Code of Ordinances
of the
CITY OF
LeClaire, Iowa
Prepared By: Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
Adopted April 15, 2024, by Ordinance No. 839
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date    Subject
May-24    Ch.                     838      4-1-24  Street and Alley Vacation
          137
                                  839      4-15-24 Adopting Ordinance
Jan-25    99.10                   840      6-3-24  Sewer Service Charges
          100.02                  841      6-3-24  Sewer Service Charges
          170.13                  842      7-1-24  Pebble Creek Planned
                                                   Development District
          63.07(2)(D);            843      8-19-24 Speed Regulations
          63.07(4)(B)
          Ch.                     844      8-19-24 ATVs, UTVs, and Snowmobiles
          75
          78.02(1)                845      8-19-24 Golf Carts
          170.13                  846      9-3-24  Timbers Edge 2nd Addition
                                                   Planned Development District
          18.02;
          18.06(8);               847      10-7-24 City Administrator
          18.06(35);
          18.06(41-43)
Sep-25    170.13                  848      1-6-25  Rezoning from R-1 to R-2
          170.13                  849      1-6-25  Johnson Farms Villas Planned
                                                   Development District
          Ch.                     850      2-3-25  Fire Suppression Appliances
          159                                      and Fire Code
          Ch.                                      Bicycles and Other Non-
          76                      851      4-21-25 Motorized Self-Propelled
                                                   Vehicles
          55.01(6);
          55.01(11-12);
          55.01(17-18);
          55.05;                  852      4-21-25 Urban Chickens
          55.09;
          55.29;
          170.07(12)(F);
          170.58
          100.02;                 853      6-6-25  Sewer Service Charges
          100.05
          106.06;                 854      6-6-25  Collection of Solid Waste
          106.07
          Ch.
          7; Ch.
          8;
          18.06;
          19.06; Ch.
          41;
          49.02;
          122.01;
          122.07;
          122.17; Ch.
          161;
          170.07(2)(D);
          170.07(4)(N);
          170.07(4)(Y);           855      8-18-25 Omnibus Changes
          170.07(8)(A);
          170.07(8)(F);
          170.07(12)(O);
          170.07(19)(AA);
          170.16(3)(P);
          170.17(3)(F);
          170.19(2-3);
          170.30(3);
          170.51;
          170.52(1);
          170.52(5)(A);
          170.52(6)(A);
          170.59(20)(I)(1);
          170.67
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title                    1.09 City Powers
1.02 Definitions              1.10 Indemnity
1.03 Rules of Construction    1.11 Personal Injuries
1.04 Amendments               1.12 Extension of Authority
1.05 Catchlines and Notes     1.13 Warrants
1.06 Altering Code            1.14 General Standards for Action
1.07 Severability             1.15 Standard Penalty
1.08 Presumption of Liability 1.16 Pending Suits
 
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of LeClaire, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code
of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council
or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
1.   “All of the Council” or “of the Council” means all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does
not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest. When a “majority” of the Council are required for
passage, and three Council members are present, then all must vote for the
passage. When four or five are present, then three must vote for passage. When
three-fourths of the Council are required for passage, then four must vote for
passage.
2.   “Alley” means a traffic way, dedicated to public use, which affords only a
secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street.
3.   “City” means the city of LeClaire, Iowa.
4.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of LeClaire, Iowa.
5.   “Code” or “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City,
as amended, including any document or ordinance included by reference therein.
“Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City.
6.   “Council” means the city council of LeClaire, Iowa.
7.   “County” means Scott County, Iowa.
8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
9.   “May” confers a power.
10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
11.   “Month” means a calendar month.
12.   “Must” states a requirement.
13.   “Oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which
by law an affirmation may be substituted for another, and in such cases the
words “affirm” and “affirmed” shall be equivalent to the words “swear” and
“sworn.”
14.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
15.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of LeClaire, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
16.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
17.   “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after,
respectively.
18.   “Public property” means any and all property owned by the City or held in
the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions, or agencies within
the City government.
19.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
20.   “Repeat offense” means a recurring violation of the same section of the
Code of Ordinances.
21.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
22.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of
the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
23.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
24.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
25.   “Street” means a general term used to describe a public right-of-way
which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and may provide
for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may
also provide space for the location of utilities (both above and below ground).
26.   “Will” is mandatory.
27.   “Writing” or “Written” may include any mode of representing words or
letters in general use, and include an electronic record as defined in Section
554D.103 of the Code of Iowa.
28.   “Year” means twelve consecutive months.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.04   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.05   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.06   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.07   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.08   PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY.
The occupant of any premises, and the owner of unoccupied premises, upon which
a violation of an ordinance is apparent, the owner of any object or material
placed or remaining anywhere in violation of an ordinance, and the occupant and
the owner of any premises served by any excavation, connection, or structure
illegally made or erected shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the
violation so evidenced and subject to the penalty provided therefore, unless
otherwise provided for herein.
1.09   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.10   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.11   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.12   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.13   WARRANTS.
If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.14   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council
or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not
specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.15   STANDARD PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
1.   Special Standard Civil Penalties for Stormwater and Erosion Control
Violations.
   A.   Any violation arising from noncompliance with any provision contained
within
Chapter 162 of this Code (Stormwater and Erosion Control) shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense.
2.   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate offense.
1.16   PENDING SUITS.
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. This section
shall extend to all repeals, whether by express words or implication, whether
the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject
or in any other ordinance. Nothing contained in this or the preceding sections
shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any
general ordinance of the City herein repealed, or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying, or altering any penalty, any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as
affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any
right of the City under the ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time
of passage of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title              2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers
2.02 Form of Government 2.04 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of LeClaire, Iowa.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.05 Alternative Relief
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.06 Criminal Penalties
3.03 Penalties               3.07 Non-Compliance Liens
3.04 Civil Citations
 
3.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted
by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or
a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.† 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.15.
3.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa
or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of
Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City
has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03   PENALTIES.
A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
   A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00.
   B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00.
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
2.   Special Civil Penalties.
   A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user
is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation
exists or continues.
   B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
      (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the time
that the violation begins.
      (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
3.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue
a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1.   The name and address of the defendant.
2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
3.   The location and time of the infraction.
4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6.   The time and place of court appearance.
7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
3.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
3.06   CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation
for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by
criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
3.07   NON-COMPLIANCE LIENS.
In lieu of and/or in addition to applying other alternative forms of relief for
violations of this Code of Ordinances, and/or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference, the City Administrator is hereby authorized to record
with the Scott County Recorder’s office a “Certificate of Non-Compliance” lien.
Said lien may be recorded after notice has been served on the owner of record
of a property where a violation has occurred or allowed to exist. The notice
shall state the nature of the violation(s), the actions needed to correct the
violation(s), and the timeframe within which the violation(s) must be corrected
prior to the issuance of the lien. The lien shall remain in full force and
affect until such time as the violation(s) is completely corrected and likewise
no building and/or other such City permits or requests for City action(s) or
review involving said property will be considered until such time as the lien
is removed from the property.
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Vacancies
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
 
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:† 2  
1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
LeClaire as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
   A.   Mayor
   B.   City Clerk
   C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Whenever reference is made in an ordinance to a City officer or
  employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
  “of the City of LeClaire” and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of
  this City having the title mentioned or performing the duties indicated. No
2 provisions of an ordinance designating the duties of any officer or employee shall
  be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty
  provided in this ordinance for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
  intention of the Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
  employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty.
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1.   Bonds Required. Each City officer required by law or Code of Ordinances to
be bonded shall, before entering upon the duties of office, be covered, and
included under the City’s “Blanket Bond,” to be approved and verified by the
City Administrator, conditioned on the faithful performance of such officer’s
duties and the proper handling and accounting for the money and property of the
City in said officer’s charge.
2.   Amounts of Bonds. The Council shall provide a blanket surety bond in the
amount not less than $150,000.00 for all officers or employees that the Council
deems necessary. The City shall pay the premium on all official bonds required.
3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[1a] and [3])
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents, and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
1.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes
shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and
in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6.   Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical
and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
Unless otherwise specifically provided for herein, public officials/employees
of the City shall be subject to the conflict of interest provisions as stated
in Sections 362.5 and 362.6 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and said sections
and provisions, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference.
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.10   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Applicable Codes              6.03 Election Precinct Boundaries Designated
6.02 Designated Nomination Methods
 
6.01   APPLICABLE CODES.
The City Council of the City of LeClaire hereby adopts by reference the
applicable State Code sections as they now exist, or are hereafter or herein
amended, as they pertain to the rules and procedures for the nomination,
election, and other related activities involving elected City officials.
6.02   DESIGNATED NOMINATION METHODS.
All candidates for elected municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 44 or Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
6.03   ELECTION PRECINCT BOUNDARIES DESIGNATED.
The election precincts of the City shall be named, bounded, and described as
follows:
1.   Precinct #1 shall be comprised of all of that part of the City lying
within the perimeter described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of Territorial Road and 23rd Street, thence South
along the centerline of 23rd Street to its intersection with Holland Street;
thence East along the centerline of Holland Street to its intersection with
North 8th Street; thence South along the centerline of North 8th Street to its
intersection with Jones Street; thence West along the centerline of Jones
Street to its intersection with Fourteenth Street; thence South along the
centerline of Fourteenth Street to its intersection with Davenport Street; then
East along the centerline of Davenport Street to its intersection with
Stagecoach Trail; thence South along the centerline of Stagecoach Trail to its
intersection with Eagle Ridge Road; thence Easterly and Southerly along the
centerline of Eagle Ridge Road to its intersection with Canal Shore Drive;
thence West along Canal Shore Drive to its intersection with Interstate 80;
thence South along Interstate 80 until the meander line of the Mississippi
River and the Southerly City corporate limit line; thence continuing Easterly
and then Northerly along said corporate limit line to its intersection with
Territorial Road; thence Westerly along the centerline of Territorial Road to
the point of beginning of the parcel herein described.
1.   Precinct #2 shall be comprised of all of that part of the City lying
within the perimeter described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of Interstate 80 and the meander line of the
Mississippi River and the Southerly City corporate limit line; thence Westerly
along said corporate limit line to its intersection with 35th Street extended
and the Westerly corporate limit line; thence Northerly along said Westerly
corporate limit line to its intersection with Forest Grove Drive; thence West
along the centerline of Forest Grove Drive to the Westerly corporate limit line
(encompassing the Pebble Creek North and South Additions); thence South, West
and North along said Westerly corporate limit line (encompassing said property)
to its intersection with the Northerly Interstate 80 right-of-way line; thence
East along said right-of-way line to its intersection with 35th Street; thence
North along the centerline of 35th Street to its intersection with Wisconsin
Street; thence West along the centerline of Wisconsin Street to the Westerly
corporate limit line (encompassing the Pleasant Valley Community School
District Junior High School property); thence North, East and South
encompassing said property and back to its intersection with Wisconsin Street;
thence East along the centerline of Wisconsin Street to its intersection with
26th Street; thence North along the centerline of 26th Street to its
intersection with Holland Street; thence East along the centerline of Holland
Street to its intersection with North 8th Street; thence South along the
centerline of North 8th Street to its intersection with Jones Street; thence
West along the centerline of Jones Street to its intersection with Fourteenth
Street; thence South along the centerline of Fourteenth Street to its
intersection with Davenport Street; thence East along the centerline of
Davenport Street to its intersection with Stagecoach Trail; thence South along
the centerline of Stagecoach Trail to its intersection with Eagle Ridge Road;
thence Easterly and southerly along the centerline of Eagle Ridge Road to its
intersection with Canal Shore Drive; thence West along Canal Shore Drive to its
intersection with Interstate 80; thence South along Interstate 80 until the
meander line of the Mississippi River, the Southerly corporate limit line, and
the point of beginning of the parcel herein described.
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT AND RELATED PROCEDURES
 
7.01 Purpose                             7.08 Cash Controls
7.02 Council Finance Chairperson         7.09 Financial Reporting and Record
                                         Keeping
7.03 Operating Budget Preparation and    7.10 Property Identification, Control,
Administration                           and Inventory
7.04 Budget Amendments                   7.11 Disposal of City Property
7.05 Capital Improvement Budget          7.12 Competing with Private Enterprise
Preparation and Administration
7.06 Funds, Expenditures, and Purchasing 7.13 Fees Established
Controls
7.07 Bidding, Requests for Proposal, and
Purchasing Controls
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   COUNCIL FINANCE CHAIRPERSON.
One member of the Council shall be appointed by the Mayor as the Council
Finance Chairperson who will be charged with the duties and responsibilities of
overseeing the City’s finances and other related matters, as spelled out
herein, according to the Council’s policies, directives, and goals. The Finance
Chairperson shall provide financial oversight and guidance to City staff to
assist in guidance and implementation of the listed policies and procedures.
The City Administrator is hereby designated as the City’s Chief Financial
Officer and as such shall be directly responsible for the administration of the
provisions of this chapter.
7.03   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
Code of Iowa Section 384.16, as amended, and the following specific provisions:
1.   Budget Proposal Preparation. The City Administrator shall compile and
prepare the necessary budget detail for review and discussion by the Mayor and
City Council. Said proposed detail shall be submitted to the Mayor and City
Council no later than the last Monday in January of each year.
2.   Budget Requests; Submittal by Department Heads, Boards, Commissions, Etc.
All department heads, boards, commissions, and other various entities or
agencies of the City or groups requesting appropriations from the City must
submit their budget proposals and supporting documentation to the City
Administrator for review and possible inclusion in the City budget proposal on
such forms and at such times as required by the City Administrator.
3.   Official Budget Document. Once the annual budget has been adopted and
approved by the City Council as provided for by law, the City Administrator
shall prepare and submit to the Council, no later than the first Council
meeting in July, the City’s official budget document which shall include any
and all relevant and pertinent budget information which may be used in the
administration and monitoring of the annual budget. Copies of the City’s
official budget document shall be kept on file for public use.
4.   Budget Review and Monitoring. The City Administrator shall review and
monitor the annual budget by whatever means they deems necessary, cause to be
kept whatever reports are necessary or required herein, and initiate and
conduct whatever remedial or corrective actions as may be necessary or required
by law.
7.04   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
The City’s budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City’s appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided for by Section 384.18 of
the Code of Iowa, as amended. As with the annual budget preparation, the City
Administrator shall prepare, in a timely manner, any and all appropriate,
detailed, supporting documentation necessary for the Council’s evaluation and
review of the budget amendment. Budget re-appropriations of any kind or any
amount (including line-item transfers) will be reviewed and approved by the
Finance Chairperson and adopted by Council as a budget amendment in the
succeeding fiscal year.
7.05   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT BUDGET PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION.
For the purpose and use within the purview of the State’s Local Option Sales
and Services Tax Legislation and pursuant to Resolution #88-128, the term
“Major Capital Improvement” means any singular or multiple-item expenditure or
obligation legally incurred by the City which usually are relatively expensive,
don’t recur on an annual basis, result in some form of a fixed asset, and which
must satisfy at least one or more of the following criteria:† 3
1.   Any such expenditure or obligation having a total value (including all
applicable “soft costs”) of between $5,000.00 and $15,000.00 and having a life
expectancy of at least 10 years from the date of purchase or acceptance of
ownership by the City.
2.   Any such expenditure or obligation having a total value (including all
applicable “soft costs”) of at least $15,000.00 and having a life expectancy of
at least five years from the date of purchase or acceptance of ownership by the
City.
3.   Any such expenditure or obligation having a total value (including all
applicable “soft costs”) of at least $2,500.00 where such expenditure or
obligation is incurred as the “matching portion” to any private, State, or
federal grant.
4.   Any such expenditure or obligation incurred in the abatement of any public
nuisance or in the protection and preservation of the health and welfare of the
citizens of the City.
5.   Any such expenditure or obligation incurred in providing permanent,
public, infrastructure improvements (not including those improvements
undertaken within the municipal utility areas) in the pursuit of community
development or in providing any permanent, public, infrastructure improvements
as economic development enhancements where the improvements are project-
specific and are not related to speculative endeavors.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Multiple-item expenditures or obligations may be termed
  “Major Capital Improvements” when the values and functions of the multiple
3 items can be reasonably and justifiably combined together so as to form an
  integral, not regularly recurring, component of a specific project, activity
  or purchase, and when this combined value satisfies at least one or more of
  the above-listed criteria.
7.06   FUNDS, EXPENDITURES, AND PURCHASING CONTROLS.
City funds, expenditures, and purchasing controls shall be administered and
maintained by the City Administrator, City Clerk/Treasurer, and Department
Heads in accordance with the provisions of Section 384, Division II of the Code
of Iowa, as amended, and the following specific provisions:
1.   No expenditure shall be authorized by any City official, officer, or
employee except as is hereinafter provided.
2.   As of July 1, of each year, the City Administrator and Department Heads
may administer and expend their respective budget appropriations as approved by
the Council. Expenditures should be coordinated and timed as to available cash
flow and should conform with the purchasing authority as spelled out herein.
3.   The City Administrator and/or Department Heads may authorize and approve
budgeted expenditures of any kind up to a maximum of $10,000.00 without
additional Council review. Any expenditure over this amount will require
additional, specific, formal review, and reauthorization by the Council. The
Council may, by separate resolution, lower this maximum expenditure threshold
at any time to insure the continued sound financial management of the City as
it deems necessary.
4.   The City Administrator, working with the respective department heads and
supervisors, will have the authority to cause to be made “book transfers”
between line items within a single sub-program. Any such transfers will be
reported to the Council. Any other transfers must be submitted to the Council
for formal consideration.
5.   Any transfers between funds shall be considered by formal resolution only.
6.   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to issue warrants/checks for
immediate payment of amounts due which, if not paid promptly, would result in
loss of discount, penalty for late payment, or additional interest cost. Any
such payment made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with
and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such
payment. The following specific items are authorized for immediate payment in
addition to those types listed above:
   A.   Payroll and associated taxes.
   B.   Any legally incurred debt, due and owing by the City which has been
previously approved by specific Council action.
   C.   Postage or shipping costs which must be paid immediately.
   D.   Recording fees.
   E.   Any request from the City Administrator which must be expedited for the
good of the City.
   F.   Employee-related reimbursements (medical/dental, safety boots/glasses,
travel expenses, etc.)
   G.   Deposit refunds (facility rentals and utilities).
7.   Authorized Signatories. Two signatures are required on all City checks.
The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, City Administrator, and the City Clerk/Treasurer are
hereby designated as the official City signatories, and such are hereby
authorized to sign financial and other legal instruments of the City when so
approved by the Council.
7.07   BIDDING, REQUESTS FOR PROPOSAL, AND PURCHASING CONTROLS.
Bids and requests for proposals will be used as required in Chapter 384,
Division VI, and Section 362.5(4) of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
Additionally, the following requirements will apply as they relate to
requesting bids or requests for proposals:
1.   Any purchase of materials, equipment, supplies, services, etc., where the
estimated cost is expected to exceed $2,500.00 in value, shall be done only
after having received written proposals, or as otherwise approved by the
Council. Proposals shall be taken from at least three qualified, responsible
vendors. If an item is a proprietary product, this provision may be waived.
Every effort shall be made to avoid specifications or requirements that require
proprietary items exclusively. Any purchase over the “threshold” amount listed
herein made under a joint purchase arrangement (i.e. “State Bid”) with another
governmental agency will not be subject to the bidding requirements established
herein. When, by virtue of any requirement of this section, bids must be
obtained, any and all verifying documentation must be maintained for at least
two years. Once a bid is received and accepted for a particular item, unless in
a fluid or highly volatile market, no new bids need be sought for reorders
unless more than one year has elapsed since the last bids were received. Major
supply contracts such as fuels, etc., shall be reviewed annually. The City
Administrator, Department Heads, and Supervisors shall be responsible for
making sure that the requirements of this section are adhered to.
2.   Any purchase of materials, equipment, supplies, services, etc., where the
estimated cost is expected to exceed $10,000.00 in value, shall be done only
after having received written proposals or as otherwise approved by the
Council. Proposals shall be taken from at least three qualified, responsible
bidders. Contracts over $10,000.00 shall be reviewed and acted upon by the
Council. Public improvement construction contracts in excess of $25,000 must be
bid in accordance with Chapter 26 of the Code of Iowa.
3.   Local Purchases. Any and all purchases by the City will be made within the
City in accordance with Section 23A.3 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, unless:
   A.   The items are not locally and readily available after a reasonable
attempt has been made in canvassing the local merchants for pricing and
availability status.
   B.   The items and quantities can be purchased elsewhere for a less
expensive amount, including transportation/delivery charges or our own pick-up
costs.
   C.   The items are purchased while an employee is already in the greater
metropolitan area to purchase specialty or locally unavailable items and the
items are less expenseive than those available locally.
4.   Purchase Orders Required. The use of purchase orders will be required for
any singular or cumulative purchases exceeding $2,500.00. The City
Administrator shall develop the necessary administrative policies and
safeguards needed to effect the provisions of this subsection.
5.   Emergency purchases may be utilized to make purchases outside of the above
bidding requirements if approved by the City Administrator and the Finance
Chairperson and are allowed under both State and federal law. Written proposals
should always be obtained for purchases over $10,000.00. Council approval, if
required, should be obtained at the earliest opportunity.
6.   Purchases for goods and services under State or federal grants or programs
must adhere to all applicable State and federal rules and laws. No grants
requiring any City match of any kind or nature greater than $2,500.00 will be
submitted for consideration until reviewed and approved by the City
Administrator and the Finance Chairperson or Council.
7.   All office supplies, operating supplies, cleaning materials, light bulbs,
batteries, etc., must be centrally purchased in bulk in the most cost-effective
manner possible, consistent with current City purchasing policies.
7.08   CASH CONTROLS.
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of monies received, the
following procedures will apply:
1.   Any and all monies or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer,
employee, department, or commission or committee shall be deposited through the
office of the City Clerk. If any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be
paid to such officer by check drawn by the City Clerk and approved by the
Council only upon such officer making adequate reports relating thereto as
required by law, ordinance, or Council directive.
2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa. Deposits shall be made at least once per week or at any time when there
is “cash on hand” in the amount of $5,000.00 or more.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3.   The City Clerk shall be custodian of a petty cash fund not to exceed
$200.00 for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-
delivery transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of
rendering a service for which payments the City Clerk shall obtain some form of
receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as
the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the City Clerk shall draw a check
for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check
and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual
manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and accounts.
7.09   FINANCIAL REPORTING AND RECORD KEEPING.
The City Administrator will cause to have prepared the following reports as
required by law or as otherwise directed by the Council:
1.   Monthly Reports. At the end of each month, a monthly Clerk’s report and a
monthly budget report showing the preceding month’s cash and budget activities
will be prepared. These reports’ content and format will consist of any and all
information to accurately reflect the City’s financial position as determined
by the City Administrator.
2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year, there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed
with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
3.   Not later than December 1 of each year, there shall be completed a Road
Use Tax Report as required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A copy of
the report must be furnished to the Iowa Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 312.14)
4.   Not later than September 30 of each year, there shall be completed fiscal
year reports itemizing:
   A.   Expenditures and receipts for each line item;
   B.   Budget year totals for each object code expenditure; and
   C.   Total of Clerk’s reports for the previous fiscal year.
7.10   PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION, CONTROL, AND INVENTORY.
The City shall maintain a capital asset inventory to comply with generally
accepted accounting principles, to ensure the security and maintenance of
municipal assets, and to ensure adequate insurance coverage. The City Clerk/
Treasurer shall maintain the capital asset records in accordance with a formal
capital assets policy as approved by the City Administrator and Council Finance
Chairperson. The City’s capital asset records will be updated on an ongoing
basis and will be reviewed and audited on an annual basis.
7.11   DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY.
Any and all City property, regardless of type, value or other features, shall
be disposed of only provided for herein:
1.   This section provides guidance for the disposal of City-owned property. It
applies to all City officials, employees, and users including, but not limited
to, full-time, part-time, and intermittent/seasonal employees.
2.   A trail of documentation for audit purposes regarding the disposition of
property as all City owned property is public record, therefore records of
transfer, sale, or disposal of surplus property shall be maintained by the City
Clerk’s office.
3.   Transferring, selling, donating, scrapping, recycling, or disposing of
property by City officials or employees for personal gain or to benefit the
interest of any person or party other than the City, including handling of
disposal of trash or junk is strictly forbidden.
4.   City officials and employees shall not claim ownership of, give away,
recover, or salvage any materials abandoned, disposed of, or stored on City
premises, including trash or other materials. This includes giving any City
property or proceeds to any person or party other than for the benefit and
interest of the City, or authorizing any other person or party to accept,
receive, or take any surplus property to benefit their own interest.
5.   “Surplus property” is defined as City owned property that no longer is
needed or has no practical use to a particular City department including, but
not limited to, vehicles, bicycles, cabinets, electronics, furniture,
equipment, machinery, and tools, mowing equipment, office machines, and
playground equipment.
6.   Disposal Methods.
   A.   If the surplus property has an estimated value greater than $1,000.00,
the surplus property’s disposition must be approved by Council resolution.
   B.   If the estimated value of the surplus property is $1,000.00 or less,
the City Administrator may dispose of the property in a manner that is deemed
to be in the City’s best interests with the approval of the Council Finance
Chairperson.
   C.   Based on review by the City Administrator, with input from department
representatives, the following methods will be considered for disposal of
surplus property:
      (1)   Transfer to Other Departments.
         a.   Surplus property may be transferred to another City department.
         b.   The departments involved in the transfer shall exchange purchase
information, service manuals, and service records and all other applicable
information regarding the property.
      (2)   Trade-in of Surplus Property.
         a.   Surplus property may be used in trade if determined to provide
maximum return for the City.
      (3)   Sale by public auction, including public auctions of other
government agencies and online public auction services.
         a.   Surplus property may be sold at public auction if the quantity
and types of property on hand warrant such action.
         b.   The department that is in possession of the surplus property
shall coordinate auctions with the City Administrator’s approval.
      (4)   Sale, donation, or trade of surplus property to another
governmental agency without the necessity of advertising, bids, or auction
sale.
   D.   Sale of land or other real property requires Council authorization and
must be disposed of in accordance with Section 364.7 of the Code of Iowa.
   E.   Disposal of public right-of-ways. See
Chapter 137.
7.   Special Considerations.
   A.   Items purchased with tax exempt bonds or grant funds shall be disposed
of in accordance with applicable federal, State or grant requirements. If no
disposal requirements exist, the City Administrator will determine how to best
dispose of such property.
   B.   Seized or unclaimed property within the Police Department shall be
handled and disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, State, and local
requirements.
   C.   Computer and electronic data storage equipment shall be reviewed for
appropriate data wiping and disposal. This includes, but is not limited to
computers, laptops, tablets, servers, routers and hubs, phones, cameras, fax
machines, copiers, scanners, monitors, external hard drives, and any similar
device that may hereafter become available for use.
   D.   Vehicles will have City logos and other markings identifying vehicles
as City property removed prior to sale.
7.12   COMPETING WITH PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.
The City, and any of its departments or utilities, will not compete with
private enterprise pursuant to the conditions as enumerated in Section 23A.2 of
the Code of Iowa, as amended.
7.13   FEES ESTABLISHED.
Any and all fees, charges, or rates for any products or services rendered by
the City (including UanyU employee, department, committee, commission, or
board) shall be as established by formal action of the City Council.
(Chapter 7 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 8
RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND RELATED PROCEDURES
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.04 Personnel Records
8.02 Definition                     8.05 Records and Information Management in
                                    General
8.03 City Clerk’s Designation and 8.06 Release of Records Information
Responsibilities
 
8.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish written policies and provide for
rules and procedures within this Code governing the management and operations
of the records management function and related affairs of the City (See Section
5.04 and Ch. 22 and 372 of the Code of Iowa, as amended).
8.02   DEFINITION.
“Public records” means any paper, correspondence, form, disk, book, photograph,
film, sound recording, tape, map, drawing, or other document, regardless of
physical form, characteristics, storage media, or condition of use, and
including all copies thereof that have been made, produced, executed, or
received by any agency of the City pursuant to law in connection with the
transaction of official business of the City, except those which may by law be
deemed privileged or otherwise restricted or confidential. A record does not
include a convenience copy made to assist the City in its day-to-day operations
and which is discarded when no longer needed, personal files, working drafts,
memos, and correspondence which is clearly and only incidental to the
activities of the City, adding machine tapes, rough notes, duplicate file
copies unless required by law, rule or regulation, and such related items.
8.03   CITY CLERK’S DESIGNATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
The City Clerk is hereby designated as the City’s public official charged with
the obligation of providing for, maintaining, securing, and disposing of the
City’s official records and information according to the requirements of this
Code, State, and federal law, and the guidelines set forth in the “Records
Retention Manual for Iowa Cities,” as amended. They shall implement such
practices and procedures as are necessary to effect the intent of this chapter.
This obligation extends to any and all City records of any kind except those
dealing with law enforcement issues requiring a law enforcement certification.
8.04   PERSONNEL RECORDS.
The City will maintain a personnel record for each paid employee in the service
of the City showing the name, title of position held, the department to which
assigned, salary, changes in employment status, evaluations, and such other
information as may be considered pertinent. Each employee shall promptly report
all changes of name, address, and telephone number to the Clerk’s office. Any
assignment change in the employment status of an employee shall be reported to
the Clerk’s office in writing by the respective Department Head as soon as
possible. Any and all information regarding all City personnel-related matters
will be kept in a single location under the jurisdiction of the City
Administrator in the absence of a Human Resources Director.
1.   Segregation of Certain Records. Personnel-related records will be
separated in a separate, secured, filing cabinet so that personal medical,
performance evaluation, disciplinary, and internal affairs investigative
materials will not be combined in the same working folders with normal “day-to-
day” payroll, attendance, and leave type records and will be labeled as
“CONFIDENTIAL.”
2.   Records Access. Access to an employee’s personnel file (information not
otherwise classified and labeled as “CONFIDENTIAL”) will be limited to the
employee, the Deputy City Clerk, the Clerk’s office, immediate supervisor,
Department Head, and others who will be directly involved in making a decision
as to terms and conditions of employment.
Employees shall have the right to inspect their own entire personnel files
(“CONFIDENTIAL” and otherwise) on their own time during normal City Hall
working hours. Access will be granted only in the presence of the City
Administrator. The employee may respond to any item in his or her personnel
file in writing. Such response by the employee will become a part of the
permanent record. Employees may receive copies of information in their
personnel files upon payment of the City’s standard copying fees. Access to
personnel records labeled as “CONFIDENTIAL” will be limited and will be allowed
only, when necessary, in the normal course of personnel administration to the
employee, the employee’s immediate supervisor, Department Head, City
Administrator, Mayor, and City Attorney. Access to these records will only be
allowed upon the direct approval and supervision of the City Administrator.
8.05   RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN GENERAL.
1.   Records Access. Only the City Clerk and their specific designees, with
case by case and matter specific authorization, shall have direct access to the
physical files, records, electronic media, and other information of the City.
As such, all official, legal, and other such requests for records shall be
coordinated with and approved by the City Clerk.
2.   Records Ownership. All records created by any City department, committee,
board, or other agency shall remain property of the City.
3.   Removal of Records. No record shall be removed from its place of
origination or storage unless specifically approved by the City Clerk.
4.   Record Retention and Disposition. All City records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, shall be maintained and disposed of by the City Clerk
according to the policies and procedures set forth by State Code and those
guidelines as established and set forth in the “Records Retention Manual for
Iowa Cities,” as amended.
5.   Intentional Destruction of Records. It is unlawful for anyone to
knowingly, willfully, and maliciously destroy or alter in any manner any City
record.
6.   Off-Site Storage of Records. Records may be stored off-site (in any place
other than a City-owned facility) in order to effect the intent of certain
security and information protection features contemplated by this chapter. The
content, location, timing, and other such details shall be approved by the City
Clerk.
7.   Protection of Security Measures. It is unlawful for any City employee or
official entrusted with such security means to divulge or compromise in any way
any electronic media access passwords, safe or lock combinations, to distribute
access lock keys, or to in any way divulge any security measure implemented, to
anyone (including other City employees) other than for an official City
business purpose.
8.   Computer Crime. Chapter 716A of the Code of Iowa, as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference in regard to computer crimes.
8.06   RELEASE OF RECORDS INFORMATION.
Except when authorized by a statement signed by the employee or former
employee, no information concerning an employee will be released to anyone
other than: confirmation of employment, confirmation of salary, dates of
employment, job title, and department.
(Chapter 8 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1.   Chief Executive Officer. Supervise all departments of the City and give
direction to the City Administrator and/or department heads concerning the
functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all functions of
the municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports from
the City Administrator and/or department heads at any time.
2.   Presiding Officer. Act as presiding officer at all regular and special
Council meetings and establish the format and content for all agendas for said
meetings.
3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council, when he or she
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
4.   Mayor’s Veto. (See Sections 380.5 and 380.6 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.)
5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council at
each meeting as required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs
generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council
action.
6.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
Appointments.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1.   The following appointments shall be made by the Mayor:
   A.   Mayor Pro Tem
   B.   Police Chief
   C.   Council Finance Chairperson
   D.   Public Works and Utilities Chairperson
   E.   Community Development Chairperson
   F.   Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson
   G.   Tourism and Economic Development Chairperson
   H.   Public Safety Chairperson
   I.   Council Community Library Chairperson
   J.   Council School District Chairperson
   K.   Council Civic Groups Chairperson
2.   The following appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with Council
approval:
   A.   Library Board of Trustees
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is $4,000.00 per year, paid monthly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38[1])
3.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
4.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
made by resolution adopted by the Council, or reduced to writing and approved
by the Council, or expressly authorized by resolution adopted by the Council,
unless otherwise provided for herein.
5.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6.   Records. The Council shall maintain records of its proceedings as
prescribed by State law or Council resolution.
7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. Unless otherwise specifically
provided for herein, elected officials shall be compensated in accordance with
the provisions of Section 372.13(8) of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and said
section and provisions, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective
in one of the following ways:
   A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
   B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
   C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
   D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution,
a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the
ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council shall be on the
first and third Monday of each month in the Council Chambers at LeClaire City
Hall at a time prescribed by resolution of the City Council, and said time and
place may be temporarily modified by resolution of the City Council as needed.
When the date for a regularly scheduled meeting falls on an observed holiday,
the meeting shall be held at the time and place mentioned above on the next
regular business day following the holiday. Whenever a public hearing is
scheduled to be held on the same date as a regularly scheduled meeting, the
public hearing shall be held first with the regularly scheduled meeting to
follow immediately afterwards.
2.   Special or “Emergency” Meetings. Special meetings (including public
hearings) and/or “emergency” meetings shall be held: 1) upon the written
request of the Mayor; or 2) upon approval of a resolution by the City Council;
or 3) upon the written request of a majority of the members of the City Council
submitted to the City Clerk. Notice of a special meeting delivered to each
member of the Council shall specify the date, time, place, and subject of the
meeting and such notice shall be left in their usual City business files at
City Hall and delivered via their City email. A record of the service of notice
shall be maintained by the City Clerk.
3.   No Smoking. There shall be no smoking in the Council Chambers during any
type of Council meeting. This includes official Council meetings, Committee-of-
the-Whole meetings, and all public hearings of the Council. This prohibition
shall not apply to other committee board meetings.
4.   Meeting Notices. Any and all notices of any meetings to be held by the
Council, except “emergency” meetings, will be posted at City Hall, LeClaire
Community Library, LeClaire Post Office, and on the City’s website, in
accordance with the requirements of the Code of Iowa. Notification for
“emergency meetings” will conform to the requirements of Section 21.4 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.
5.   Meeting Attendance Restrictions. In accordance with Section 21.2(2) of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, there shall not be more than two Council members (in
any capacity whatsoever) in attendance at any gathering where there is any
discussion, deliberation, or action upon any matter within the scope of the
Council’s policy making duties, unless said gathering is a public meeting held
pursuant to the requirements of Section 21.3 of the Code of Iowa.
6.   Any official meeting called for or requested to be held by the Council in
the administration of the zoning or subdivision ordinance will be held on the
first or third Monday of the month, unless otherwise provided for herein.
Further, the Council’s formal hearing, review, and/or consideration of any
zoning or subdivision ordinance related matters will take place no sooner than
10 days following the Planning and Zoning Commission’s hearing and final action
on the matter, unless another hearing date is otherwise established by
resolution of the Council.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
1.   City Clerk
2.   City Attorney
3.   City Administrator
4.   Planning and Zoning Commission Members
5.   Board of Adjustment
6.   Parks and Recreation Commission Members
7.   LeClaire Tourism Board of Directors
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is $2,000.00 per year, paid monthly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
18.01 Purpose        18.04 Compensation
18.02 Appointment    18.05 Nature of Work
18.03 Term of Office 18.06 Roles, Expectations, Powers, Duties, and
                     Responsibilities
 
18.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to create the office of City Administrator of
the City and to prescribe the duties of said office.
18.02   APPOINTMENT.
A search committee shall be formed at the Mayor’s direction whenever necessary
to select a City Administrator. The search committee shall consist of the
Mayor, two Council members, and two residents of the City, and the members of
the search committee shall be appointed by the Mayor. The search committee
shall screen the candidates and recommend a list of finalists. The Mayor and
full Council will then conduct finalist interviews after which the Mayor will
select one candidate from the finalists to recommend to the Council for
approval. If the Council approves, that person shall serve as City
Administrator.
(Section 18.02 – Ord._847 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
18.03   TERM OF OFFICE.
Unless the City Administrator has an employment contract, the City
Administrator shall serve as an at-will employee in said capacity at the
pleasure of the Council and shall be removed from office only by at least two-
thirds majority vote of the Council. The City Administrator may terminate their
employment with the Council, subject to the terms of any existing contract
agreements, if any. Either the Mayor or any member of the Council may initiate
the removal of the City Administrator.
18.04   COMPENSATION.
The compensation of the City Administrator shall be in such amount as may, from
time to time, be fixed by resolution of the Council.
18.05   NATURE OF WORK.
Under the general direction of the Mayor and the Council, the City
Administrator shall be responsible for the operational administration of all
City affairs, including supervision of all City department heads and functions,
other than specific exceptions relating to the Police Department and Library as
indicated in Subsections 3,11,19, 33, and 38 of Section
18.06, direct supervision of the City Administrator’s office, and coordination
of special projects. The City Administrator shall plan, direct, coordinate, and
manage the various services, activities, and policies set forth by the Mayor
and Council in accordance with the City’s Municipal Code. The nature of the
work performed require the City Administrator to establish and maintain
effective working relationships with the Mayor, Council, City employees,
business and community groups, State and federal officials, representatives of
the media, and the public. The principal duties are performed in a general
office environment.
1.   The City Administrator shall implement policy directives promulgated by
the Mayor in the Mayor’s executive capacity and Council in its legislative
capacity, organize the work of the departments through the department heads,
develop the staff needed to do the work, set priorities, and make sure that all
work is done to a high standard of quality and performance.
2.   The City Administrator is directly responsible to the Mayor and Council
for the administration of municipal affairs as directed and is the agent of the
Council and Mayor in all that is done. All departmental activity requiring the
attention of the Mayor and Council shall be brought before the body by the
Administrator, and all Council involvement in administration initiated by the
Mayor and Council must be coordinated through the City Administrator.
These responsibilities are extensions of those of the elected officials and as
such are done in close cooperation and coordination with those officials.
18.06   ROLES, EXPECTATIONS, POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
The following, although not fully inclusive, are considered to be the roles,
expectations, powers, duties, and responsibilities of the City Administrator:
1.   Supervise enforcement and execution of all municipal laws, resolutions,
Council policies, and directives.
2.   Recommend to the Council any measure necessary or expedient for the good
and welfare of the City.
3.   Supervise and direct the official conduct of all City officers with the
exception of the Police Department and LeClaire Community Library personnel.
4.   Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the
City and may negotiate and authorize formal contract change orders on behalf of
the City where the “net increase” for any one change order does not exceed
$10,000.00 and where the sum total of all change orders associated with one
specific project does not exceed 10 percent of the original contract amount in
contracts of $100,000.00 value or more.
5.   Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance, and
management of all City property, capital improvements, and undertakings of the
City.
6.   Cooperate with all administrative agencies or boards.
7.   Keep the Council fully advised on the financial and other conditions of
the City, and of its future needs.
8.   Conduct the business affairs of the City and cause complete and accurate
records to be kept by modern and efficient methods.
9.   Administer oaths of office as prescribed by law in the absence of the
Clerk.
10.   Have direct financial management over all City departments.
11.   Have direct management responsibility over all City departments, except
the Police Department and the LeClaire Community Library.
12.   Be responsible for the preparation of the City’s annual operating and
capital improvements budget and purchasing for all City departments and as
directed by the Council.
13.   Supervise and coordinate the actions of the City’s consulting engineers
and all departments as directed by the Council.
14.   Supervise and coordinate the actions of the City Attorney and all
departments as directed by the Council. The City Attorney shall review all
contracts, ordinances, and other agreements before signature or approval, and
any deviation from their suggestions shall be communicated to the Council
before any form of consideration by the Council.
15.   Formulate policy with the approval of the Council within the framework of
the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State.
16.   Serve as liaison between the Council and independent commissions, other
public bodies, City departments, etc.
17.   Maintain personnel relations in the best interests of the City.
18.   Summarily and without notice, investigate or cause to be investigated the
affairs and conduct of any City department, agency, officer, or employee either
under their direct or indirect supervision.
19.   Employ and remove City employees in accordance with Council approved
policies, except Police Department and LeClaire Community Library personnel.
The Mayor shall be consulted with respect to City Hall employees prior to any
actions.
20.   Study possible joint arrangements with municipal boards and commissions,
make recommendations for such arrangements as are mutually acceptable, and
coordinate these activities as agreed upon.
21.   Assist the Mayor in their Mayoral duties as requested by the Mayor.
22.   Assist the Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission in the carrying
out of the Comprehensive Plan and assist in all other forms of planning within
the City government.
23.   Act for the City in the exercise and execution of all policies and
programs whereby the City is involved on a joint basis with any other
governmental subdivision, including any subdivision of the government of the
State or the United States of America.
24.   As needed, nominate, for Council appointment, a Clerk to perform the
duties of the Administrator in their absence and to perform such other duties
assigned by the City Administrator.
25.   Cause to have maintained and updated an inventory system of all municipal
properties.
26.   Keep apprised of grants that may be available to the City and recent
legislation affecting the City and aggressively apply for available grants with
the assistance of Department Heads for subject matter and justification.
27.   Administer documentation of claims to current grants.
28.   Draft routine ordinances and amendments including penalty provisions, if
appropriate, with review and assistance by the City Attorney. Answer inquiries
on all.
29.   Oversee the construction of supporting documentation, resolutions,
repayment schedules, etc. for new bonds issued.
30.   Meet with citizens and representatives of governmental or other
organizations who work with or for the City.
31.   Keep apprised of recent legislation affecting the City.
32.   Be responsible for research and analysis for projects and prepare
preliminary data for municipal finance committee and budget meetings.
33.   Be responsible for the employment of and termination of all City
personnel (excluding Police Department personnel and LeClaire Community Library
personnel) in accordance with those standard procedures and policies in effect
now or as may hereafter be adopted by the Council.
34.   In the absence of the Clerk, assume those duties and responsibilities of
that position as required by law and as required by the Council.
35.   Possess a degree in Business Administration, Public Administration, or a
Council approved equivalent and participate in annual continuing professional
education on subjects applicable and beneficial to the City.
36.   Coordinate with the Mayor in their official responsibilities and act
immediately to institute whatever actions are deemed necessary on behalf of the
City during times of emergency to minimize the loss of life and property and to
restore and resume normal City operations and functions as quickly as possible;
sign and file documents with the Iowa Emergency Management Division (EMD), or
its successors, for the purpose of obtaining federal/State financial assistance
under the Disaster Relief Act (PL 93-288, as amended) or otherwise available
from the President’s Disaster Relief Fund etc., and Chapter 29C of the Code of
Iowa, as amended.
37.   Perform such other duties as may hereafter be directed by the Mayor or
Council.
38.   Be responsible for and administer annual formal evaluations of all City
personnel, if such a program is adopted by the Council, except for the Police
Department, which evaluations shall be administered by the Police Chief and the
Mayor.
39.   In the absence of a Human Resources Director, provide such services as
needed with regard to benefit programs offered by the City, employee
understanding of same, and periodic updating the Employee Manual, as needed.
40.   Prepare draft for Council and committee, of the whole agendas for
approval by the Mayor.
41.   Acts as a Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, conducts zoning and
subdivision reviews, and coordinates meetings and agendas for the Planning &
Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment.
42.   Acts as Floodplain Administrator in enforcing the floodplain ordinance,
reviewing Floodplain Permits, and ensuring compliance with State and federal
law.
(Section 18.06 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 19
CITY CLERK
 
19.01 Purpose                       19.08 Recording Measures
19.02 Appointment                   19.09 Other Publications
19.03 Term of Office                19.10 Authentication
19.04 Compensation                  19.11 Certification
19.05 City Clerk as Department Head 19.12 Elections
19.06 Powers and Duties             19.13 City Seal
19.07 Publication of Minutes
 
19.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to create the office of City Clerk of the City,
and to prescribe the duties of said office.
19.02   APPOINTMENT.
The City Clerk shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council.
Nominations shall be made to the City Council by the City Administrator.
19.03   TERM OF OFFICE.
The City Clerk shall serve in said capacity at the pleasure of the City
Council, and may be subject to removal only by a majority vote of the City
Council.
19.04   COMPENSATION.
The compensation of the City Clerk shall be fixed by resolution of the City
Council.
19.05   CITY CLERK AS DEPARTMENT HEAD.
The City Clerk shall be considered a department head for the purposes of these
ordinances.
19.06   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Clerk shall assume duties and responsibilities listed below, but shall not
be limited to these and shall assume any other duties or responsibilities that
may be inherent to this position or as directed by the Council or City
Administrator:
1.   Assume the title, duties, and responsibilities of City Treasurer.
2.   Supervises and is responsible for all City accounting, bookkeeping, record
keeping, filing, and posts entries into appropriate ledgers and books of entry.
3.   Maintains the City’s fixed asset accounting and inventory systems.
4.   Attends regular and special Council meetings and/or public hearings;
oversees or performs an accurate recording of the proceedings, prepares the
minutes of said meetings using proper legislative terminology and format,
recording, indexing, and filing same for the public record; distributes
information as requested.
5.   Performs certification, attesting, and recording for the City as required
on legal documents and other records requiring such certification; seals and
attests by signature to ordinances, resolutions, contracts, easements, deeds,
bonds, or other documents requiring City certification; oversees the cataloging
and filing of all City records.
6.   Oversees processing all checks, bills, bonds, and coupons, payroll checks,
and utility bills as needed.
7.   Develops and presents a claims register, (displaying the proper fund
debiting of each claim), at every Council meeting upon approval of the Finance
Officer.
8.   Reconciles bank statements and prepares a “Clerk’s Report” each month.
9.   Prepares a detailed, line-item, budget report each month.
10.   Files timely reports as required by the State and federal government:
i.e. taxes, financial reports, street finance, tax increment, budget reports,
annual reports, etc.
11.   Administers the issuance of and verifies and/or forwards to the proper
agency the initial renewal or cancelation of various municipal licenses,
including, but not limited to, business, animal, bicycle, beer/liquor,
cigarette, regulatory licenses as assigned, etc., in accordance with applicable
City ordinances and other regulations.
12.   Prepares, advertises, distributes, and/or publishes meeting agendas, bid
and other legal notices, public hearing, and special meeting notices. Publishes
and posts notices of varying nature as required and approved by the City
Administrator.
13.   Establishes and supervises the maintenance of required files and records
as needed or directed.
14.   Responsible for recording all bonds and interest payments.
15.   Oversees monthly, quarterly, and annual payments of lease fees.
16.   Oversees billing of accounts receivable and utility accounts.
17.   Keeps a schedule of and record of all Council meetings agendas and public
hearing agendas and proceedings of such meetings.
18.   Files, records, and publishes ordinances and resolutions of the Council
and oversees the codification of ordinances into the municipal code. Updates
City Code books and other ordinances (i.e. Zoning, Subdivision, PWD Specs
(SUDAS), etc.)
19.   Prepare purchase orders and secure necessary management approvals to
initiate purchases.
20.   Responsible for all arrangements for conducting municipal elections.
21.   Handle all City investments in conjunction with the City Administrator
and maintain an investment register.
22.   Oversees and coordinates the City’s annual, independent, financial audit
(s) and publishing of the City’s financial statements.
23.   File timely budget and amendments with the County Auditor.
24.   Administer oaths of office to any City officer required to give an oath.
25.   Records expirations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of
Adjustment, Parks and Recreations Commission, and Tourism Board member terms.
Inquires with Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, and Tourism
Board members and continuing in that capacity.
26.   Serves as board secretary for and takes minutes at the meetings of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment, makes necessary
preparations for, and maintains records thereof.
27.   Provides public records and information to citizens, civic groups, the
media, and other agencies as requested and as required per State and City
Codes.
28.   Responsible for establishing, implementing, and maintaining City-wide
electronic document imaging records system for the City.
29.   Composes, types, and edits a variety of correspondence, reports,
memoranda, and other material requiring judgment as to content, accuracy, and
completeness.
30.   Coordinates dissemination and posting of information on City website and
social media accounts.
31.   Communicates official plans, policies, and procedures to staff and to the
general public.
32.   Maintains a daily cash balance and balancing cash against receipts and
assists in preparing and balancing deposits.
33.   Assists in the preparation and verification of weekly, monthly, and
annual payroll processes and reports.
34.   Assists the City Administrator in the operation and maintenance of the
City’s central financial and management computer system.
35.   Be responsible for the day-to-day office management of the City Hall
offices.
36.   Be responsible for the distribution and filing of all incoming
correspondence as directed by the City Administrator.
37.   Become a Notary Public within three months after taking office. (The City
shall assume all costs involved in this requirement.)
38.   Responsible for recording, at the County Recorder’s Office, all land
transactions engaged in by the City, any ordinance required to be recorded by
Council action, street names, and name changes, and any other required
documents.
39.   Responsible for providing for, maintaining, securing, and disposing of
the City’s official records and information according to the requirements of
this Code, State, and federal law, and the guidelines.
(Section 19.06 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
19.07   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting, the Clerk shall cause
the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall
include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
19.08   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
19.09   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances
or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
19.10   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
19.11   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
19.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
19.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are
the words “CITY OF LECLAIRE.”
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City            20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Document Preparation
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor, Council, or City
Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   DOCUMENT PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those documents which the Mayor, City Council,
or City Administrator may desire and so direct them to prepare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, City Administrator, or Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor, Council, or City Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 21
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
21.01 Purpose                   21.06 Powers and Duties
21.02 Establishment             21.07 Contracting with Other Libraries
21.03 Library Trustees          21.08 Nonresident Use
21.04 Organization of the Board 21.09 Library Account
21.05 Powers and Duties         21.10 Annual Report
 
21.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a free
public library in the City; to provide further for the creation of a library
board of trustees; and to establish such board’s powers and duties, its
composition, and the method of appointment of its members.
21.02   ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established a free public library for the City to be known as
the “LeClaire Community Library” (and referred to herein as the “Library”).
21.03   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.
21.04   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City.
Members shall be over the age of 18 years.
21.05   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
2.   Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if such member is
absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case
of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be
filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new
Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
21.06   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary.
2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Library Director, and authorize the
Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary
for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, prior to such employment, the compensation of the Library Director,
assistants, and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of
the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.
5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Library Director, by a two-thirds vote
of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Library Director to select, and
make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps,
journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and
supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents
and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for
the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the business of
the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of
the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
14.   Present Annual Budget. Present annual budget request to the Council for
the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with the timetable adopted by the Council
for submitting such requests.
21.07   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of
free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
21.08   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
21.09   LIBRARY ACCOUNT.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
21.10   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
CHAPTER 22
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
22.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 22.06 Compensation
22.02 Term of Office                 22.07 Powers and Duties
22.03 Removal from Office            22.08 Quorum: Voting
22.04 Meeting Attendance Required    22.09 Records to Be Kept
22.05 Vacancies
 
22.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government. A majority of the members of the Commission shall be
persons representing the public at large and shall not be involved in the
business of purchasing or selling real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
22.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.03   REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
Any member of the Commission may be removed from office by written order of the
Council, which shall give the reasons therefore.
22.04   MEETING ATTENDANCE REQUIRED.  
Any Commission member who has three or more consecutive, unexcused absences
shall be recommended to the City Council for removal from office. The
Commission shall determine what an “unexcused absence” is.
22.05   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
22.06   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. No
members shall act or join any action hereunder in which said member has direct
financial interest.
22.07   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related
matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4.   Comprehensive Plan. It shall have full power and authority to make or
cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, or charts of the whole or any
portion of the City or of any land outside thereof, which in the opinion of the
Commission bears relation to the comprehensive plan and shall bring it to the
attention of the Council and may publish its studies and recommendations.
5.   Comprehensive Plan: Preparation. For the purpose of making a comprehensive
plan for the physical development of the City, the Commission shall make
careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of
the City and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan
shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the City and its environs
which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as
well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
6.   Comprehensive Plan: Public Hearing. Before adopting a comprehensive plan
as referred to in the preceding paragraph, or any part of it, or any
substantial amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one public
hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by posting a copy thereof
in public places within the City, one of which shall be the City Hall, not less
than seven nor more than 20 days before the date of hearing. The adoption of
the plan or part or amendment thereof shall be by motion of the Commission
carried by the affirmative vote of not less than five of the members of the
Commission. After adoption of said plan by the Commission, an attested copy
thereof shall be certified to the Council and the Council may approve the same.
When said plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the
approval of the Council, the said plan, until subsequently modified or amended
as herein authorized, shall constitute the official City plan.
7.   Comprehensive Plan: Amendments. When the comprehensive plan as herein
provided has been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof
shall be made without such proposed change first being referred to the
Commission for its recommendation; or, the Commission itself may initiate the
proposal. The Commission shall then make such study of the proposal as it deems
necessary and hold the public hearing required under Subsection 9 of Section
22.07 hereof and certify a copy of its adoption or disapproval of the proposed
change to the Council. If the Commission disapproved the proposed change, it
may be adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least four of
the members of the said Council.
8.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivisions
or resubdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in
lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended
to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the
Commission, and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council,
except such requirement and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action
on any such plans or plats when the Commission after 30 days’ written notice
requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
22.08   QUORUM: VOTING.
A minimum of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum of said
Commission and, except as otherwise provided, no motion of recommendation of
approval or of disapproval by the Commission shall be deemed approved or
adopted without the concurrence of at least four members thereof.
22.09   RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each recommendation, proposal, or other motion, of absence or
failure to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep appropriate records of
its examinations, studies, publications, and other official actions. Such
official minutes and records of the Commission shall be kept in the office of
the Commission and shall be a public record.
CHAPTER 23
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
 
23.01 Creation                     23.06 Meetings
23.02 Director’s Appointment     23.07 Executive Board Creation and Meetings
23.03 Director’s Qualifications  23.08 Records
23.04 Termination of Directors     23.09 Powers
23.05 Council Parks and Recreation 23.10 Council Appeal Permitted
Chairperson
 
23.01   CREATION.
There is hereby established, effective August 3, 2015, a LeClaire Parks and
Recreation Commission, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission,” for the
City.
23.02   DIRECTOR’S APPOINTMENT.
The City Council shall appoint the Commission directors by resolution. The
total number of directors will be seven. Each director’s term shall be for a
period of three years. All prospective director applicants must adhere to and
will be subject to the City’s current application and consideration process
including the “gender balance” provisions as required by State Code.
23.03   DIRECTOR’S QUALIFICATIONS.
The directors must be residents of the City or residents of the County living
within the 52753 zip code mailing area. Residents of the City shall make up a
majority (at least four) of the Board of Directors. No person while on said
Commission, except the Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson, will hold any
City public office. The directors will serve without compensation except for
their actual expenses in special cases, which will be subject to prior approval
of the Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson or the Council.
23.04   TERMINATION OF DIRECTORS.
Upon a majority vote, the Commission may notify the Council Parks and
Recreation Chairperson, in writing, of the need to consider termination of a
director for three or more unexcused absences within any 12- month period or
for other just cause(s) as determined by the Commission. Upon receipt of such
notice, the Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson shall contact the director
(s) so identified and discuss the termination notice with them. In the event
that a mutually satisfactory understanding between all of the parties involved
cannot be reached or if a resignation is not tendered after the Council Parks
and Recreation Chairperson has evaluated and substantiated all the material
pertaining to the matter and has so requested one, then the Council Parks and
Recreation Chairperson shall submit a written request for termination of the
director(s), signed by a majority of the directors, to the Council for their
consideration. The Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson may, in lieu of the
above-described method for termination, proceed directly to the Council and
request, in writing, the termination of any director. Said written request
shall contain an explanation and reasoning for said termination consideration.
23.05   COUNCIL PARKS AND RECREATION CHAIRPERSON.
The Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson shall have no voting privileges
and is authorized to oversee and intervene in any and all actions taken, or
which are proposed to be taken, by the Commission that is deemed to be
detrimental or inconsistent with the overall City Parks and Recreation program
as approved by the Council. The Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson shall
not serve as Chairperson of the Commission nor hold any elected office on the
Commission.
23.06   MEETINGS.
The Commission shall hold regularly scheduled meetings at least once per month
and any other meetings as needed. The place and time of all meetings shall be
determined by the Commission. Meeting notices and agendas shall be posted
pursuant to City policy and as required by State law (ref. Code of Iowa,
Chapter 21). Four voting members shall constitute a quorum of the Commission
for purposes of conducting a meeting. It shall take not less than four
concurring votes of the voting members to act on any matter before the
Commission.
23.07   EXECUTIVE BOARD CREATION AND MEETINGS.
The Commission shall elect, by paper ballot in June of each year, an Executive
Board to serve a 12-month term beginning in July of each year. The Executive
Board shall consist of the following positions: one Chairperson; one Vice
Chairperson; one Treasurer; one Secretary. Initially the Commission shall
conduct this vote during its first meeting after the adoption of this ordinance
and those initial terms shall expire at the end of June following the adoption
of this ordinance. Executive Board members may serve consecutive terms upon re-
election. Should a vacancy occur during the term of one of the above listed
elected offices, that office shall be filled by majority paper ballot vote, and
that term shall run until the next regularly scheduled election. Executive
Board members shall assume those duties and responsibilities as defined, and
from time-to-time amended, by the Commission and/or Council.
23.08   RECORDS.
The Commission shall cause to be kept a record of all Commission meetings
(detailed minutes), individual expenses incurred, monies received, and a
complete individual service and attendance record of each director. A copy of
these records shall be provided to the Council Parks and Recreation Chairperson
and the Clerk immediately upon completion, but in no instance less than on a
monthly basis.
23.09   POWERS.
The Commission shall have and possess the following powers, duties, and other
such responsibilities as may be incidental to the successful carrying out of
the powers vested in the Commission herein or such as may be expressly
conferred on it from time-to-time by the Council.
1.   Carry out all of the duties prescribed by the Council and/or the Council
Parks and Recreation Chairperson or as otherwise prescribed herein.
2.   The Commission shall advise and recommend to the Council those programs,
activities, and facilities needed to provide a broad range of cultural and
recreational activities and opportunities for the residents of the City.
3.   To prepare and revise annually, a comprehensive City-wide, long-range
cultural, and recreational plan.
4.   Prepare and recommend to the City Council for consideration, rules, and
regulations for the conduct of the general public in its use and operations of
the City’s cultural and recreational facilities.
5.   To coordinate with other boards, agencies, or groups within the City, to
expand and enhance cultural and recreational activities for the citizens of the
City.
6.   To prepare and recommend to the Council amendments to this ordinance as
the Commission may from time-to-time deem necessary.
7.   To establish and maintain the highest standard possible in the
development, preservation, care, expansion, and maintenance of the cultural and
recreational areas and facilities in the City.
8.   The Commission, pursuant to rules and procedures developed by the
Commission as it so deems necessary, shall cause schedules to be created,
maintained, and posted for any and all activities and uses conducted within the
cultural and recreational facilities of the City.
9.   The Commission shall cooperate with other municipal, County, State, and
federal entities in implementing the City’s recreation objectives and to help
assure harmonious and beneficial relationships in this pursuit.
23.10   COUNCIL APPEAL PERMITTED.
The Commission may appeal to the Council in writing for a final, formal
disposition on any action or decision rendered by the Council Parks and
Recreation Chairperson. The Council, by resolution, may support, reverse, or
approve an alternative proposal on said appealed matter.
CHAPTER 24
BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP - GENDER BALANCE AND TENURE
 
24.01 Purpose and Application 24.03 Memberships - Tenure (Service)
24.02 Gender Balance          24.04 Other City Boards
 
24.01   PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the uniform application of gender
selection and the establishment of members’ tenure or service on said body when
newly creating a board, commission, or committee or when filling a vacancy on
such body. The following provisions apply to any and all boards, commissions,
or committees of any nature appointed by the Council.
24.02   GENDER BALANCE.
All appointive boards, commissions, or committees shall be gender balanced per
the provisions of Section 69.16A of the Code of Iowa. Upon initial appointment
the “odd, remaining position” shall be filled alternating the gender of the
person serving in the seat. When filling any vacancy, except the “odd,
remaining position”, the vacant position shall be filled by a person of the
same gender. If, after attempting in good faith for 90 days to fill a vacancy
with the appropriate gender, and using a fair and unbiased method of selecting
the best qualified applicants the effort is unsuccessful, the City shall
utilize a fair and unbiased method of selecting the best qualified applicants.
24.03   MEMBERSHIPS - TENURE (SERVICE).
Except as otherwise provided for elsewhere in this code, any and all board,
commission, or committee membership appointments shall be for a maximum period
of two uninterrupted terms as applicable or for a maximum, not-to-exceed term
of 10 years whichever is shorter, unless otherwise specifically extended by
action of the Council. A board, commission, or committee member that serves a
vacated term for two years or less of the current term may serve an additional
two terms, not to exceed 12 years of service. These provisions notwithstanding,
board, commission, or committee members may be reappointed to a new membership
term only after having first taken a two-year membership “hiatus” from the
board, commission, or committee and then only after complying with all of the
membership application provisions for that vacant position. When a board or
commission member has served the maximum terms, the Council may allow the
member to continue serving for one more term if no qualified applicants are
identified for the board or commission member’s seat.
24.04   OTHER CITY BOARDS.
Except as otherwise provided for elsewhere in this code, any and all board,
commission, a committee members shall not be a member of any other City board,
commission, or committee.
CHAPTER 26
OFFICE OF TOURISM AND LECLAIRE TOURISM BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 
26.01 Purpose                              26.05 Qualifications of Directors
26.02 Establishment                        26.06 Organization of the Board
26.03 Tourism Board of Directors Created   26.07 Powers and Duties
26.04 Composition and Appointment of Board 26.08 Board Account
 
26.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation and establishment of
an office of tourism and a tourism board in the City and to establish such
board’s powers and duties, its composition, and the method of appointment of
its members.
26.02   ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established an office of tourism for the City to be known as
the “LeClaire Office of Tourism,” (“Office”).
26.03   TOURISM BOARD OF DIRECTORS CREATED.
There is hereby created a governing Board of Directors of the Office of Tourism
to be known as and referred to as the “Tourism Board of Directors,” (“Board”).
26.04   COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT OF BOARD.
The Board shall consist of seven voting members. All voting members of the
Board shall be appointed by the Council, after recommendation of the Board, and
consistent with those requirements as stated herein. The Board shall also
consist of two elected officials who shall serve in an ex-officio, non-voting
member status. The Mayor and the Council person designated as the “Civic Group”
liaison are hereby designated as the City’s representatives and shall serve in
said capacity.
26.05   QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTORS.
All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City,
or shall own and/or operate a commercial establishment within the City which
meets the classification requirements of category descriptions “b” and “e”
through “g” shown in Section
26.06(1), or shall be a permanent standing member of the Board by virtue of
their position held on the designated organizations listed in categories “c”
and “d” shown in Section
26.06(1), and all directors shall have attained the age of 18 prior to the
effective date of appointment and no director, other than those as specified
herein below, shall hold any elective office within the City.
26.06   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
1.   Composition of Board. The Board shall be made up of the following number
of designated representatives from the general categories as described:
Categories Descriptions
Categories Descriptions
a          Two - Mayor (Ex-officio) and one Council member - “Civic Group” designated
           liaison (Ex-officio) - Non-Voting members
b          One - Lodging Industry (Motels, hotels, B and B’s, etc. contributing to the
           Hotel/Motel tax revenues) - Voting member
c          One - Any City based non-profit organization representative - Voting member
d          One - City Chamber of Commerce Member - Voting member
e          One - Festivals, events, attractions (Tug-Fest, marinas, seasonal events,
           river cruises, etc.) - Voting member
f          One - Restaurants and other exclusive food establishments - Voting member
           Three - General, retail, and/or service-related, tourism-oriented business
g          representatives, including convenience store/fuel dispensing establishments,
           antiques, etc. - Voting member(s)
h          One - LeClaire Buffalo Bill Museum Executive Director - Voting Member
 
2.   Terms of Office. The Board positions represented by categories “a,” “b,”
“d,” and “h” as shown above shall be considered permanent standing Board
positions. Board members representing those entities shall serve on the Board
for the duration of the time that they hold the position associated with that
entity.
3.   The Board positions represented by categories “c” and “e” through “g”
shall serve two- or three-year terms, as provided for herein for the initial
appointments. Board members representing these categories (“c” and “e” through
“g”) may be re-appointed for one additional, consecutive, two-year term after
their initial appointment and then must vacate the position for a minimum of
two years before becoming eligible for another appointment. Except for the
initial appointments as specified herein, each term shall commence on July 1
and shall expire on June 30, two years later. Of the first four members
initially appointed within these categories (“e” through “g”), two, (categories
“e” and “g”) shall be appointed for two years and two, (categories “f” and “g”)
for three years. The terms of the initial appointees shall include the period
beginning on the date of their formal appointments, if such occurs prior to
July 1, 2002, and end on June 30 of the year in which their respective terms of
office would otherwise have normally expired. For purposes of the initial
appointment of the Board members within categories “c” and “e” through “g,” the
five Board members representing the permanent, standing Board positions will
recommend appointments to the Council for consideration by no later than June
24, 2002. After the initial appointments, any future appointment recommendation
to the Council will be made only upon the majority approval of the voting
members of the Board.
4.   Vacancies. The position of any director shall be forfeited and shall
become vacant if the director:
   A.   No longer resides, owns, or operates a commercial establishment within
the City.
   B.   Is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except
in the case of acceptable, excused absences as approved by the Board.
   C.   No longer holds the specified position associated with a particular
entity.
   D.   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council only upon the
majority approval and recommendation of the voting members of the Board. Any
newly appointed director filling a vacancy shall fill out the unexpired term
for which the appointment is made.
   E.   If any position within categories “c,” “e,” “f,” or “g” remain vacant
for a period of two or more months, the Board may recommend to the Council for
appointment any applicant to fill the unexpired term of that particular
vacancy, even though the applicant does not meet the representative criteria
for that category.
5.   Quorum. Four voting members shall constitute a quorum of the Board for
purposes of conducting a meeting. It shall take not less than four concurring
votes of the voting members to act on any matter before the Board.
6.   Compensation. Directors shall receive no compensation for their services
other than to be reimbursed (consistent with established City procedures) for
any actual expenses incurred in conducting Board business.
26.07   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   The Board shall elect, annually at a meeting held in July of each year,
from its members, a Chair, Vice-Chair, Secretary, and such other officers as it
deems necessary. The Clerk shall serve as Board treasurer, but shall not be a
member of the Board.
2.   To direct and control all of the affairs of the Office.
3.   To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with City ordinances, policies, and State law, for the care, use,
government and management of the Office and the business of the Board.
4.   The Board shall have full, complete, and exclusive authority to expend for
and on behalf of the City all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and
expend all gifts, donations, or payments, whatsoever which are received by the
City specifically designated for tourism development purposes.
5.   The Board shall have no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its
budget for the current fiscal year unless otherwise approved by the Council.
6.   The Board may contract with private professional consultants and
contractors, other governmental entities, quasi-governmental entities, or with
any one or more of them, for assistance in carrying out the City’s tourism
objectives as established by the Board and approved by the Council, and may
agree with each or all of them as to the amount, if any, to be paid for such
assistance, provided however, that any such contract must be executed,
ratified, and confirmed by the City Administrator with the prior approval of
the Council.
7.   The Board shall cooperate with other municipal, County, State, and federal
entities in implementing the City’s tourism objectives and to help assure
harmonious and beneficial relationships in this pursuit.
8.   The Board shall annually review, revise, present to the Council in a
timely fashion, and implement the approved tourism and marketing plan designed
for the City.
9.   The Board shall hold regular meetings not less than once per month at such
time and place as the Board shall so decide pursuant to its established rules
and procedures.
10.   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon each recommendation, proposal, or other resolution, of absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep appropriate records of
its examinations, studies, publications, and other official actions. Such
official minutes and records of the Board shall be kept at City Hall and shall
be a public record.
11.   The Board shall present an annual detailed budget request to the Council
for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with the timetable and policies as
adopted by the Council for submitting such requests.
12.   The Board shall periodically review and recommend to the Council any
required changes to the Board’s composition as specified herein to reflect
changes in the identified City tourism “stakeholders.”
26.08   BOARD ACCOUNT.
All money appropriated by the Council to the Board for the implementation of
the approved tourism and marketing plan, irrespective of its funding source,
shall be set aside in a separate account for the Board. The Clerk will issue
checks.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.07 Police Chief: Appointment, Service,
                                   and Removal from Office
30.02 Organization                 30.08 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training            30.10 Uniform Allowance
30.05 Oath                         30.11 Police Protection Fees
30.06 Compensation
 
30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
30.05   OATH.
Every police officer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by Section
5.01 of this code.
30.06   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.07   POLICE CHIEF: APPOINTMENT, SERVICE, AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor if a vacancy exists within
this position classification. The Chief shall serve as an at-will employee in
said capacity at the pleasure of the Council, and shall be discharged only by a
four-fifths majority vote of the Council. Should an individual be relieved of
their duties as Police Chief, for other than illegal or serious, major
violations of the LeClaire Police Rules and Regulations Manual, or the LeClaire
Human Resources Guidelines Manual, they shall automatically assume the regular
duties of the position that they held prior to the appointment as Police Chief
with the corresponding wage adjustments as provided in the LeClaire Human
Resources Guidelines Manual. In the event that an individual from within
existing personnel is appointed Police Chief and is relieved of their duties as
Police Chief for other than illegal or serious major violations of the LeClaire
Police Rules and Regulations Manual or the LeClaire Human Resources Guidelines
Manual, they shall automatically assume the regular duties of the position that
they held prior to the appointment of Police Chief. Wages shall be reduced
accordingly and shall be computed as outlined in the LeClaire Human Resources
Guidelines Manual.
In the event that an individual is hired from outside the existing City police
personnel to serve in the capacity of Police Chief, they shall serve in that
capacity for a minimum of one full year before becoming eligible to receive the
benefits enumerated in this section. If they are relieved of their position
prior to this one-year qualifying time period, the individual may also be
relieved of their employment with the City. If the individual, in this case,
meets the prequalifying length of service at the time they are relieved of the
duties of Police Chief, they shall assume the rank of patrolman and the
corresponding pay in effect as of that date as outlined in the LeClaire Human
Resources Guidelines Manual. In the event that an individual is hired from
outside the existing City police personnel to serve in the capacity of Police
Chief, and this eligible individual (as defined in the previous paragraph), who
was demoted decides not to seek employment elsewhere, the individual with the
least number of years of service on the department at that time, including the
recently demoted Police Chief, may be laid off from employment with the City,
unless the Council finds it necessary to increase the number of members
employed by the department. The establishment of this provision shall, in no
way, prevent dismissal for illegal activities or for serious major violations
of the LeClaire Police Rules and Regulations Manual or the LeClaire Human
Resources Guidelines Manual.
30.08   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the
State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and
materials of the department.
11.   Serve as the “sergeant-at-arms” at all Council meetings (regular and
otherwise), unless otherwise excused by the Mayor, and be charged with the
preservation of order at these meetings.
30.09   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with this Code,
and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the
operation of the department including rules governing the following:
1.   Rules of Conduct. The conduct and activity of members of the department
during regular and off-duty hours.
2.   Uniform. The wear and care of uniforms.
3.   Weapons. The care, use, and practice of side arms and other police
weapons.
4.   Communication. The procedures, use, and care of the police radio and other
communication systems.
5.   Training. The nature, time, and attendance requirements for in-service
training of members of the department.
6.   Emergencies. Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the
department, as may be necessary, in the event of an emergency until such rules
may be considered by the Council.
7.   Other. Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in
assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
30.10   UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
All police officers shall be provided with uniforms as determined by resolution
of the Council which shall be granted in the form of the purchase of clothing
meeting the standard of color, style, and quality specified by the City. Any
officer who leaves the department’s service shall turn all items identifiable
as official uniforms, including insignia, before receiving final compensation.
30.11   POLICE PROTECTION FEES.
When certain planned and/or scheduled events or activities are determined by
the Police Chief, in consultation with the City Administrator and the Mayor/
Council, to require police protection above and beyond that normally scheduled,
the City Administrator shall cause charges to be assessed to the individuals,
businesses, or any other entities that are sponsoring or creating the activity
or event. (Examples of activities potentially requiring additional protection
include, but are not limited to, alcohol being sold or served or crowd sizes
requiring extra traffic control, etc.) Assessed charges will be based on a
minimum charge of one hour with a minimum incremental charge of one-quarter
hour thereafter. Hourly charges shall be established by resolution of the
Council. Charges will be based on an estimated number of hours of service and
billed and paid prior to the activity or event. The final amount due will be
adjusted to reflect the actual number of hours of service provided.
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
35.01 Establishment and Purpose        35.08 Duties of Fire Chief
35.02 Organization                     35.09 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.03 Dismissal from Fire Department   35.10 Policies and Procedures
35.04 Training                         35.11 Powers and Duties
35.05 Compensation                     35.12 Response Outside City
35.06 Fire Chief Selection and Service 35.13 Charges for Services
35.07 Oath                             35.14 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A volunteer fire and rescue department is hereby established to prevent and
extinguish fires, to protect lives and property against fires and other perils,
to promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls
when requested to do so. This department shall be known as and referred to as
the “LeClaire Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department.”
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department shall consist of a permanent full-time Fire Chief and not more
than 40 volunteer members. Additional permanent full-time staff may be added as
deemed necessary by resolution of the Council.
35.03   DISMISSAL FROM FIRE DEPARTMENT.
The Fire Chief may remove any member from the department for cause according to
the procedures as established within the policies and regulations of the City.
35.04   TRAINING.
All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05   COMPENSATION.
The Fire Chief, staff, and members of the department shall be designated by
rank and receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the
Council.
35.06   FIRE CHIEF SELECTION AND SERVICE.
The Fire Chief shall be recruited, selected, and appointed using a process
similar to that used for other City department heads. The Fire Chief shall
serve as an at-will employee under the general supervision and broad policy
guidance and direction of the City Administrator.
35.07   OATH.
The Fire Chief, before entering upon the duties of office, shall qualify for
office by taking the oath prescribed by Section
5.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
35.08   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7.   Property. Exercise and have control over the use, maintenance, and
operation of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by
or belonging to the Fire Department. Establish controls and reports to ensure
firefighting equipment is inspected and tested.
8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division, the City Administrator,
and the Mayor immediately. For all other fires causing damage of $50.00 or
more, or emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the
State Fire Marshal’s Division within 10 days following the end of the month.
The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of
the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of
the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as
determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances
concerning the fire incidents.
9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514)
10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and
as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
14.   Department Head. Be a City department head.
15.   Assist City Administrator. Assist the City Administrator in developing
and administering the department’s annual City budget and equipment revolving
fund.
16.   Purchasing Agent. Act as purchasing agent for the department in
accordance with City purchasing policies and guidelines.
17.   Appoint Officers. Appoint any and all department officers as he or she
deems necessary.
18.   Represent Department. Represent the Fire Department in all matters
relating to the department and attend any and all Council meetings when so
requested by the Mayor, City Council, or City Administrator.
19.   Administer and Enforce Codes. In consultation with the Building
Inspector, administer and enforce the Uniform Fire Code, Life Safety Code,
Uniform Fire Code Standards, and other such codes, as adopted by the City.
20.   Recruitment and Training. Recruit, train, hire, and direct the activities
of fire fighters to ensure that an adequate number of trained firefighters are
available in the event of a fire, medical, or other emergency response.
35.09   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.10   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
The Fire Chief shall develop, adopt, periodically review, and amend such
department policies and operating guidelines as they deem necessary to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such polices and operating guidelines,
and any change or amendment to the policies and guidelines, will take effect
after reviewed and approved by the City Administrator. The Fire Chief may issue
temporary operating guidelines at any time, and such operating guidelines shall
be in effect until reviewed and approved by the City Administrator.
35.11   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Fire Department, pursuant to the authority granted to the Fire Chief and
the policies and procedures duly established by the Department, shall have
full, complete, and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City
all sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts,
donations, or payments, whatsoever which are received by the City specifically
designated for department purposes.
35.12   RESPONSE OUTSIDE CITY.
The department may answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the City
limits if the Fire Chief determines that such an emergency exists and that such
action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits. The
department may answer all calls in accordance with the First Fire District
Agreement, the Scott County First Responder Agreement, and in any other such
mutual aid situation, as approved by the Council.
35.13   CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
The City may cause to have charges billed for all services rendered by the
department against individuals, businesses, or any other entities. Charges will
not be billed (unless otherwise provided for herein) against residents/
taxpayers of the County. Charges will be billed to any individuals, businesses,
or any other entities where it is determined that: 1) it is conclusively
determined by a conviction, admission of guilt, or through other indisputable
evidence, that an illegal burn as specified and prohibited in Section
105.05 of this Code (or any other illegal activity requiring the department’s
services) has taken place; 2) where a hazardous materials (as defined in
Section
105.02(19) of this Code) incident has occurred; 3) where arson has been found;
or 4) to any entity where insurance recovery reimbursement options are
available. The City shall initially determine (and periodically adjust)
reasonable charges for the department’s services based upon current, industry-
wide, standard practices for such activities, subject to the following
criteria:
1.   When charges are billed there shall be a base minimum charge of one hour
with a minimum incremental charge of one-half hour thereafter.
2.   Charges for services billed under this section involving activities or
situations occurring on private property within the City, created by the
property owner, or a regular resident of the property or with the property
owner’s permission/knowledge may be assessed against the property pursuant to
the provisions of
Chapter 50 of this Code.
3.   The charge for such services shall be computed to include a rate per hour,
per vehicle, and per man-hour per firefighter responding to a call for
assistance. An additional charge may be billed to reimburse the department for
extraordinary expenses of materials used in rendering such services. No charge
shall be made for services for which the total charge would be less than
$50.00.
4.   Replacement cost of disposable equipment, equipment that is damaged or
must be disposed of, will be added to the bill. An additional 25 percent will
be added to cover the costs of replacement administration.
5.   Any additional costs incurred by the City for cleanup or disposal will be
billed to and must be paid by the responsible party.
35.14   CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages (as defined by the Code of Iowa) is
prohibited anywhere on the Fire Department property except within that area of
the Fire Station building commonly known and referred to as the “community
room” (including kitchen) and then only when done in conjunction with an
authorized and approved rental or use of said area. The Fire Chief and all Fire
Department members, employees, and staff are prohibited from responding to fire
or emergency calls, participating in department training, or operating fire and
emergency equipment following the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
CHAPTER 36
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
 
36.01 Definitions           36.04 Additional Regulations
36.02 Proclamation by Mayor 36.05 Emergency Powers
36.03 Imposition of Curfew
 
36.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Civil emergency” is hereby defined to be:
   A.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute such force by three or more persons acting together without authority
of law; or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within or without the
corporate limits of the City resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
2.   “Curfew” is hereby defined as a prohibition against any person or persons
walking, running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street,
highway, public property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the
City during the hours in which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons
officially designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
36.02   PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
When, in the judgment of the Mayor, a civil emergency as defined herein is
deemed to exist, the Mayor shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of
same.
36.03   IMPOSITION OF CURFEW.
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the City or to the City
as a whole, as the Mayor deems advisable and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as the Mayor deems necessary in the interest of the public
safety or welfare.
36.04   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also in the interest of
public safety and welfare make any or all of the following orders:
1.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores.
2.   Order the closing of all taverns.
3.   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof wherein the
consumption of intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted.
4.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.
5.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away gasoline
or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a
gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
6.   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief
activity of which is the sale, distribution, or dispensing of liquid flammable
or combustible products.
7.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or giving
away of firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
8.   Order the closing of any or all establishments, or portions thereof, the
chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing, or giving away
of firearms and/or ammunition.
9.   Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the protection of
life and property.
36.05   EMERGENCY POWERS.
During the period of a declared civil emergency, the Mayor shall have the power
to invoke any or all of the following provisions:
1.   Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a
public street or place which is publicly owned, or in any motor vehicle driven
or parked thereon, which is within a duly designated restricted area.
2.   Weapons. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick,
or weapon, who uses or intends to use the same unlawfully against the person or
property of another.
3.   Incendiary Missiles. No person shall make, carry, possess, or use any type
of “Molotov Cocktail,” gasoline, or petroleum base firebomb or other incendiary
missile.
4.   Restricted Areas. No person shall enter any area designated by the Mayor
as a restricted area unless in the performance of official duties or with
written permission from the Mayor or the Mayor’s duly designated
representative.
CHAPTER 37
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
37.01 Purpose                     37.05 Notifications
37.02 Definitions                 37.06 Police Authority
37.03 Cleanup Required            37.07 Liability
37.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
 
37.01   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
37.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent,
or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the
land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates an
immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
37.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a
cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required, and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
37.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or
loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of
the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by
that person.
37.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and
the Fire Chief of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible
but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or
discovery of the hazardous condition. The Fire Chief shall immediately notify
the Department of Natural Resources.
2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Fire
Chief, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
37.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any peace officer issued under this
section.
37.07   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
37.02(4).
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Regulating Conduct in Public Places
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
No person shall commit harassment.
1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
   A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement
authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the
information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act,
knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall do any of the following:
1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in
or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to
disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a
report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report
to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
   A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
   B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
   C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
   D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
   E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
   F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
   A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
   B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person
knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by
another.
   C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PLACES.
1.   Definition. As used in this section, “loitering” means remaining idle in
essentially one location and includes the concepts of spending time idly,
loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and also includes the colloquial
expression “hanging around.”
2.   Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. No person shall loiter in a public
place in such manner as to:
   A.   Create, or cause to be created, a danger of a breach of the peace.
   B.   Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
   C.   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
   D.   Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
This section includes the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive,
disgusting, or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the
person to whom, or in whose hearing, they are made.
3.   Request to Leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any public place
is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in Subsection
2 above, any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any
person who refuses to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer
shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.10 Barbed Wire and
Safety Entities                                          Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Failure to
Device                                                   Assist
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators              41.16 Chemical
                                                         Inhalation
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive,
caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such
into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions
that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place
where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a
law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A of
the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer,
or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the
Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the
lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building, unless they comply with the
right-of-way requirements in
Chapter 142.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits unless such land consists of 10 acres or more and
is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits.
2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns, or
other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
The sale, use, or exploding of fireworks within the City are subject to the
following:
1.   Definitions. The sale, use, or exploding of fireworks within the City is
subject to the definitions enumerated in Section 727.2 of the Code of Iowa, and
Section 100.19 of the Code of Iowa, which definitions are incorporated herein
by reference.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2 and 100.19)
2.   Manufacture and/or Sale of Fireworks.
   A.   Manufacture. It shall be unlawful for a person to manufacture fireworks
within the City limits without a permit as may be required by local, State, or
federal laws and regulations.
   B.   Sales and Retail Display Permitted. Persons shall not manufacture,
construct, display, nor offer for sale explosives, explosive materials, or
fireworks (either First-Class or Second-Class) upon any property in any zoning
district other than those areas zoned “C-3: Highway Oriented Commercial
District” or any “I – Industrial District.”
   C.   Sales Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a
resident, dealer, manufacturer, or jobber of such fireworks as are not
otherwise prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be
shipped out of State; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or
theater, or for signal purposes in athletic sports, or by railroads or trucks
for signal purposes, or by a recognized military organization. This section
does not apply to any substance or composition prepared and sold for medicinal
or fumigation purposes.
   D.   Approved Dates of Sales. Consumer fireworks sales shall only be
conducted in accordance with dates and times designated by Section 727.2 of the
Code of Iowa. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks without meeting
the requirements specified in this Code, or to sell fireworks outside of the
dates specified.
   E.   Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of this Code
shall be allowed from an approved permanent structure or building between June
1 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
   F.   Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the requirements of this Code
shall be allowed from an approved temporary structure, including, but not
limited to, stands, tents, or canopies, between June 13 and July 8.
   G.   Required Public Notice for Sales of Consumer Fireworks. An 8” x 11”
copy of this ordinance is required to be prominently posted within two feet of
all cash registers or point of payment for the sale and purchase of consumer
fireworks.
   H.   Sales to Persons Less than Age 18. Consumer or display fireworks shall
not be sold or transferred by a resident, dealer, manufacturer, wholesaler,
retailer, or jobber of such firework, to a person who is less than 18 years of
age.
   I.   Purchases by Persons Less Than Age 18. Person less than 18 years of age
shall not purchase or receive consumer or display fireworks from resident,
dealer, manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or jobber of such firework.
   J.   Inspections of Approved Permanent and Temporary Structures for the Sale
of Consumer Fireworks. Applicants for and recipients of permits to sell
consumer fireworks are subject to periodic inspection of the approved permanent
and temporary structures for the storage, housing, wholesale, and retail sale
of consumer fireworks.
   K.   Proof of Insurance. Proof shall be provided of fully paid commercial
general liability insurance with a minimum of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and
$2,000,000.00 in the aggregate.
   L.   Application for and Registration of Fireworks Retailers. All applicants
for a retail permit to sell consumer fireworks shall pay the scheduled
application fee and, if granted a permit, the scheduled registration fee. A
completed application must be submitted to the City/Fire Chief no less than 14
days before each separate sales period begins.
3.   Discharging of Fireworks - General Requirements.
   A.   No person under the age of 18 shall possess or discharge a consumer
firework without parental supervision.
   B.   A person shall only discharge a consumer fireworks device on real
property they own or on property where consent has been given. The discharging
of fireworks on any public property is strictly prohibited unless otherwise
specifically authorized in writing by the City.
   C.   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to, possessed, or discharged by
persons showing visible signs of, reasonably believed to be, or determined to
be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug or narcotic.
   D.   Any person discharging a consumer fireworks device assumes all
responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. No person shall
discharge a consumer fireworks device in a reckless manner or manner likely to
cause death, injury, fire, or property damage.
   E.   No person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device outside the
following dates and hours:
      (1)   July 3rd from the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. unless it is
the Saturday or Sunday immediately preceding July 4, and then until 11:00 p.m.
      (2)   July 4th from the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
      (3)   December 31st from the hours of 12:00 p.m. until 12:30 a.m.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or discharge components of a
consumer fireworks device from its intended method of discharging.
      (5)   Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to be released
within the City limits.
      (6)   The City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the
display of fireworks on public property by a “community group,” fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent
operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance as
required under Section 727.2 of the Code of Iowa, and under this section.
4.   Violations. All violations of any provisions of this section are hereby
declared simple misdemeanors and/or municipal infractions. Violations may be
prosecuted as either a misdemeanor criminal offense or a municipal infraction
at the sole discretion of the City. Fines shall be set by resolution of the
Council and shall not be less than $500.00. Violations of this section shall be
reported to the State Fire Marshal by the Fire Chief.
5.   Use of “first-class consumer fireworks” within the corporate limits of the
City, except as otherwise provided in this section, is prohibited.
41.15   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
41.16   CHEMICAL INHALATION.
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or
inhale the fumes from any paint, glue, or other substance containing toluene or
toluol, xylene or xylol, acetone, acetate, hexane, or ketone.
1.   Any person violating this section shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
(Chapter 41 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.07 Cemetery Property
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.08 Activities in Public Places
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.09 Iowa Smokefree Air Act
42.04 Unauthorized Entry                42.10 Smoking in Public Buildings and
                                        On Public Grounds
42.05 Fraud                             42.11 Other Public Property Offenses
42.06 Theft
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
   A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle,
or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
   B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the
Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of the
Code of Iowa.
   C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
   D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person owning,
leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
   E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property owned,
leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
   F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
      (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
      (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
      (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of
unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
      (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom,
altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate
or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession.
      (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
      (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
   A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
   B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   CEMETERY PROPERTY.
1.   Snowmobiles. It is unlawful for a person to have or operate a snowmobile
within the limits of any cemetery property.
2.   Unlicensed Self-Propelled Vehicles or Horses. It is unlawful for a person
to have or operate unlicensed self-propelled vehicles or horses within the
limits of any cemetery property.
3.   Cemetery Hours. It is unlawful for any person other than cemetery
personnel and law enforcement officers to be within the confines of the
Glendale Cemetery Property from the hours of one-half hour after sunset until
sunrise.
42.08   ACTIVITIES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
It is unlawful for any individual or group of individuals, organizations, or
corporations to engage in any activity on any public street, highway, alley,
sidewalk, or other public property, which will disrupt the normal flow of
activity within the City, without approval of the City. Application for such
activity must be made at least 15 days prior to the activity and shall be in
writing, detailing the activity, the disruption which may occur, and the
security precautions to be taken.
42.09   IOWA SMOKEFREE AIR ACT.
The Council hereby adopts, by reference, the “Smokefree Air Act” Chapter 142D
of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended; as such chapter
pertains to smoking in public places, places of employment, and certain outdoor
areas.
42.10   SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND ON PUBLIC GROUNDS.
It is unlawful to smoke in any public building including the associated ground
(s) or outdoor area(s) of any public building which are used in connection with
the building including, but not limited to, a sidewalk immediately adjacent to
the building; a sitting or standing area immediately adjacent to the building;
or any other area specifically designated by resolution of the Council.
42.11   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
1.   
Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
   A.   Section
105.07 – Littering Prohibited
2.   
Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
   A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
   B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
   C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
   D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
   E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
   F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
   G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
3.   
Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
   A.   Section
136.10 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
   B.   Section
136.14 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
   C.   Section
136.15 – Defacing
   D.   Section
136.16 – Debris on Sidewalks
   E.   Section
136.17 – Merchandise Display
   F.   Section
136.18 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
43.01 Purpose                      43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   43.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
43.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term
“controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity
of controlled substances.
5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
7.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use,
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining marijuana.
8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
   A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
   B.   Water pipes;
   C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a
marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
   F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
   G.   Chamber pipes;
   H.   Carburetor pipes;
   I.   Electric pipes;
   J.   Air driven pipes;
   K.   Chillums;
   L.   Bongs;
   M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the
Code of Iowa.
4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate
a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code
of Iowa.
7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
explaining or depicting its use.
10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control
of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any
retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
   A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa
and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
   B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
   D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor
in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol license. A
person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public
school property or while attending any public or private school-related
function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication
under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person
may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a
person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section
62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01   CURFEW.
The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically
to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for
minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
1.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
   A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss
of life.
   B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should reasonably
be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible
adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or careless
adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult responsibility
through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an adult responsible
for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of the minor.
   C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
   D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside,
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility
where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s
parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but
not for longer than six hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
   E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also includes such
parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned,
that are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is
considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
   F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
2.   Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any
of the alleys, streets, or public places or to be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day on days commencing on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and
Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
3.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
   A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
   B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on
either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for
the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
   C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
      (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in
which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of work;
      (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
      (3)   Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
      (4)   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity;
      (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or meeting
of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or
cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment of
the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity.
   D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
   E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning,
ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult
knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City
within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence
falls within one of the above exceptions.
5.   Enforcement Procedures.
   A.   Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the
absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license,
a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his
or her best judgment in determining age.
   B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are that
the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in
violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to
identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s
own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who
arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in
a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not
place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor
physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into
custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
   C.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody,
the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as
soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the
minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such
time as the court may direct.
   D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer
determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law
enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person
legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the
law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative
of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person
who is known to the child.
6.   Penalties.
   A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation
by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail, send to the
adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning
that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable
penalties.
   B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as defined
in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor
to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a municipal
infraction.
   C.   Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor,
the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning, which
states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the
curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable
penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may issue the minor
a citation for a first violation.
   D.   Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age to
commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                   47.06 Parks Hours
47.02 Designation of City Parks 47.07 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
47.03 Use of Drives Required    47.08 Smoking in Parks
47.04 Fires                     47.09 LeClaire Veterans Memorial Complex/BMX
                                Park Rules
47.05 Littering
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   DESIGNATION OF CITY PARKS.
The following generally described and commonly referred to areas of public
property are hereby designated as public City parks: Hollyhock Park, Scout
Park, Huckleberry Park, City Center Plaza, and the LeClaire Veterans Memorial
Complex Park.
47.03   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any car, cycle, or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.04   FIRES.
No fire shall be built, except in a place designated for such purpose, and such
fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area.
47.05   LITTERING.
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.06   PARKS HOURS.
It is unlawful for any person other than authorized City personnel and law
enforcement officers to be within the confines of the areas known and
designated as City Parks, from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Furthermore, it is
unlawful for any unattended passenger vehicle, travel trailer, camper, self-
contained living or travel trailer, motor home, caravan, recreational vehicle,
trailers of any nature, and other such vehicles, all as defined in the Code of
Iowa and the City’s Code of Ordinances, to be within these said areas, from 10:
00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Motor trucks, truck tractors, road tractor-trailers, semi-
trailers, and other such vehicles and trailers, all as defined in the Code of
Iowa, are hereby prohibited from parking within said areas at any time except
by express permission of the City. Any vehicles parked in said areas in
violation of this section may be ticketed and/or may be towed immediately at
the owner’s expense. The Police Department is hereby granted the authority to
issue parking tickets and/or citations to any vehicles and/or immediately tow
any such vehicles that are in violation of these regulations. Any violation of
the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine as established by
resolution of the Council.
47.07   CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages (as defined by the Code of Iowa) is
permitted within designated City parks.
47.08   SMOKING IN PARKS.
Smoking shall be permitted in all City parks pursuant to the provisions of the
“Iowa Smokefree Air Act” (as amended), unless otherwise restricted by
resolution of the Council.
47.09   LECLAIRE VETERANS MEMORIAL COMPLEX/BMX PARK RULES.
Any person within the confines of the enclosed area hereby designated as the
“LeClaire Veterans Memorial Complex Skate/BMX Park” shall comply with the
posted rules and regulations governing the use of said area as adopted by
resolution of the Council. These rules and regulations shall be in addition to
and shall supersede other provisions of this chapter where conflicts and
inconsistencies exist between the provisions.
CHAPTER 48
RIVERFRONT REGULATIONS
 
48.01 Purpose                     48.07 Buffalo Bill Museum Parking Area
                                  Designated
48.02 Riverfront Area Designated  48.08 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
48.03 Regulations                 48.09 Restricted Boat Trailer Parking
48.04 Police Department Authority 48.10 Smoking on Riverfront
48.05 Commercial Use Prohibited   48.11 Camping on Riverfront Prohibited
48.06 Swimming Prohibited
 
48.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations governing access, use,
traffic flow, and parking control in the riverfront area to preserve and
enhance the public health, safety, enjoyment, and welfare associated with this
public use area.
48.02   RIVERFRONT AREA DESIGNATED.
The riverfront area subject to the regulations imposed herein includes all that
real estate, improvements, docks, utilities, landing/loading ramps, and all
other appurtenances located on the west bank of the Mississippi River, east of
the established railroad right-of-way, south of the north right-of-way line of
Ewing Street, and north of the south right-of-way line of Davenport Street
extended.
48.03   REGULATIONS.
1.   It is a violation of this Code of Ordinances to leave any boat or
recreational watercraft secured to any public boat docking facility for a
period of more than two hours. Usage of any public boat trailer ramp or
“courtesy trailer dock” shall be limited to a reasonable amount of time for the
launching, trailering, loading, and unloading of boats or recreational
watercraft, and any and all vehicles/trailers and/or boats or other watercraft
utilizing said facilities shall be attended to at all times.
2.   Any unattended passenger vehicle, travel trailer, camper, self-contained
living or travel trailer, motor home, caravan, recreational vehicle, trailers
of any nature, and other such vehicles, all as defined in the Code of Iowa, and
the City’s Code of Ordinances, may park on said riverfront area, (except as
otherwise excluded below in Subsection 3), for a period of time not exceeding
more than 72 hours except by express permission of the City. Motor trucks,
truck tractors, road tractor-trailers, semi-trailers, and other such vehicles
and trailers, all as defined in the Code of Iowa, are hereby prohibited from
parking on said riverfront area at any time except by express permission of the
City. Any vehicles parked on the riverfront in violation of this subsection
will be towed at the owner’s expense.
3.   No unattended passenger vehicles, commercial, or recreational vehicles of
any kind shall park on that riverfront area from the south right-of-way line
extended easterly of Jones Street, down-river to the southerly right-of-way
line of Dodge Street at any time except by express permission of the City or if
said vehicles are owned by individuals patronizing one or more of the
commercial river cruise vessels operating off of the City’s riverfront. (This
provision does not prohibit the temporary, supervised parking of commercial
delivery and service vehicles needed to operate and maintain those entities
utilizing and those services provided on the riverfront.)
48.04   POLICE DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY.
The Police Department shall have the authority to issue parking tickets and/or
citations to any vehicles that are in violation of these regulations. In the
event that a vehicle is blocking another vehicle or is creating a public
nuisance by parking in a manner that utilizes numerous parking spaces, said
vehicle may be towed at the owner’s expense.
48.05   COMMERCIAL USE PROHIBITED.
It is a violation of this Code of Ordinances to use any part of the above-
described riverfront and/or docks or launching ramps for any commercial purpose
or use, except by express permission of the City. (For purposes of this section
“commercial” means any work or activity engaged in for profit.) The provisions
of this section do not apply to those residents of the City who are engaged in
commercial pursuits, providing that their activities at, on, or involving the
above-described public facilities are limited to the launching and trailering
of boats and related equipment only. Furthermore, the use of these public
facilities for the pursuit of a commercial activity, according to the above-
stated provisions, shall be by permit or lease only.
48.06   SWIMMING PROHIBITED.
There shall be no swimming of any kind from anywhere on the riverfront area as
defined above.
48.07   BUFFALO BILL MUSEUM PARKING AREA DESIGNATED.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Mayor, City Administrator, Police Chief, or
Fire Chief, no person shall park a vehicle from the north end of the Buffalo
Bill Museum to and including the south end of the Lone Star Steamer, or west of
the grassed area in front of the Museum for the length of one car, except for
the purpose of visiting the aforesaid Museum and Steamer. Parking to visit the
Museum shall be limited to a period of two hours.
48.08   CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages (as defined by the Code of Iowa) is
permitted within the designated riverfront area.
48.09   RESTRICTED BOAT TRAILER PARKING.
In addition to other applicable parking ordinances contained within this code,
the following regulations shall be applicable to the parking of vehicles and
boat trailers on the riverfront:
1.   No boat trailer shall be parked south (downriver) of the Jones Street
northerly right-of-way line extended easterly.
2.   No vehicle or boat trailer (or any portion thereof) shall be parked
anywhere other than on the concrete parking surface provided for such parking.
3.   Vehicles or boat trailers shall only park perpendicular to the curb.
4.   Only those vehicles or boat trailers owned by a City resident, and
properly displaying a resident permit, shall be permitted to park in “resident-
only” designated and signed spaces during the period of May 1st through October
1st.
5.   Those fine provisions of Section
71.03 of this Code of Ordinances notwithstanding, the fine for admitted
violations of these parking restrictions shall be as established by resolution
of the Council.
6.   The Police Chief or their designee may permit temporary parking
accommodations other than those listed herein to facilitate additional parking
on the riverfront as needed.
48.10   SMOKING ON RIVERFRONT.
Smoking shall be permitted within the designated riverfront area pursuant to
the provisions of the “Iowa Smokefree Air Act” (as amended) unless otherwise
restricted by resolution of the City Council.
48.11   CAMPING ON RIVERFRONT PROHIBITED.
Camping (defined as an outdoor, overnight, away from home activity involving
the erecting of a tent or shelter of natural or synthetic material; preparing a
sleeping bag or other bedding material for use; parking of a motor vehicle,
motor home or trailer; or mooring of a vessel for the apparent purpose of
overnight occupancy) in any form or of any nature is prohibited on the
riverfront. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable
by a fine as established by resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 49
CITY-WIDE AND SPECIAL EVENTS ONLY REGULATIONS
 
                                 49.05 Peddlers, Solicitors, Transient
49.01 Purpose                    Merchants, Outdoor Commercial Sales, and
                                 Public Vending Control
49.02 Definitions                49.06 Nuisance
49.03 Streets and Parking        49.07 Violations - Penalties
49.04 Wine, Beer, Liquor Control
 
49.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to supplement and add to those already existing
City Code provisions dealing with such public concerns as parking, public
vending, authorized uses, and control of public spaces, public gatherings,
solid waste disposal and littering, noise, nuisances, etc., during Council
designated and approved City-wide and special events.
49.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “City-wide and special events” (hereinafter referred to as “event”) means
any activity which meets all of the following criteria:
   A.   The event must by formally recognized and approved by resolution of the
Council;
   B.   The event must be sponsored by and/or conducted by any “local civic
organization” as defined in Section
122.18.
   C.   The event must be held on public property where such public property is
utilized for any purpose(s) other than that which it was originally intended;
   D.   The event must reasonably expect to generate an influx of or create a
congregation of people within the City during a 24-hour period.
2.   A “City-wide event” is distinguished from a “special event” in that a
“City-wide event” is an event where only the City (or any duly recognized,
subsidiary thereof) is the sponsoring entity.
3.   “Temporary” means any time frame duration during the event time frame as
authorized and approved by the Council.
4.   “Commercial” means as previously established and contained within the
City’s Zoning Ordinance.
5.   “Outdoor” means any place on any parcel of land other than that which is
totally within the confines of a principal building.
(Section 49.02 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
49.03   STREETS AND PARKING.
In addition to and/or in lieu of those various street and parking-related
provisions contained within this Code, the following specific street and
parking-related provisions shall apply during an “event”:
1.   The Police Chief or their designee(s), after the review and development of
alternate parking plans and solutions, and without additional prior Council
approval, may authorize any “temporary” parking as deemed necessary for the
“event.” Appropriate and informative signage shall be posted to reasonably
notify the public of the modified parking conditions in effect.
2.   Any and all “commercial” parking conducted during a “city-wide” event
only, whether conducted on private or public property, shall only be allowed in
pre-determined locations as designated by the “event” organizers and as pre-
approved by the Council during their review, recognition, and formal approval
of the “event”.
3.   Without prior Council approval, the Police Chief, or their designee(s),
may temporarily place barricades or roadblocks in any City street, alley, or
roadway to temporarily close or redirect any and/or all traffic in order to
enhance the proper and safe flow of pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic
within the City limits.
49.04   WINE, BEER, LIQUOR CONTROL.
In addition to and in lieu of those provisions contained within
Chapter 120 of this Code, the following specific wine, beer, and liquor-related
control provisions shall apply during an event:
1.   Unless otherwise established as a part of a permanent wine, beer, or
liquor permit/license feature and function of an existing establishment, no
entity other than the event sponsor shall be allowed to sell any wine, beer, or
liquor of any kind outdoors during the duration of the City-wide event.
49.05   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL SALES,
AND PUBLIC VENDING CONTROL.
In addition to and in lieu of those provisions contained within Chapters
122,
123, and
136 of this Code, the following specific provisions related to the regulation
of peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants, public vendors, and the use of
both public and private areas shall apply to any and all outdoor commercial
sales of any kind during an “event”:
1.   No outdoor commercial sales of any kind will be allowed on public property
within the event designated area except those as approved by the event sponsor
and then only as authorized and lawfully permitted and approved by the City as
noted herein below.
2.   The provisions of Section
123.03 of this Code notwithstanding, no public vending activities will be
permitted without the prior formal approval by the Council of a specific
location plan as submitted by the event sponsor.
3.   The provisions of Subsection
123.06(15) notwithstanding, any fees charged by the event sponsor for outdoor
commercial sales permits or public vending permits issued for a city-wide event
shall be approved by resolution of the Council. At no time other than for the
official City-sponsored RAGBRAI event shall any local civic organization be
charged a permit fee.
4.   Any person or entity issued an outdoor commercial sales or public vending
permit pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the Iowa Department of Health
and the Scott County Health Department rules and regulations pertaining to the
sale and dispensing of food for consumption.
5.   Any person or entity issued an outdoor commercial sales or public vending
permit pursuant to this chapter shall, at all times during the event, display
and/or wear said permit on said person in a readily visible location and shall
present said permit for inspection to any City official upon request.
6.   All beverages sold for immediate, outdoor public consumption in the City
by anyone holding a permit issued under the terms and conditions of this
chapter shall be sold in non-glass containers only.
49.06   NUISANCE.
The sale of food, beer, wine, liquor, or merchandise of any kind or the
erection of a temporary facility for the sale of such without a permit as
required herein, is a violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall be
considered a nuisance, as defined in the City Code of Ordinances. If this type
of nuisance is determined to exist, an emergency abatement procedure pursuant
to Subsection
50.06(5) of this Code is hereby authorized and may be executed by the Police
Chief, or their designee(s), or those acting at their direction, by dismantling
and removing the nuisance without notice.
49.07   VIOLATIONS - PENALTIES.
Selling or supplying food, beer, wine, liquor, or merchandise of any kind to
any person without a permit, or in any other way in violation of this chapter,
shall be deemed to be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of
$500.00 and a maximum of 30 days in jail. Furthermore, any violation of this
chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction, as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances, and, therefore, any civil penalties may
likewise be assessed and enforced as set forth.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or
any act of any person or group whereby the health or life of any person may be
endangered, injured, or impaired, or any disease may directly or indirectly be
caused by the act, or because of the act any property may be endangered,
injured, or damaged is a nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected
and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
7.   Abandoned Appliances. Depositing or storing of any discarded, abandoned,
unattended, or unused item commonly referred to as an appliance including, but
not limited to, such items known as, refrigerators, freezers, ovens, stoves,
washers, dryers, furnaces, air conditioners, microwave ovens, water heaters,
etc., unless in a completely enclosed structure. Further, any such appliance
meeting the above-stated criteria equipped with any type of door must have the
door removed.
8.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such
as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
9.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
10.   Infected, Infested, and Dead Trees. Dead, infected, or infested trees and
all dead wood, or debris, which, because of its condition may serve as a
breeding place for such pests or diseases or enable transmission of such pests
or diseases, or any tree creating a current danger whether the tree is on
public or private property, and without regard for the cause of damage to the
tree.
11.   Buried or Inoperable Curb Stops. A buried or inoperable water curb stop,
when at any time it is necessary for the curb stop to be used in terminating
water service to a property for any reason.
12.   Obstructing View at Corners. See Zoning Chapter Section
170.44.
13.   Excessive Noise:
   A.   Any noise level which, at any time, creates a “noise disturbance” as
defined in Section
155.05(4)(C) of this Code of Ordinances. (This provision does not apply to
noises emitted by authorized emergency vehicles, municipal public works or
other quasi-public utilities vehicles performing services during the course of
emergency repairs or operations, or to vehicles or equipment whose operations
are regulated pursuant to the provisions of the Interstate Commerce Act.)
   B.   The possession or harboring of any animal or bird which frequently or
for continued duration emits sounds native to the species which create a “noise
disturbance.” (Excepted from this provision are guide dogs for the blind and
deaf.)
   C.   The operation, playing, or the permitting of the playing of any radios,
televisions, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar
device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound at a sound level which
creates a “noise disturbance.” (Items and activities such as church carillons,
bells, or chimes, parades, mobile radio signaling devices, and sanctioned race
events are hereby exempt from this provision.)
   D.   The operation or the permitting of the operation of a power lawn mower,
power trimmer, power blower, or vacuum, electric or gasoline powered chain saw,
or any other power yard trimming or maintenance device between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such use creates a “noise disturbance.”
For the purposes of enforcing any provision of the Code of Ordinances,
including this section, where the level of sound contributing to a “noise
disturbance” needs to be evaluated, the sound level measured from a sound
source shall be measured using a sound level meter at the real property
boundary from which the sound is emanating (or at a point reasonably proximate
to the real property boundary) and shall be measured at a height of four feet
above the immediate ground surface.
14.   Faulty or Defective Building Sewers or Private Sewer Systems. Any leaking
or defective building sewers or private sewer systems that are leaking or
defective and/or are not providing an acceptable quality of effluent.
15.   Nuisances on Private Property. Any condition or use of a premises or of a
building exterior which is detrimental to the property of others or which
causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property
in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
16.   Rodent, Snake, or Vermin Harborage. Any accumulation of trash, waste,
lumber, wood, etc., that attracts and harbors rats, snakes, or other vermin.
17.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
2.   Weed Control and Abatement (See
Chapter 52)
3.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
4.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
5.   Trees (See
Chapter 151)
6.   Construction and Repair of Buildings (See
Chapter 155)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section
50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
1.   Nuisance Abatement. Whenever the City finds that a nuisance exists, it
shall cause to be served upon the property owner a written notice requiring
that the nuisance be abated within a reasonable time after receipt of the
notice to do so, unless otherwise specified herein.
2.   Contents of Notice to Abate. The notice to abate shall contain:
   A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance
or other condition.
   B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance or condition.
   C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance or condition.
   D.   Timeframe. The timeframe within which to complete the abatement.
   E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against such person, as
specified under Section
155.07.
3.   Method of Service. The notice will be sent by certified mail to the
recorded property owner as indicated by the records of the Scott County
Assessor’s Office.
4.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the City Administrator as to whether a nuisance exists. A request
for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City Administrator
within the timeframe stated in the notice or it will be conclusively presumed
that a nuisance exists, and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be
before the City Administrator at a time and place fixed by the City. The
findings of the City Administrator shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is
found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the
circumstances.
5.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance, the City may perform any
action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City
shall assess the associated costs as provided in Section
155.07 after giving notice to the property owner under the applicable
provisions of Subsections 1 and 2 and hearing as provided in Subsection 4
above.
6.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance, or who
fails or refuses to abate or remove the same within the time specified in the
notice to abate, will be in violation of the Code of Ordinances.
7.   Abatement by City. If any person fails to abate any nuisance as directed,
the City may perform the required actions to abate, keeping an accurate account
of the expenses incurred. The itemized expense accounting will be filed with
the City Clerk who will pay such expenses on behalf of the City, if applicable.
Such expenses will be computed in accordance with those provisions as outlined
in Section
155.07.
8.   Assessment of Costs. The Clerk will certify the costs to the County
Treasurer, and they will then be collected with and in the same manner as
general property taxes.
9.   Installment Payments of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the assessment to be paid in
up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same
interest as benefited property.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK, JUNK VEHICLES, AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.05 Notice to Abate
51.02 Junk, Junk Vehicles, and Nuisance 51.06 Abatement and Removal of Nuisance
Vehicles Prohibited                     Vehicles
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance 51.07 Vehicles for Sale
51.04 Exceptions
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
   A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window,
headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
   B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
   C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
   D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
   E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
   F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of its
defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
   G.   Is unattended on jacks, blocks, or elevated in any other way which
constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
   H.   Lacks current registration or does not display current registration, if
registration is required for that category of vehicle.
   I.   Has been partly or fully dismantled.
   J.   If upon any public right-of-way, cannot be legally operated on the
same.
   K.   In the case of a motor vehicle, cannot be legally operated on a public
street or highway.
   L.   Largely functions as a solid waste container-lawfully operated. (Solid
waste or garbage trucks are excluded.)
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3.   “Nuisance vehicle” means any vehicle upon public or private property, not
otherwise excepted as permitted in Section
51.04, which exhibits at least one of the characteristics enumerated above in
Section 51.01(2) or which meets at least one of the characteristics enumerated
in Section
69.09(1).
4.   “Vehicle” means any manner of conveyance designed to be propelled by
force, but not human powered, along the ground, water or air, and including,
but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, tractor trailers, motorcycles,
trailers, wagons, tractors, watercraft, aircraft, snowmobiles or any
combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK, JUNK VEHICLES, AND NUISANCE VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk, junk
vehicle, or nuisance vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk, junk vehicle, or
nuisance vehicle stored within:
1.   Legal Structure. A legal garage or other enclosed legal structure; or
2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operating within
the City.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement procedures as
outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances or institute any other available legal
abatement remedies or penalties as provided for in the code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.06   ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF NUISANCE VEHICLES.
No nuisance vehicle shall remain upon public or private property for a period
in excess of 24 hours. After a 24 hour waiting period, said vehicle is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be immediately abated by the City.
1.   The Police Department, or their respective designees, shall give notice of
the nuisance and request abatement to begin the 24-hour waiting period in any
one of the following ways:
   A.   By certified and regular mail addressed to the private property owner,
if applicable, as shown by the County Parcel query; or,
   B.   By certified and regular mail addressed to the last known address of
the registered owner of the nuisance vehicle; or,
   C.   By attaching a notice securely to the nuisance vehicle. Said notice
shall state the nature of the violation, the abatement action to be taken to
correct the violation, the date by which the abatement action must be taken,
that failure to correct the violation will result in the vehicle being towed,
that the costs of abatement action by the City will be assessed against the
property (required only if the cost assessment is pursued), and that a hearing
to contest the tow may be requested.
In the case of mailing a notice, the notice shall be deemed given when placed
in the U.S. mail. The “starting time” for the above-stated 24-hour waiting
period shall commence no earlier than 72 hours after the notice has been placed
in the U.S. mail, if mailed by regular mail, and no earlier than 72 hours after
the City receives notice of receipt of the mail delivery, if mailed by
certified, registered mail.
2.   Removal of Nuisance Vehicles. The Police Department, or its designees, are
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter by issuing parking
tickets and/or citations or by having nuisance vehicles that violate this
chapter removed (towed at the owner’s expenses) from public or private property
in accordance with the abatement notice. Any nuisance vehicle not reclaimed
within 10 days of impoundment shall be deemed abandoned.
51.07   VEHICLES FOR SALE.
Any resident may have only one vehicle for sale at a time on his or her
property. The vehicle for sale shall be registered to the property owner. A
maximum of six vehicles may be placed on the property for sale in any one
calendar year.
CHAPTER 52
WEED CONTROL AND ABATEMENT
 
52.01 Weeds and Vegetation 52.04 Required Notice
52.02 Duty to Maintain     52.05 Required Individual Notice to be Given
52.03 Failure to Maintain  52.06 Abatement Penalties, Fees, and Costs
 
52.01   WEEDS AND VEGETATION.
In all areas of the City, any noxious weeds or vegetation, as defined by the
Code of Iowa, are deemed to be nuisances, as well as any dense growth of weeds,
vines, brush, or other similar vegetation which are reasonably believed to be
constituting a public safety, health, or fire hazard. On any developed parcel
within the City or within 100 feet of any developed parcel, any weeds,
vegetation, vines, brush, or other growth which exceeds 10 inches in height
shall be deemed a nuisance. In all other areas of the City, any weeds,
vegetation, vines, brush, or other growth which exceeds two feet in height
shall be deemed a nuisance. Natural areas including, but not limited to,
waterways, or farmland, may exceed these established height limitations. Weeds
and vegetation do not include defined, cultivated flowers, flower beds, and
gardens, including native plantings used for aesthetic or wildlife promotion,
to attract and aid wildlife, to offset and control any soil loss problems and
for the transpiration of stormwater by plants.
52.02   DUTY TO MAINTAIN.
It is the responsibility of any and all property owners to maintain their
property and the public right-of-way between the property line and the driving
surface of any drivable street or alley to keep it free of any and all weed
nuisances as defined in Section
52.01 above between April 1 and November 1 of each year.
52.03   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
Any property where a weed nuisance is allowed to exist during the time period
mentioned above will be subject to the nuisance abatement procedure, penalties,
and assessment of fees and costs, as provided for herein.
52.04   REQUIRED NOTICE.
The City shall publish notice of the minimum, City-wide, property maintenance
requirements of this chapter, the nuisance abatement procedures to be used in
instances of noncompliance, and the penalties, fees, and costs to be charged
and the collection and assessment procedures associated therewith. The notice
shall be published at least once in the City’s March edition of its Bits and
Pieces newsletter (or its successor publication), shall be placed on the City’s
website, and shall be published twice in the Quad Cities Times, once each
during the third and fourth weeks of March. The notice shall contain the
following information and shall generally conform to the following:
1.   An adequate definition of what constitutes a “weed nuisance” as defined in
this Code.
2.   What form and level of maintenance is required of the property owner.
3.   What timeframe this chapter covers (April 1 through November 1).
4.   The actions the City will take to abate the nuisance in the absence of the
property owner’s maintenance and the fact that all costs will be assessed
against the property and collected in the same manner as property taxes.
5.   The hourly and other miscellaneous charges to be assessed against the
property for any work done.
52.05   REQUIRED INDIVIDUAL NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
1.   A one-time only (per April 1 through November 1 yearly season) abatement
warning notice shall be provided to any property parcel upon the discovery of
the initial violation of this chapter (who did not have any nuisance violations
in the previous year). Such notice shall be delivered by certified mail.
“Delivered” shall mean the day that the notice is placed in the U.S. mail for
processing. Commencement of any abatement activities shall begin no sooner than
10 days from the date of delivery of said notice. Notice shall also be provided
on a one-time, first-violation basis by affixing a visible abatement notice
document (i.e., “door hanger”) to any structure on the property or to a post
erected on the property for this purpose. These notices serve as the sole
notice to be given for the entire year (season). The City will not notify a
property owner every time a property becomes a nuisance violation.
2.   A “new weed season reminder notice” shall be mailed via regular 1st class
mail in late March to all property owners who had at least one weed violation
in the previous year.
3.   In both cases the letters serve as a warning for the entire year. If
subsequent violations are observed after receiving either a reminder or first-
time notice, the City will immediately abate the nuisance with no further
notice and “administrative charges” (see below) may be added to the abatement
costs.
4.   An additional “administrative charge” (as determined by resolution of the
Council) will be added to any “repeat” violations on properties where weed
violations were abated and who were previously notified within the past two
years.
52.06   ABATEMENT PENALTIES, FEES, AND COSTS.
The Council shall review and establish, by resolution, the penalties, fees, and
other costs associated with the City’s abatement of any weed nuisances as
referenced herein.
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.16 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.17 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.18 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.19 Animal Control Officer
55.05 Livestock                    55.20 Wild or Vicious Animals
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.21 Apprehension and Impoundage
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.22 Parents’ Liability
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.23 Nuisance by Animal
55.09 Vicious Dogs                 55.24 Manner of Keeping
55.10 Rabies Vaccination           55.25 Bees
55.11 Owner’s Duty               55.26 Kennels
55.12 Confinement                  55.27 Hunting and Trapping
55.13 At Large: Impoundment        55.28 Authority of Police Officers
55.14 Disposition of Animals       55.29 Urban Chickens
55.15 Impounding Costs
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium, including
(but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag, or
articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain dogs
or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a
veterinary hospital or kennel.
5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
   B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
   C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
   D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
6.   “Chicken” means a member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, a
domesticated fowl.
(Subsection 6 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
7.   “Dog kennel” means a place of business where dogs are sold, bred, raised,
or kept for the purpose of resale, training, or teaching, and which business is
done commercially and for profit, or as a hobby; provided, however, this shall
not apply to any kennel where not more than two dogs and their litters are kept
during any licensing year, provided that the kennel is State or federally
licensed.
8.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
   C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
9.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section
99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
10.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an animal’s
health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or organ, or
the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
11.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa; or fowl excluding urban chickens.
(Subsection 11 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
12.   “Number of animals” means any person shall not own, keep, possess,
shelter or harbor more four animals (non-urban chickens) and four urban
chickens per street address for a maximum total of eight animals.
(Subsection 12 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
13.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
14.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
15.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
16.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine, veterinary
medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital, diagnostic
or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific establishment
situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or instruction
concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the cause,
prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human beings
or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
17.   “Urban chickens” means a chicken permitted to be kept within the City
limits under this chapter.
(Subsection 17 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
18.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169 of
the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Subsection 18 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
   A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
   B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably sufficient
to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy this
requirement.
   C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
   D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate protection
from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species, and
physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of
good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is endangered. The
shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun and have adequate
bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and dampness. A shelter
may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
   E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent adverse
health effects or suffering.
   F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
      (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s welfare
as described in this section.
      (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal to
suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part of
the commercial establishment’s operation.
      (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as described
in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care requirements
provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any applicable
rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship applying
to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section 162.10A
[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant to
Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or renewed
a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions within the
scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the research
facility.
3.   For purposes of this provision “impounds or a confine, in any place” also
includes leaving an animal unattended in or tethered to a standing or parked
vehicle in excess of 15 minutes. Furthermore, it is unlawful for any animal to
be impounded or confined in such a manner that places the animal in a life-
threatening situation by exposure to prolonged periods of extreme heat (in
excess of 75º F) or cold (below 40º F) without proper ventilation or other
protection from the heat or cold. In order to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of an animal, an animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or a
fire and rescue personnel, who have probable cause to believe this provision is
being violated shall have the authority to enter a motor vehicle by any
reasonable means under the circumstances after making a reasonable effort to
locate the owner, driver, or other person responsible for placement of the
animal. A person who negligently or intentionally commits the offense of animal
neglect is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to
fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership
and custody of the cat or dog.
2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound or that has
been issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture
and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except in
compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
(Section 55.05 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or cat to permit such
dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway, or private lands or premises
without the permission of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear
up, crush, or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree, or garden in any
manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog or cat to allow or permit such dog or cat
to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by frequent
and habitual howling, yelping, barking, whining or making other sounds common
to its species in excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion to the disturbance
of other animals or persons; or by running after or chasing persons, bicycles,
automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   VICIOUS DOGS.
It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious dog within the City.
A dog is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked or bitten any person without
provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons exists and is known
or out reasonable to be know to the owner. A dog causing the death of a chicken
which is off the permitted tract of land shall not, for that reason alone, be
considered a dangerous or aggressive animal.
(Section 55.09 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
55.10   RABIES VACCINATION.
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is
unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept
in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not
subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11   OWNER’S DUTY.
It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten or
attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12   CONFINEMENT.
If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a
summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.14   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by
the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by
having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal
within seven days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner
cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall be disposed of in
accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.15   IMPOUNDING COSTS.
Impounding costs shall be set by Scott County Animal Control.
55.16   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
   A.   A prize for participating in a game.
   B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
   C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
   D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
   B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.17   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag if
all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies vaccination
tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.18   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
   B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached to
an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness, or
vest.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.19   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
The Council may employ or enter into a contract with the County or any person
to be designated “Animal Control Officer” and said person or employee of the
City or County is herewith authorized to enforce this chapter and issue
citations or sign information for any violation of this chapter as directed by
the Police Chief.
55.20   WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
1.   Definitions. For use in this section the following terms are defined:
   A.   “Vicious animal” means any animal which has previously attacked or
bitten any person, or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who
harbors said animal knows or should reasonably know that the animal is
possessed of tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   B.   “Wild animal” means any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake,
or other reptiles, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other animal or
any bird of prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
2.   Keeping of Wild and Vicious Animals.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his
premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes,
whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply
to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any wild
animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the State and the animal is kept in confinement.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal within
the City. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may be seized
by any police officer or humane officer and upon establishment, to the
satisfaction of any court or competent jurisdiction, of the vicious character
of said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to animals under the
control of a law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept
for the protection of property, provided that such animals are restrained by a
leash or chain, cage, fence, or other adequate means, from contact with the
general public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or
implied permission of the owner or occupant.
   D.   The licensing authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care, and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless.
55.21   APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDAGE.
Any dog found at large not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag and for which
no rabies vaccination certificate can be produced shall be apprehended and
impounded. When such dog has been apprehended and impounded, the official shall
give written notice in not less than two days to the owner, if known. If the
owner does not redeem the dog within seven days of the date of notice, the dog
may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the law.
An owner may redeem a dog by having it immediately vaccinated and by paying the
cost of impoundment. If the owner of a dog apprehended or impounded cannot be
located within seven days, the animal may be humanely destroyed or otherwise
disposed of in accordance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
55.22   PARENTS’ LIABILITY.
The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any dog or cat shall
be deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be charged for all penalties
and pound fees imposed by this chapter.
55.23   NUISANCE BY ANIMAL.
It is unlawful for any owner, keeper, or walker of any animal to permit their
animal to discharge such animal’s feces upon any public or private property,
other than the property of the owner of any dog or cat, within the City if such
owner, keeper, or walker does not immediately thereafter remove and clean up
such animal’s feces from the public or private property.
55.24   MANNER OF KEEPING.
All pens, yards, or runs or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall
be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and kept in good repair.
Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be securely
constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair, and shall
not be allowed to become unsightly.
55.25   BEES.
It is unlawful to keep or harbor any bees in the City. Any beehive used or
occupied by bees is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it is unlawful to
keep or maintain any such hive in the City.
55.26   KENNELS.
1.   License Fee. The fee for a license to operate a dog kennel as defined in
this chapter shall be set by resolution of the Council. All licenses shall be
issued by the Clerk, upon presentation of a certificate of immunization that
said dogs have been immunized against rabies for the current year and a
certificate signed by the Police Chief stating that the regulations set out in
this section have been complied with. Those kennels currently holding State
and/or federal kennel licenses shall not be required to present an immunization
certificate upon application for a City kennel license. Copies of State and/or
federal licenses shall accompany the kennel license application.
2.   Exemption. Dogs kept by the operator of a dog kennel shall not be subject
to payment for a dog license, provided such dogs are kept in pens or such
enclosures so that they cannot run at-large. Kennel dogs which are kept or
raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale, and which are kept under
constant restraint, shall be exempt from the immunization requirements of
Chapter 56.
3.   Condition and Operation of Kennels. Dog kennels shall be kept free of dirt
and filth and in all-around sanitary condition as far as practicable and shall
be operated so as not to be offensive to the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public, or the residents of the vicinity in which the dog
kennels are located. Upon written complaint filed with the City, the Police
Chief shall make an inspection to determine the conditions of said kennel and
shall report same to the Council.
55.27   HUNTING AND TRAPPING.
It is unlawful to hunt, pursue, kill, trap, or take any animal, bird, or any
game for any reason within the corporate limits of the City unless conducted in
strict compliance with and pursuant to any and all specific provisions
(including permitting and the payment of associated fees) contained within a
formal resolution adopted for such by the Council. The provisions of this
section do not apply to the use of any trap specifically designed to kill rats,
mice, gophers, groundhogs, opossum, badgers, or moles. Other similar nuisance
vermin such as raccoon, fox, and beaver that are valuable, fur-bearing animals
which may occasionally present themselves as a nuisance may be trapped only
after receiving written consent of the property owner and approval from the
Police Chief. The provisions of this section do not apply to the use of traps
employed during times of proclaimed civil emergencies, for the control of
nuisance animals as long as such traps are tended at least once during each 12-
hour period.
55.28   AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
Any duly sworn police officer of the City is hereby authorized to discharge his
or her weapon and kill any dangerous, maimed, or otherwise diseased animals of
any kind.
55.29   URBAN CHICKENS.
1.   Chickens may be kept on a single-family residential (R-1) or rural
residential (RR) zoned properties where a single-family dwelling exits.
2.   Only female chickens (hens) are permitted.
3.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times.
Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non-
daylight hours. Chickens may be kept in the rear yard only.
4.   No portion of an enclosure for chickens shall be located closer than ten
feet (10’) from a property line or twenty-five feet (25’) from any adjacent
residential dwlling, church, school or place of business.
5.   No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City.
6.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any other provision of this Code.
(Section 55.29 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 56
DOG AND CAT LICENSE REQUIRED
 
56.01 Annual License Required 56.05 Immunization
56.02 License Fees            56.06 Kennel Dogs
56.03 Issuance of License     56.07 Seeing Eye Dogs
56.04 License Tags            56.08 Penalties
 
56.01   ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
Every owner of a dog or cat over the age of four months shall procure a dog or
cat license from the Clerk on or before the first day of January of each year.
Such license fee shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year.
Licenses become delinquent after January 1 of each year and the delinquent
license fee shall be set by resolution of the Council except in those cases
where, by reason of residence or age, the dog or cat was not subject to
licensing prior to January 1.
56.02   LICENSE FEES.
The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution of the Council.
56.03   ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
Upon payment of the license fee, the Clerk will issue to the owner a license
which shall contain, at a minimum, the name and signature of the owner, place
of residence, a description of the dog or cat including the breed-type, sex,
age, color, name, and markings, if any, information whether the dog or cat is
spayed or neutered, and a rabies certificate/tag reference stating who the
veterinarian is and the effective dates of the vaccination. The Clerk will keep
a duplicate of each license issued.
56.04   LICENSE TAGS.
Upon issuance of the license, the Clerk shall deliver to the owner a metal tag
stamped with the number of the license, the year for which it is issued, and
the City’s name. The license tag shall be securely fastened to a collar or
harness which shall be worn by the dog or cat for which the license is issued.
56.05   IMMUNIZATION.
All dogs and cats, four months or older, shall be vaccinated against rabies.
Before issuance of a license, the owner shall furnish a veterinarian’s
certificate showing that the dog or cat for which the license is sought has
been vaccinated and that the vaccination does not expire within six months from
the effective date of the dog or cat license. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any dog or cat not to be vaccinated against rabies. In addition to
rabies, cats are required to be inoculated for distemper or other dangerous
diseases.
56.06   KENNEL DOGS.
Kennel dogs which are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale
and which are kept under constant restraint shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
56.07   SEEING EYE DOGS.
Any person owning a dog properly trained and certified to assist persons with
disabilities is exempt from the license fee payment requirement of this chapter
with regard to such animal. Upon application, annually, to the Clerk and
presentation of a vaccination certificate as prescribed by the provisions of
Section
56.05, every owner of a Seeing Eye dog or other properly trained guide dog
shall receive, at no charge, a City dog license.
56.08   PENALTIES.
Any owner of a dog or cat over the age of four months who has not procured a
current City pet license or does not have a current rabies vaccination
certificate for their dog or cat shall be cited and fined according to the fine
schedule as set by resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.08 Parades Regulated
60.02 Definitions                    60.09 Investigation of Traffic Accidents
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.10 Traffic Accidents: Studies
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.11 Files Maintained
60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents   60.12 Habitual Traffic Violators
60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority    60.13 Annual Safety Reports
60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters
60 through
71 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “LeClaire Traffic
Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
2.   “Controlled access facility” means the means a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or
occupants of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement, or only
a controlled right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any
other reason.
3.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
4.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
5.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
6.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
7.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
8.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
9.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
10.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
11.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
12.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school, or residence districts.
13.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
14.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES REGULATED.
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
1.   Permission Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining
permission from the City. Any person organizing or sponsoring a parade shall
state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general
route, therefore. Such permission granted to the person organizing or
sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to
parade when such participants have been invited by the person organizing or
sponsoring the parade to participate therein. No fee shall be required for such
permission.
60.09   INVESTIGATION OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The Police Chief shall investigate all accidents reported. If sufficient
evidence of a violation is found, proper action will be taken to punish the
violator.
60.10   TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: STUDIES.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the Police
Chief shall conduct studies of such accidents and propose remedial measures.
60.11   FILES MAINTAINED.
The Police Chief shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents,
warnings, arrests, convictions, and complaints reported for each driver during
the most recent three-year period. Such reports shall be filed alphabetically
under the name of the driver concerned.
60.12   HABITUAL TRAFFIC VIOLATORS.
The Police Chief shall study the cases of all drivers charged with frequent or
serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic
accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons
therefore, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent
same, or to have the license of such persons suspended or revoked as provided
by State law.
60.13   ANNUAL SAFETY REPORTS.
The Police Chief shall prepare annually a traffic report which shall be filed
with the Mayor and Council. Such report shall contain information on the number
of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed and injured, the number and
nature of violations, and other pertinent traffic data including plans and
recommendations for future traffic safety activities.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.06 Interference with Devices, Signs, or Signals
61.02 Crosswalks    61.07 Unlawful Possession
61.03 Traffic Lanes 61.08 Traffic Control Signals to Regulate Traffic
61.04 Standards     61.09 Avoiding Traffic Control Devices
61.05 Compliance
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or
emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency
or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or
warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 and
321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.06   INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES, SIGNS, OR SIGNALS.
Any person who willfully and intentionally, without lawful authority, attempts
to or in fact alters, defaces, injures, knocks down, tampers with in any way,
or removes an official traffic-control device, an authorized warning sign or
signal or barricade, whether temporary or permanent, a railroad sign or signal,
an inscription, shield, or insignia on any of such devices, signs, signals, or
barricades, or any other part thereof, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor and shall be required to make restitution to the affected
jurisdiction.
61.07   UNLAWFUL POSSESSION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in the person’s possession any
official traffic control device except by legal right or authority.
61.08   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS TO REGULATE TRAFFIC.
For the purpose of this section, “stop at the official traffic control signal”
means stopping at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line
or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection. Official
traffic control signals consisting of colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
or other symbols shall regulate traffic at the intersection of Eagle Ridge Road
and U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road) in the following manner:
1.   A “steady circular red” light means vehicular traffic shall stop.
Vehicular traffic shall remain standing until a signal to proceed is shown or
vehicular traffic, unless prohibited by a sign, may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn from the right lane of traffic. Turns made
under this subsection shall be made in a manner that does not interfere with
other vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection.
Pedestrian traffic facing a steady circular red light shall not safely cross
the roadway without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
2.   A “steady circular yellow” or “steady yellow arrow” light means vehicular
traffic is warned that the related green movement is being terminated and
vehicular traffic shall no longer proceed into the intersection and shall stop.
If the stop cannot be made in a safe fashion, a vehicle may be driven
cautiously through the intersection. Pedestrian traffic is warned that there is
insufficient time to cross the intersection and any pedestrian starting to
cross the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
3.   A “steady circular green” light means vehicular traffic may proceed
straight, turn right, or turn left through the intersection unless otherwise
specifically prohibited. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicular and pedestrian traffic lawfully within the intersection.
4.   A “steady green arrow” light shown alone, or with another official traffic
control signal, means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection
and proceed in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection.
5.   A “flashing circular red” light means vehicular traffic shall stop and
after stopping may proceed cautiously through the intersection yielding to all
vehicles not required to stop or yield which are within the intersection or
approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard, but then may proceed.
6.   A “flashing yellow” light means vehicular traffic shall proceed through
the intersection or past such signal with caution.
7.   A “don’t walk” light or symbol is a pedestrian signal which means that
pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal shall not start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal, and pedestrian
traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a safety zone.
8.   A “walk” light or symbol is a pedestrian signal which means that
pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal may proceed to
cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal and shall be given
the right-of-way by drivers of all vehicles.
61.09   AVOIDING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across any
other property to avoid an official traffic control device.
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.07 Milling
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.08 Excessive Noise and Acceleration
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle      62.09 Passing Contrary to Sign or Marking
62.05 Quiet Zones
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial vehicles.
15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits, and
chauffeur’s instruction permits.
17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle rental.
30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals; unlawful
possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited; vehicle
damage only; removal of vehicles.
40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal injury
accident.
41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access facilities.
97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements; penalties.
103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while operating a
commercial motor vehicle.
152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall
drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   MILLING.
It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others, in
any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the
interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any
person.
62.08   EXCESSIVE NOISE AND ACCELERATION.
1.   It is unlawful for any person to race the motor of any vehicle
unnecessarily, to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner so that the vehicle
is so rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position that the exhaust
system emits an audible, loud, cracking, or chattering noise, unusual to its
normal operation; or to so accelerate from a stopped position so as to create
friction between the tires and pavement or other surfaces, whereby there is
produced an audible noise or “squeal,” a deposit of tire materials upon or a
defacement of any kind to the pavement or other surfaces, except when
acceleration is reasonably necessary to avoid a collision.
2.   It is unlawful for any person to make or allow to be made any loud or
obnoxious noise from any motor vehicle, public roadway or park grounds which
disturbs the public peace and quiet enjoyment. This includes the use of engine
compression braking devices, or engine retarders, commonly referred to as
“jake-brakes,” to slow or stop vehicles within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
62.09   PASSING CONTRARY TO SIGN OR MARKING.
1.   No person shall pass or drive left of the center of any roadway when signs
are posted, and pavement markings are placed showing a distinctive center line
or off-center line in the following designated areas:
   A.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) for northbound traffic from its intersection with
8th Street to its intersection with Davenport Street.
   B.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) for northbound traffic from its intersection with
Oak Street to its intersection with Byron Street.
   C.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) for northbound traffic from its intersection with
Benton Street to its intersection with Walnut Street.
   D.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) for southbound traffic from its intersection with
Wisconsin Street to its intersection with Eighth Street.
   E.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) for southbound traffic from its intersection with
Chestnut Street to its intersection with Holland Street.
   F.   Forest Grove Drive from its intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street west
to the westerly corporate limits.
   G.   Sycamore Drive from its intersection with Cody Road (U.S. 67) north to
its intersection with Thornwood Lane.
   H.   Territorial Road for eastbound traffic from its intersection with
Twenty-Third Street east to the eastern boundary of the 1700 block.
   I.   Territorial Road for eastbound traffic from 300 feet west of 277th
Avenue east to its intersection with Cody Road (U.S. 67).
   J.   Territorial Road for westbound traffic from its intersection with Cody
Road (U.S. 67) west to its intersection with 277th Avenue.
   K.   Territorial Road for westbound traffic from 200 feet west of Napsinekee
Drive west to its intersection with Twenty-Third Street.
   L.   Thirty-Fifth Street from its intersection with Valley Drive to its
intersection with Wisconsin Street.
   M.   Valley Drive from its intersection with Cody Road (U.S. 67) westerly to
its intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street.
   N.   Wisconsin Street from its intersection with Fifteenth Street west to
the westerly corporate limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.304)
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                        63.05 Minimum Speed
63.02 State Code Speed Limits        63.06 Alleys
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking 63.07 Automated Traffic Enforcement (ATE)
Lots
63.04 Special Speed Zones
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa, and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1.   Business District – 20 MPH.
2.   Residence or School District – 25 MPH.
3.   Suburban District – 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 25 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   All streets within the Business District.
   B.   Canal Shore Drive from the DRI and NW Railroad to U.S. 67.
   C.   Cox Court for its entire length.
   D.   Eagle Ridge Road from its intersection with Iowa Drive to its
intersection with U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road).
   E.   Holland Street from Cody Road (U.S. 67) to 600 block.
   F.   Huckleberry Lane for its entire length
   G.   Joan Rose Court for its entire length.
   H.   N. Fifteenth Street for its entire length.
   I.   Oakley Drive for its entire length.
   J.   On Cody Road (U.S. 67) from +50 feet north of Second Street to +100
feet north of Ewing Street (Iowa Department of Transportation Station 536 +00).
   K.   Stagecoach Trail, Scenic Place, Fox Hollow Lane, Iowa Drive, Eagle View
Court, Falcon Drive and Bridgeview Place.
   L.   Titus Court for its entire length.
   M.   Walbrier Court for its entire length.
   N.   Welcome Center Drive and Mississippi View Court.
   O.   William Court for its entire length.
   P.   Wisconsin Street from Cody Road (U.S. 67) to Fifteenth Street.
   Q.   Woodland Lane from its intersection with Valley Drive northerly to its
termination.
2.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) from + 100 feet north of Ewing Street to + 150 feet
north of Chestnut Street (Iowa Department of Transportation Station 559 + 50).
   B.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) from Iowa Department of Transportation Station 500
to + 50 feet north of Second Street (Iowa Department of Transportation Station
510 + 50).
   C.   Forest Grove Drive from its intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
west to its intersection with the westernmost corporate limits.
   D.   Holland Street from Fifteenth Street to the west corporate line.
   E.   Holland Street from 700 block to Fifteenth Street.
   F.   North Twenty-sixth Street along the west corporate line from Holland
Street to Wisconsin Street.
   G.   North Twenty-Third Street along the west corporate line from
Territorial Road to Holland Street.
   H.   Territorial Road from its intersection with Cody Road (U.S. 67) to the
County Road designated as 277th Avenue.
   I.   Thirty-Fifth Street S.W. along the west corporate line from Wisconsin
Street to Valley Drive.
   J.   Wisconsin Street from Fifteenth Street west 2.5 miles.
3.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 45 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) from + 150 feet north of Chestnut Street to the
northernmost corporate limits on Cody Road (U.S. Highway 67).
   B.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) from Iowa Department of Transportation Station 480
to Iowa Department of Transportation Station 500.
4.   Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 55 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   Cody Road (U.S. 67) from the southernmost corporate limits to Iowa
Department of Transportation Station 480.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06   ALLEYS.
A speed in excess of 10 miles per hour in any alley, unless specifically
designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
63.07   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT (ATE).
1.   General. In accordance with its police powers, the Council may cause to be
deployed, erect, or cause to have erected an automated traffic enforcement
system for capturing images of motor vehicles that violate traffic laws by
failing to obey speed regulations within the City. The system may be managed by
a private contractor that owns and operates the requisite equipment. The Police
Chief shall retain supervisory control over the system and, with prior Council
approval, shall determine the exact deployment of the system components
throughout the City. The initial installation and implementation of the ATE
system shall be limited to those locations as previously identified, reviewed,
and discussed by the Council around the I-80 interchange area and along the US
67 (Cody Road) corridors, west of the I-80 interchange area. The contractor
shall provide photographic and/or video images of any potential violations to
the Police Department to review and, in the event the Police Department
determines a vehicle was operated in violation of the City’s traffic control
ordinances, the Police Department shall direct that a notice of Automated
Traffic Citation be issued to the vehicle owner in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
2.   Definitions.
   A.   “Automated Traffic Citation” means a notice of violation generated in
connection with the automated traffic enforcement system.
   B.   “Automated traffic enforcement contractor” means the company or entity,
if any, with which the City contracts to provide equipment and/or services in
connection with the Automated Traffic Enforcement System.
   C.   “Automated traffic enforcement system” means an electronic system
consisting of a photographic, video, or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor
installed to work in conjunction with an official traffic controller or Police
Department employee to automatically produce photographs, video, or digital
images of each vehicle violating a standard traffic control device or speed
restriction.
   D.   “Vehicle owner” means a person who holds the legal title to a motor
vehicle. However, if the motor vehicle is the subject of a security agreement
with a right of possession in the debtor, the debtor is deemed the owner for
purposes of this section, or if the motor vehicle is leased as defined in
Section 321.493, the lessee is deemed the owner for purposes of this section.
(Paragraph D – Ord._843 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
3.   Vehicle Owner Subject to Civil Fine for Automated Traffic Citations.
   A.   If a vehicle is detected traveling at a speed above the posted limit,
the vehicle owner shall be subject to a civil fine as scheduled below in
Subsection 63.07(4)(B).
   B.   Exemptions from this section are set forth in Subsection 63.07(7), and
shall not be considered violations for purposes of the Automated Traffic
Enforcement System.
   C.   In no event will an Automated Traffic Citation be sent or reported to
the Iowa Department of Transportation or similar department of any other state
for the purpose of being added to the vehicle owner’s driving record.
4.   Notice of Automated Traffic Citation; Fines.
   A.   Upon determination by a qualified Police Department employee that the
Automated Traffic Enforcement System has detected a violation described in
Subsection 63.07(3)(A), a notice of an Automated Traffic Citation will be
mailed to the vehicle owner for each such violation recorded by the Automated
Traffic Enforcement System. The Automated Traffic Enforcement Contractor shall
mail the notice within 30 days after receiving information about the vehicle
owner. The notice shall include the name and address of the vehicle owner; the
vehicle make, if available and readily discernable; the vehicle registration
number; the violation alleged; the time, date, and location of the alleged
violation; the applicable fine; information as to the manner in which the
Automated Traffic Citation may be challenged; and that the basis of the notice
is a photographic or video record generated by an Automated Traffic Enforcement
System.
   B.   Any violation of Subsection 63.07(3)(A) above after the first 60 days
of implementation shall be subject to a civil fine as scheduled in the table
below, and the fine for any violation committed in a designated construction
zone (as provided by the Code of Iowa), shall be doubled, as scheduled below,
subject in any event to the limit on fines sought in municipal infractions.
 
Speed Over the Limit Civil Fine If in Construction Zone
11 through 20 MPH    $75.00     $150.00
21 through 25 MPH    $100.00    $200.00
25 through 30 MPH    $250.00    $500.00
Over 30 MPH          $500.00    $1,000
(Paragraph B – Ord._843– Jan. 25 Supp.)
5.   Challenging an Automated Traffic Citation. Within 30 days from the date
appearing at the top of a notice of Automated Traffic Citation sent to the
vehicle owner, the vehicle owner may either pay the fee associated with the
citation or challenge the citation by submitting a written challenge to the
citation or requesting that a municipal infraction be filed pursuant to §364.22
of the Code of Iowa, as amended. Any such written challenge or request must be
on a form specified by and available from the City as indicated on the notice,
and be sent to the City according to the instructions on that form. Upon
receipt of a written challenge, a police officer shall determine whether the
citation should be rescinded. Within 30 days after the City receives such a
challenge, the City shall notify the vehicle owner whether the challenge to the
Automated Traffic Citation is successful, in which case, the citation shall be
rescinded. Otherwise, the citation shall stand. Thereafter, the City may seek
voluntary payment and/or file the citation as a municipal infraction against
the vehicle owner, all as set forth in Subsection 4 hereof.
6.   Failure to Timely Pay or Challenge Automated Traffic Citation. If the
recipient of an Automated Traffic Citation does not either pay the fine by the
due date stated on the original citation or successfully challenge the citation
as provided herein, the City may file a municipal infraction against the
vehicle owner in accordance with Municipal Code
Chapter 3 and §364.22 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, seeking judgment for the
applicable civil fine provided in Subsections 3 and 4 above, plus State-
mandated filing fee and court costs. If judgment is entered for the City in the
municipal infraction proceeding, the City may, subject to applicable law,
pursue enforcement of the judgment together with interest as permitted by law.
Collection of that judgment may include referral to the State of Iowa Income
Offset program administered by the Department of Administrative Services, State
Accounting Enterprise. Notwithstanding the City’s right to file a municipal
infraction, the City may first seek voluntary payment of the fine by sending a
written request for payment to the vehicle owner and/or referring the matter to
a private service agent to conduct collection in accordance with all applicable
law.
7.   Exemptions from Section 63.07. The following shall not be considered
violations for purposes of the Automated Traffic Enforcement System.
   A.   The operator of the vehicle in question was issued a uniform traffic
citation for the violation in question pursuant to
Chapter 63 of this code or Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   The violation occurred at any time after the vehicle in question or its
State registration plates were reported to a law enforcement agency as having
been stolen, provided, however, the vehicle or its plates had not been
recovered by the vehicle owner at the time of the alleged violation.
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at
intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left-hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Through Streets              65.06 School Stops
65.02 Stop Required                65.07 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.03 Three-Way Stop Intersections 65.08 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.04 Four-Way Stop Intersections  65.09 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.05 Yield Required
 
65.01   THROUGH STREETS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through
streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   Benton Street from Cody Road to Eighth Street.
2.   Bridgeview Place from Stagecoach Trail to Eighth Street.
3.   Byron Street from Cody Road to Fifth Street.
4.   Chestnut Street from Cody Road to Fifth Street.
5.   Cody Road from the southerly corporate line to the northerly corporate
line.
6.   Davenport Street from Cody Road to Fifteenth Street.
7.   Dodge Street from Cody Road to Fifteenth Street.
8.   Elm Street from Cody Road to Fifth Street.
9.   Ewing Street from Cody Road to Eighth Street.
10.   Ferry Street from First Street Place to Fifth Street.
11.   Holland Street from Cody Road to west corporate line.
12.   Iowa Drive from I-80 to Eighth Street.
13.   Jones Street from Cody Road to Fifteenth Street.
14.   May Street from Cody Road to Eighth Street.
15.   Oak Street from Cody Road to Fifth Street.
16.   Reynolds Street from Cody Road to Fifteenth Street.
17.   Stagecoach Trail from Eagle Ridge Road to Davenport Street.
18.   Valley Drive from Cody Road to Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
19.   Walnut Street from Cody Road to Fifth Street.
20.   Wisconsin Street from Cody Road to west corporate line.
65.02   STOP REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   Eighth Street. Vehicles traveling north and south on Eighth Street shall
stop at the intersection(s) with Davenport Street.
2.   Blackstone Circle. Vehicles traveling southwesterly on Blackstone Circle
shall stop at the intersection with Blackstone Way.
3.   Blackstone Court. Vehicles traveling northeasterly on Blackstone Court
shall stop at the intersection with Blackstone Way.
4.   Blackstone Way. All vehicles traveling east on Blackstone Way shall stop
at the intersection with Cobblestone Lane.
5.   Bluff Lane. All vehicles traveling easterly on Bluff Lane shall stop at
its intersection with South Eighth Street.
6.   Bluff Lane. All vehicles traveling westerly on Bluff Lane shall stop at
its intersection with Fox Hollow Lane.
7.   Bridgeview Place. All vehicles traveling easterly on Bridgeview Place
shall stop at its intersection with South Eighth Street.
8.   Bridgeview Place. All vehicles traveling westerly on Bridgeview Place
shall stop at Fourteenth Street.
9.   Buffalo Court. Vehicles traveling east on Buffalo Court shall stop at the
intersection with Eighth Street.
10.   Canal Shore Drive. Vehicles traveling southwesterly (downriver) on Canal
Shore Drive, S.W. shall stop at the intersection with the railroad right-of-
way.
11.   Clover Hill Lane. All vehicles traveling east or west on Clover Hill Lane
shall stop at the intersections with Eighth Street or Fox Hollow Lane.
12.   Cobblestone Lane. All vehicles traveling easterly and westerly on
Cobblestone Lane shall stop at its intersection with Country Club Court.
13.   Cobblestone Lane. All vehicles traveling north and south on Cobblestone
Lane shall stop at the intersection with Country Club Way.
14.   Cobblestone Lane. All vehicles traveling south on Cobblestone Lane shall
stop at its intersection with Forest Grove Drive.
15.   Cobblestone Lane. All vehicles traveling south on Cobblestone Lane shall
stop at the intersection with Blackstone Way
16.   Cobblestone Lane. All vehicles traveling southwesterly on Cobblestone
Lane shall stop at its intersection with Forest Grove Drive.
17.   Country Club Court. All vehicles traveling easterly and southerly on
Country Club Court shall stop at its intersection with Cobblestone Lane.
18.   Country Club Court. All vehicles traveling north on Country Club Court
shall stop at its intersection with Marble Lane.
19.   Country Club Way. All vehicles traveling east on Country Club Way shall
stop at the intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
20.   Davenport Street. Vehicles traveling east on Davenport Street shall stop
at its intersection with Stagecoach Trail.
21.   Davenport Street. Vehicles traveling east on Davenport Street shall stop
at its intersection with South Twelfth Street.
22.   Davenport Street. Vehicles traveling west on Davenport Street shall stop
at its intersection with South Eleventh Street.
23.   Dodge Street. Vehicles traveling west on Dodge Street shall stop at
Fifteenth Street.
24.   Eagle Ridge Road. Vehicles traveling southeasterly on Eagle Ridge Road
shall stop at Canal Shore Drive, S.W.
25.   Eagle View Court. All vehicles traveling southwesterly on Eagle View
Court shall stop at Stagecoach Trail.
26.   Eighth Street. All vehicles traveling southeasterly on Eighth Street
shall stop at the intersection with Cody Road (U.S. Highway 67).
27.   Fairwynd Drive. All vehicles traveling easterly and northerly on Fairwynd
Drive shall stop at May Street.
28.   Falcon Drive. All vehicles traveling north on Falcon Drive shall stop at
Iowa Drive.
29.   Fifteenth Street. Vehicles traveling north on Fifteenth Street shall stop
at Holland Street.
30.   Fletcher Drive. Vehicles traveling west on Fletcher Drive shall stop at
the intersection with Twelfth Street.
31.   Forest Grove Drive. All vehicles traveling east on Forest Grove Drive
shall stop at its intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
32.   Forest Grove Road. Vehicles traveling east on Forest Grove Road shall
stop at Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
33.   Forest Reed Place. All vehicles traveling west on Forest Reed Place shall
stop at Sycamore Drive.
34.   Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling south on Fourth Street shall stop at
Ferry Street.
35.   Fox Hollow Lane. All vehicles traveling easterly and southerly on Fox
Hollow Lane shall stop at Iowa Drive.
36.   Fox Hollow Lane. All vehicles traveling northerly and westerly on Fox
Hollow Lane shall stop at Stagecoach Trail.
37.   Frontier Court. Vehicles traveling west on Frontier Court shall stop at
the intersection with Eighth Street.
38.   Glenwood Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Glenwood Drive shall stop at
Fourteenth Street.
39.   Hartz Court. All vehicles traveling north on Hartz Court shall stop at
the intersection with Clover Hill Lane.
40.   Iowa Drive. All vehicles traveling east on Iowa Drive shall stop at the
intersection with Eighth Street.
41.   Joan Rose Court. Vehicles traveling west on Joan Rose Court shall stop at
its intersection with Fifteenth Street.
42.   Jones Street. Vehicles traveling east and west on Jones Street shall stop
at the intersection(s) with Eighth Street.
43.   Jones Street. All vehicles traveling east or west on Jones Street shall
stop at Front Street and the intersection with the D.R.I. and N.W. railroad
right-of-way.
44.   Jones Street. Vehicles traveling west on Jones Street shall stop at
Fifteenth Street.
45.   Kaylann Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Kaylann Drive shall stop at
Fourteenth Street.
46.   Kaylann Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Kaylann Drive shall stop at
Glenwood Drive.
47.   Meadow Lane. Vehicles traveling southerly on Meadow Lane shall stop at
Glenwood Drive.
48.   Mississippi View Court. All vehicles traveling south on Mississippi View
Court shall stop at the intersection with Eagle Ridge Road.
49.   North Fourth Street. All vehicles traveling north on North Fourth Street
shall stop at the intersection with Holland Street. All vehicles traveling
north on North Fourth Street shall stop at the intersection with Benton Street.
All vehicles traveling south on North Fourth Street shall stop at the
intersection with Benton Street.
50.   North Twenty-Sixth Street along the west corporate line. Vehicles
traveling south on North Twenty-Sixth Street along the west corporate line
shall stop at Wisconsin Street.
51.   North Twenty-Third Street along the west corporate line. Vehicles
traveling north on North Twenty-Third Street along the west corporate line
shall stop at Territorial Road along the north corporate line.
52.   North Twenty-Third Street along the west corporate line. Vehicles
traveling south on North Twenty-third Street along the west corporate line
shall stop at Holland Street.
53.   Oakley Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Oakley Drive (North and South
extensions) shall stop at the intersection(s) with Huckleberry Lane.
54.   Orchard Lane. All vehicles traveling north on Orchard Lane shall stop at
Thornwood Lane.
55.   Pebble Creek Circle. All vehicles traveling westerly on Pebble Creek
Circle shall stop at its intersection(s) with Pebble Creek Drive.
56.   Pebble Creek Drive. All vehicles traveling north on Pebble Creek Drive
shall stop at its intersection with Forest Grove Drive.
57.   Redstone Court. All vehicles traveling north on Redstone Court shall stop
at the intersection with Blackstone Way.
58.   Sandstone Court. All vehicles traveling easterly on Sandstone Court shall
stop at its intersection with Cobblestone Lane.
59.   Scenic Place. All vehicles traveling west on Scenic Place shall stop at
Stagecoach Trail.
60.   Second Street. Vehicles traveling south on Second Street shall stop at
Ferry Street.
61.   Silverstone Drive. All vehicles traveling south on Silverstone Drive
shall stop at the intersection with Blackstone Way.
62.   Slatestone Circle. All vehicles traveling south on Slatestone Circle
shall stop at the intersection with Clover Hill Lane.
63.   South Twelfth Street. Vehicles traveling south on South Twelfth Street
shall stop at its intersection with Dodge Street.
64.   Stagecoach Trail. All vehicles traveling north on Stagecoach Trail shall
stop at Iowa Drive and Davenport Street.
65.   Stagecoach Trail. All vehicles traveling south on Stagecoach Trail shall
stop at Iowa Drive.
66.   Third Street. Vehicles traveling on Third Street shall stop at Ferry
Street.
67.   Thirty-Fifth Street S.W. along the west corporate line. Vehicles
traveling north on Thirty-Fifth Street S.W. along the west corporate line shall
stop at Wisconsin Street.
68.   Thirty-Fifth Street S.W. along the west corporate line. Vehicles
traveling south on Thirty-Fifth Street S.W. along the west corporate lines
shall stop at Valley Drive.
69.   Thornwood Lane. Vehicles traveling west on Thornwood Lane shall stop at
Twenty-Fifth Street S.W.
70.   Titus Court. Vehicles traveling west on Titus Court shall stop at its
intersection with Eighth Street.
71.   Valley Drive. All vehicles traveling easterly on Valley Drive shall stop
at its intersection with Woodland Drive.
72.   Valley Drive. All vehicles traveling west on Valley Drive shall stop at
the intersection with Woodland Drive in the 2500 block.
73.   Valley Drive. Vehicles traveling southeast on Valley Drive shall stop at
Cody Road (U.S. 67).
74.   Walbrier Court. All vehicles traveling southerly on Walbrier Court shall
stop at its intersection with Valley Drive.
75.   Welcome Center Drive. All vehicles traveling westerly and northerly on
Welcome Center Drive shall stop at the intersections of this street with Iowa
Drive and Eagle Ridge Road.
76.   West Canal Shore Drive. All vehicles traveling north or south on West
Canal Shore Drive shall stop at the intersection with the D.R.I. and N.W.
railroad right-of-way.
77.   West Canal Shore Drive. Vehicles traveling in an easterly direction on
west Canal Shore Drive shall stop at U.S. 67.
78.   Wild West Court. Vehicles traveling west on Wild West Court shall stop at
the intersection with Eighth Street.
79.   Wild West Drive. Vehicles traveling east on Wild West Drive shall stop at
the intersection with Eighth Street.
80.   William Court. Vehicles traveling south on William Court shall stop at
its intersection with Joan Rose Court.
81.   Wisconsin Street. All vehicles traveling east or west on Wisconsin Street
shall stop at Front Street and the intersection with the D.R.I. and N.W.
railroad right-of-way.
82.   Wisconsin Street. Vehicles traveling east and west on Wisconsin Street
shall stop at the intersection(s) with Eighth Street.
83.   Woodland Drive. Vehicles traveling south on Woodland Drive shall stop at
Valley Drive.
84.   Woodland Drive. Vehicles traveling west-northwest on Woodland Drive shall
stop at Woodland Lane.
85.   Woodland Lane. Vehicles traveling south on Woodland Lane shall stop at
Valley Drive.
65.03   THREE-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated
four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   Eagle Ridge Road and Stagecoach Trail. Vehicles traveling easterly and
westerly on Eagle Ridge Road shall stop at Stagecoach Trail; vehicles traveling
south on Stagecoach Trail shall stop at Eagle Ridge Road.
2.   Fox Hollow Lane and Iowa Drive. All vehicles traveling east and west on
Iowa Drive shall stop at the intersection of Fox Hollow Lane.
3.   Second Street and Jones Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street shall
stop at Jones Street; vehicles traveling east on Jones Street shall stop at
Second Street.
4.   Second Street and May Street.
5.   Second Street and Wisconsin Street. Vehicles traveling on Second Street
shall stop at Wisconsin Street; vehicles traveling east on Wisconsin Street
shall stop at Second Street.
6.   Stagecoach Trail and Bridgeview Place. All vehicles traveling easterly and
westerly on Bridgeview Place shall stop at Stagecoach Trail; all vehicles
traveling north and south on Stagecoach Trail shall stop at the northern-most
intersection with Bridgeview Place.
65.04   FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated
four-way stop intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   Intersection of Eighth Street and May Street.
2.   Intersection of Wisconsin Street and Fifteenth Street.
3.   Intersection of Wisconsin Street and Twelfth Street.
65.05   YIELD REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
- NONE -
65.06   SCHOOL STOPS.
At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching
said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have
passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
- NONE -
65.07   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.08   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.09   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.05 Truck Routes
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.06 Specific Streets Designated:
                                         Restricted Weight Limits
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets   66.07 Exceptions
66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow, or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight, including cargo, in excess of that which is
posted. For streets not designated as “truck routes,” no person shall operate
any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle, including cargo, in excess of four tons
or as otherwise posted, unless said vehicle is actually engaged in the
temporary delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo incidental to the
adjoining properties.
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers
of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded, or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
All trucks within the City shall be operated only over and along the truck
routes on the following designated streets:
1.   Cody Road from north corporate limits to south corporate limits.
2.   Holland Street from Twenty-Third Street to west corporate limits.
3.   Territorial Road from Cody Road to west corporate limits.
4.   Trent Street from N. Twenty-Third Street to eastern termination.
5.   Wisconsin Street from Twenty-Sixth Street to west corporate limits.
6.   Twenty-Third Street from Territorial Road to Holland Street.
7.   Twenty-Sixth Street from Holland Street to Wisconsin Street.
66.06   SPECIFIC STREETS DESIGNATED: RESTRICTED WEIGHT LIMITS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross vehicle weight, including cargo, in excess of that posted
and as listed herein at any time upon any of the following streets:
1.   Holland Street from Twenty-Third Street to west corporate limits - 20
tons.
2.   Twenty-Sixth Street from Holland Street to Wisconsin Street - 20 tons.
3.   Wisconsin Street from Twenty-Sixth Street to west corporate limits - 20
tons.
66.07   EXCEPTIONS.
Emergency vehicles, public works vehicles, public utility vehicles, grain
hauling on Wisconsin Street from Twenty-Sixth Street to west corporate limits,
and vehicles specifically excluded from such regulation by State law are exempt
from the weight restrictions above.
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate
signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
1.   Vehicular traffic driving in the public alley located between Ewing Street
and Jones Street and 2nd Street and Cody Road shall travel only in a south to
north direction.
2.   Vehicular traffic driving on Davenport Street from its intersection with
Stagecoach Trail East through to its intersection with Eleventh Street shall
travel only from west to east in direction.
3.   Vehicular traffic driving on South Twelfth Street from its intersection
with Davenport Street North through to its intersection with Dodge Street shall
travel only from south to north in direction.
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb             69.08 No Parking Zones
69.02 Parking on One-Way Streets        69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Angle Parking                     69.10 Snow Routes
69.04 Manner of Angle Parking           69.11 Controlled Access Facilities
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes      69.12 Non-Motorized Equipment Parking
Illegal                                 Prohibited
69.06 Parking Prohibited                69.13 Snow Emergency: Parking
                                        Prohibited
69.07 Persons with Disabilities Parking 69.14 Emergency Vehicles Exception
 
69.01   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1.   The 100 block of Dodge Street on the south side.
2.   The 300 block of Wisconsin Street on the north side.
69.04   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 24 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.06   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
18.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part
of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
19.   Controlled Access Facility Approach. On the minor street approach for a
distance of 35 feet in advance of the stop sign or on the exit side of the
minor street for a distance of 35 feet beyond the far crosswalk or right-of-way
line of any controlled access facility.
20.   Controlled Access Facility Intersection. On the primary road extension of
controlled access facilities for a distance of 55 feet in advance of the near
crosswalk or right-of-way line and a distance of 22 feet beyond the far
crosswalk or right-of-way line.
21.   U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road). There shall be no parking of any nature on
either side of U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road) from the southerly corporate limits
to the northerly right-of-way line of Davenport Street; on the east side from
the southerly right-of-way line of Holland Street to the northerly right-of-way
line of Walnut Street; also on the east side from the southerly right-of-way
line of Chestnut Street to the northerly corporate limits; and on the west side
from the northerly right-of-way line of Walnut Street to the northerly
corporate limits.
22.   U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road). A single lane of parking will be permitted
outside of the center 24 feet on the east side of U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road)
from the northerly right-of-way line of Davenport Street to the southerly
right-of-way line of Holland Street; and also on the east side from the
northerly right-of-way line of Walnut Street to the southerly right-of-way line
of Chestnut Street; and on the west side from the northerly right-of-way line
of Davenport Street to the northerly right-of-way line of Walnut Street.
23.   Public Alley. No person shall park a vehicle in any public alley within
the fire limits of the City.
24.   Private Alley. No person shall park a vehicle in any private alley within
the fire limits of the City in such manner that ingress or egress of fire
apparatus to or from such alley might be blocked.
25.   U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road). No person shall park on the west side of
U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road) within 40 feet of its intersection with Holland
Street and/or Walnut Street.
26.   Parking in Yards. No vehicle will be parked in any yard except upon a
permanent driveway or parking lot constructed in accordance with the provisions
contained elsewhere in the code.
69.07   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
   A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
   B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
   C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8
of the Code of Iowa.
3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
   A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply
with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when utilizing
a wheelchair parking cone.
   B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.08   NO PARKING ZONES.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Blackstone Circle, on either side, for its entire length.
2.   Blackstone Court, on either side, for its entire length.
3.   Blackstone Way, on either side, for its entire length.
4.   Bluff Lane, on either side, for its entire length.
5.   Bridgeview Place, on either side, from Fourteenth Street to Eighth Street.
6.   Buffalo Court, on either side, for its entire length.
7.   Canal Shore Drive, on the west end, on the east and north sides of this
portion of the street from its intersection with the D.R.I. and N.W. Railroad
right-of-way south and east for a distance of 511 feet. (Any vehicles parked in
violation of this provision will be towed away by the City. Said towing expense
will be borne by the owner of the vehicle.)
8.   Canal Shore Drive, S.W., on either side from the intersection with Eagle
Ridge Road, west (downriver) for a distance of approximately one thousand,
1,120 feet to the easterly property line extended southerly of Lot #4 of
Carleton’s Addition (Captain’s Quarters).
9.   Clover Hill Lane, on either side, for its entire length.
10.   Cobblestone Lane, on either side, for its entire length.
11.   Country Club Court, on either side, for its entire length.
12.   Country Club Way, on either side, for its entire length.
13.   Cox Court, on either side, for its entire length.
14.   Davenport Street, on either side, from its intersection with Fourteenth
Street to its intersection with Eleventh Street.
15.   Davenport Street, on the north side, from Eighth Street to Tenth Street.
16.   Dodge Street, on the south side, from its intersection with South Twelfth
Street, west for a distance of 95 feet.
17.   Eagle Ridge Road, on either side, for its entire length.
18.   Eighth Street, on either side, for its entire length.
19.   Ferry Street, on either side, from Cody Road to Fourth Street.
20.   Forest Grove Drive, on either side, for its entire length.
21.   Fourteenth Street, on the east side, from its intersection with Kaylann
Drive south to the southern intersection with Glenwood Drive.
22.   Fourteenth Street, on the west side, extending from the southernmost
intersection with Glenwood Drive, north for a distance of 35 feet.
23.   Fox Hollow Lane, on either side, for its entire length.
24.   Front Street. No vehicle or any portion thereof shall be parked anywhere
within the designated and signed driving surface “No Parking” zone, (created
pursuant to and in conformance with the provisions of Subsection
69.06(13), along the entire length of Front Street. Commercial vehicles loading
and unloading and providing other services to adjacent properties along Front
Street may park within said area for a maximum time not to exceed 15 minutes.
Any such vehicle so parked shall park in such a fashion as to allow unimpeded
vehicular access to other vehicles using the driving surface. The driver of any
vehicle so parked shall be readily available, accessible, and capable of moving
the vehicle in the event of an emergency or at the direction of a police
officer.
25.   Frontier Court, on either side, for its entire length.
26.   Hartz Court, on either side, for its entire length.
27.   Huckleberry Lane, on west side, for its entire length.
28.   Iowa Drive, on either side, from Wellhouse #4 to Eighth Street.
29.   Joan Rose Court, on either side, for its entire length.
30.   Jones Street, on either side, from N. Fourteenth Street to N. Fifteenth
Street.
31.   Jones Street, on either side, from Cody Road (U.S. 67) to Front Street.
32.   Jones Street, on the south side, from the alley between Second and Third
Street west to Third Street and on the south side from Third Street to Fourth
Street for not more than 15 minutes.
33.   LeClaire Riverfront Levee, immediately adjacent to and west of the
Veteran’s Memorial at the foot of Wisconsin Street, as signed or marked.
34.   Mississippi View Court, on both sides, for its entire length.
35.   Musket Court, on either side, for its entire length.
36.   N. Fifteenth Street, on either side, from Wisconsin Street to Holland
Street.
37.   North Fourth Street in the 200 block, on either side, from 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
38.   North Third Street, on the west side, from Jones Street to Ferry Street.
39.   North Third Street, on the west side, from Wisconsin Street to Jones
Street.
40.   Oakley Drive, on either side, for its entire length.
41.   Orchard Lane, on both sides, for its entire length.
42.   Pebble Creek Circle, on either side, for its entire length.
43.   Pebble Creek Drive, on either side, for its entire length.
44.   Redstone Court, on either side, for its entire length.
45.   Sandstone Court, on either side, for its entire length.
46.   Silverstone Drive, on either side, for its entire length.
47.   Slatestone Circle, on either side, for its entire length.
48.   South Twelfth Street, on either side, from its intersection with
Davenport Street to its intersection with Dodge Street.
49.   South Fifth Street, on the east side, from May Street north 150 feet.
50.   Stagecoach Trail, on either side, from Eagle Ridge Road to Davenport
Street.
51.   Sycamore Drive, on both sides, from its intersection with U.S. 67 (Cody
Road) north to its intersection with Thornwood Lane.
52.   Thirty-Fifth Street S.W., on either side, from Valley Drive North to
Wisconsin Street.
53.   Thornwood Lane, on both sides, for its entire length.
54.   Titus Court, on either side, for its entire length.
55.   U.S. 67 (Cody Road) from the intersection with Second Street west and
southwest to the westernmost corporate limit.
56.   Valley Drive, on both sides, from its intersection with U.S. 67 (South
Cody Road) to its termination at the western corporate limits and its
intersection with Thirty-Fifth Street S.W.
57.   Valley Drive, on both sides, from its intersection with Woodland Drive
east to its termination.
58.   Walbrier Court, on either side, for its entire length.
59.   Welcome Center Court, on either side, for its entire length.
60.   Welcome Center Drive, on both sides, for its entire length.
61.   Wells Fargo Trail, on either side, and at the cul-de-sac.
62.   Wild West Court, on either side, for its entire length.
63.   Wild West Drive, on either side, for its entire length.
64.   William Court, on either side, for its entire length.
65.   Wisconsin Street, on either side, from Fifteenth Street west to the west
corporate limits.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to pick-up, light delivery, or panel delivery
trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   No person shall park a truck, semi-tractor and/or trailer, or other motor
vehicle with or without an attached trailer which has three or more axles
individually or combined between the tractor/trailer or which has a licensed
weight of 10,000 pounds or more or which exceeds any of the following maximum
size dimensions: 24 feet in length; seven feet in width (not including
mirrors); or 10 feet in height measured from the ground to the topmost point of
the vehicle, in any residential area of the City unless said vehicle is
actually engaged in the temporary (that period of time that is reasonably
necessary to park, load or unload, and remove the vehicle from the public
street) delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo incidental to a
residential use and is legally parked so as not to interfere with the free flow
of traffic.
2.   Vehicles with three or more axles are allowed to park on Cody Road for a
maximum of one hour only if the driver is utilizing one of the City’s
commercial establishments.
3.   No semi-tractor/trailer combinations or semi-trailers shall be parked on
Cody Road or in any area of the City not specifically designated for such
purpose by resolution of the Council.
4.   Livestock. It is unlawful to stand or park any vehicle containing
livestock any place in the City for a period of time longer than three minutes,
except for loading or unloading.
5.   Any violation of the provisions of this section may be punishable by a
fine as established by resolution of the Council or may be abated as provided
for in the code.
69.10   SNOW ROUTES.
All streets and alleys within the corporate limits of the City shall hereafter
be designated as snow routes, and as such, shall be regulated in the following
manner:
1.   Parking shall be limited to the even-numbered side of the street on the
even-numbered calendar days and the odd-numbered side of the street on the odd-
numbered calendar days. For the purpose of enforcement of this section, days
shall begin at 7:00 a.m. and run for a period of 24 hours.
2.   This section shall be in full force and effect between 7:00 a.m. November
1 through 7:00 a.m. March 31 (inclusive).
3.   Warning tickets may be issued between 7:00 a.m. November 1 through 7:00
a.m. November 15 (inclusive) and after such time and throughout the duration of
the dates and times designated in Subsection 2 above, tickets may be issued for
any violation of this section.
4.   Any vehicle receiving a ticket and remaining in violation of this section
for a period greater than 24 hours shall be removed at the owner’s expense in
accordance with the provision of this section.
5.   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or
in a condition in violation of any provision of this section, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation
of a provision of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such vehicle, shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or
left the vehicle in violation of this section.
For the purpose of this section, parking in alleys, where it is absolutely
necessary, shall correspond to the street parking on those streets running
parallel to the alley. For the purposes of this section, snow route designated
parking on Cody Road within the corporate limits of the City shall only be
limited during the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. when the “odd-even” system
mentioned above in Subsection 1 shall be enforced. All other provisions related
to snow route designated parking shall be in full force and effect as otherwise
provided for herein. Snow route designation or snow route parking signs shall
not be required due to the extent of City-wide coverage and seasonal nature of
this section.
69.11   CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.
Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in
Chapter 140 of this Code of Ordinances.
69.12   NON-MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person shall park or store a trailer, camper, wagon, or other non-motorized
piece of equipment that is designed to be towed by a motor vehicle, which has
been disconnected from the tow vehicle, upon any public right-of-way. No person
shall park or store any other non-motorized piece of equipment upon any public
right-of-way without written consent of the City Public Works Director, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, or City Administrator.
69.13   SNOW EMERGENCY: PARKING PROHIBITED.
1.   Parking Prohibited. No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any
vehicle on any public street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area
during any snow emergency proclaimed by the Mayor unless the snow has been
removed or plowed from said street, alley, or parking area and the snow has
ceased to fall. A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its
proclamation through the duration of the snow or ice storm and the 48-hour
period after cessation of such storm, except as above provided upon streets
which have been fully opened. Such emergency may be extended or shortened when
conditions warrant.
2.   Proclamation. When weather forecasts or occurrences indicate the need, the
Mayor shall proclaim a snow emergency and request all news media to publicize
the proclamation and applicable parking restrictions.
3.   In all zoning districts, off-street accessory parking areas, in the open
or in a garage, shall be provided and used during proclaimed snow emergencies
of two inches or more, or at such time as the Council deems it necessary for
the betterment of the community. Such areas, in the case of “A” (Agricultural)
or “R” (Residential) Districts, shall be on the premises intended to be served;
and in the case of “C” (Commercial) or “I” (Industrial) Districts, such areas
shall be on the premises intended to be served or on adjoining or nearby
property within 100 feet of said premises and in the same or less restricted
district.
69.14   EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTION.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the parking of recognized
emergency vehicles (See Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa, as amended) when
responding to an emergency request for service.
CHAPTER 71
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
71.01 Arrest or Citation            71.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
71.02 Scheduled Violations          71.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
71.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 71.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
71.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
71.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
71.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the Clerk. The fine for each violation charged under a simple notice
of a fine shall be in the amount of $25.00 for all violations except improper
use of a persons with disabilities parking permit and snow emergency. If such
fine is not paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The fine for
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00. The fine
for snow emergency fine amount is $50.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
71.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
71.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
71.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
1.   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
   A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
   D.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
CHAPTER 75
ATVS AND UTVS
 
75.01 Purpose                   75.07 Equipment
75.02 Definitions               75.08 UTV Hours of Operation
75.03 General Regulations       75.09 UTV Speed Limits
75.04 Operation of ATVs         75.10 Traffic Code
75.05 Operation of UTVs         75.11 Negligence
75.06  UTV Prohibited Locations 75.12 Accident Reports
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and off-road utility vehicles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2.   “Off-road motorcycle” by the operator and handlebars for steering control
and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road
motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of
title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but
which contains design features that enable operation over natural terrain. An
operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this
chapter governing the operation of ATVs and UTVs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
   B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than Type
1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
   C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48
inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed
for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle
that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or
treads. Snowmobile use is prohibited within the City limits except on
designated trails or private property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
ATVs, off-road motorcycles, or UTVs within the City must be operated in
compliance with Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa, rules established by the
Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing
their registration, equipment, and manner of operation, and this ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF ATVS.
1.   ATVs Not Permitted. ATVs are not permitted on any City street, alley,
park, or public property with the following exceptions and exceptions listed
per Chapter 321I.10 of the Code of Iowa.
2.   Exceptions. A person shall not operate an ATV upon roadways or highways
except as provided below:
   A.   A registered ATV may be operated on the roadways or alleys of City for
purpose of snow removal within 24 hours of the cessation of the snow fall.
   B.   The operation is between sunrise and sunset and is incidental to the
vehicle’s use for agricultural purposes. For purposes of this paragraph,
“incidental to the vehicle’s use for agricultural purposes” includes stopping
in the course of agricultural use to obtain fuel for the ATV or to obtain food
or a nonalcoholic beverage for the operator.
   C.   The operation is incidental to the vehicle’s use for the purpose of
surveying by a licensed engineer or land surveyor.
   D.   The ATV is operated by an employee or agent of a political subdivision
or public utility for the purpose of construction or maintenance on or adjacent
to the highway.
   E.   The ATV is operated by an employee or agent of a public agency as
defined in Section 34.1 of the Code of Iowa for the purpose of providing
emergency services or rescue.
   F.   The ATV is operated for the purpose of mowing, installing approved
trail signs, or providing maintenance on a snowmobile or ATV trail designated
by the Department of Natural Resources.
   G.   A person operating an ATV on a City street shall have a valid driver’s
license and the vehicle shall be operated at speeds of 35 miles per hour or
less.
   H.   ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails.
3.   Direct Crossing. An ATV may make a direct crossing of a highway that is
not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(5))
   A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
   B.   The ATV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or
main traveled way of the highway.
   C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or alley.
   E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such
vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.05   OPERATION OF UTVS.  
UTVs may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons who are 18 years
of age or older and are possessing a valid State operator’s license, except as
prohibited in Section 75.06. While operated on a City street, the number of
passengers permitted on a UTV shall not exceed the number of seats intended for
passengers. While on City streets, operators must have on their person or in
the UTV proof of the required insurance.
75.06   UTV PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
1.   Trails. UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated. UTVs shall not be operated on any recreational, bike, or walking
trail.
2.   Railroad Right-of-Way. UTVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad
right-of-way. A UTV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only
at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provision of law may,
if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after
yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14(1h))
3.   Parks and Other City Land. UTVs shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
4.   Sidewalk or Parking. UTVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk
or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
5.   Direct Crossing. A UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway that is not
part of the interstate road system provided all of the following occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(5))
   A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
   B.   The UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or
main traveled way of the highway.
   C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
   E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such
vehicle is authorized to operate.
6.   U.S. Highway 67. UTV’s shall not be operated on U.S. Highway 67 – “Cody
Road,” a primary road extension within the City. However, a UTV shall be
allowed to cross U.S. Highway 67 – “Cody Road” at a right-angle only.
7.   Special Exemptions. The Chief of Police is authorized to permit UTVs to
operate on restricted City areas for certain special events.
75.07   EQUIPMENT.
UTVs operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the following:
   1.   UTVs operated on City streets shall be equipped with a muffler,
headlights, taillights, turn signals, seatbelts, or safety restraints and
adequate brakes to stop and hold the UTV in a stopped position. Driver and all
passengers must comply with all seatbelt and occupant restraint requirements,
including the use of child safety seats, as required for motor vehicles
operating on a public roadway. Driver and all passengers shall each wear a
properly adjusted safety belt or safety harness any time the UTV is in motion
on a City street or alley.
   2.   UTVs operated on City streets shall be equipped with an adequate
exhaust systems.
75.08   UTV HOURS OF OPERATION
UTVs may be operated on City streets from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. UTVs may be
operated during prohibited hours when being used for snow removal.
75.09   UTV SPEED LIMITS.
No UTV shall be operated at a speed in excess of 35 MPH or the posted speed
limit, whichever is lower. No UTV shall be operated at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper for the existing conditions.
75.10   TRAFFIC CODE.
Any person operating a UTV shall strictly adhere to all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations, and shall obey the orders
and direction of any law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic. No person shall leave an UTV unattended on public property while the
motor is running or the keys are in the ignition switch.
75.11   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV or UTV are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or UTV. The owner of an ATV or
UTV shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the
operator of the ATV or UTV at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the
operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or UTV at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.19)
75.12   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or UTV is involved in an accident resulting in injury or death
to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.11)
(Chapter 75 – Ord._844 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLES AND OTHER NON-MOTORIZED SELF-PROPELLED VEHICLES
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.06 Parking
76.02 Purpose              76.07 Equipment Requirements
76.03 Definitions          76.08 Skateboards, Sleds, Roller Skates, Scooters,
                           Etc.
76.04 Trail Rules          76.09 Enforcement
76.05 Movement Regulations
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations, applicable to bicycles and other non-motorized, self-
propelled vehicles, except recognized emergency vehicles (see Sec. 321.231 of
the Code of Iowa, as amended) apply whenever such vehicle is operated upon any
public right-of-way, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
76.02   PURPOSE.
The trail system is intended for the activities of individuals and permitted
groups for recreation, transportation, fitness and other similar purposes using
human powered or power assisted propulsion. Activities using powered equipment
are to be permitted by the unit of government given authority to issue permits.
Individuals with disabilities are allowed to use ADA compliant power assisted
devices intended for personal transport on trails. The intent of this ordinance
is to establish consistent rules and regulations for trail use. The rules set
forth herein are a supplement to any existing State of Iowa vehicle codes or
other applicable federal, State, or local rules and regulation pertaining to
trail use. The intent of this ordinance is to establish consistent rules and
regulations for trail use. The rules set forth herein are a supplement to any
existing State of Iowa vehicle codes or other applicable federal, State, or
local rules and regulation pertaining to trail use.
76.03   DEFINITIONS.
1.   Trail – For the purposes of this ordinance “trail” is a multi-use trail,
side path or shared use path defined by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) as: a bikeway physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or on other public property or within an
easement dedicated for public use. These facilities may also be used by
pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers, and other non-motorized users.
Minimum trail width for bike usage is 8 feet.
2.   Electric scooter – A device weighing less than one hundred pounds that is
equipped with two or three wheels, handlebars, and an electric motor, and which
is solely powered by the rider or by an electric motor capable of propelling
the device without additional propulsion supplied by the rider, at a maximum
speed on a paved level surface of no more than twenty miles per hour, or both.
3.   Compliant vehicle – Human powered devices no wider than four feet with the
exception of equipment approved by the governing agency for use to maintain the
trail, provide for public safety, or specially permitted for use by the
governing agency responsible for the trail, including electric scooters. Class
1 , 2, and 3 electric bikes are considered compliant.
   Class 1: An electric bicycle that only provides assistance when the rider is
pedaling; the motor ceases at 20 miles per hour (mph).
   Class 2: An electric bicycle that provides assistance regardless of whether
the rider is pedealing; the motor ceases at 20 mph.
   Class 3: An electric bicycle that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling; the motor ceases at 28 mph.
76.04   TRAIL RULES.
Rules users of the trails shall not:
1.   Travel at a rate of speed that is greater than reasonable and prudent.
2.   Use the trail in a negligent manner that is likely to endanger persons or
property. Trail user shall use common courtesy and respect the rights and
safety of others. The applicable State regulations regarding the equipment
required to allow the safe operation of bicycles or other wheeled vehicles
during the times of the day when natural light is diminished shall be applied
to the trails subject to this ordinance.
3.   Litter, leave animal waste, or discard any other items along or near the
trail.
4.   Operate any vehicle other than a compliant vehicle as previously defined
in this ordinance.
76.05   MOVEMENT REGULATIONS.
1.   Traffic Code Applies to Persons Riding Bicycles. Every person riding a
bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and will be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the
State declaring rules of the road applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions which by their nature can have application. Whenever
such person dismounts from a bicycle, they shall be subject to all regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
2.   Riding on Bicycles. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other
than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be
used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed
and equipped.
3.   Riding Abreast. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
4.   Use of Bicycle Paths. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been
provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall
not use the roadway.
5.   Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
6.   Emerging from Alley or Driveway. The operators of a bicycle emerging from
an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk sidewalk area, , trail, or trail area, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
in said roadway.
7.   Carrying Articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon
the handlebars.
8.   Riding on Sidewalks or Trail.
   A.   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Business
District, which is that area along Cody Road (U.S. 67) from May Street to
Walnut Street.
   B.   When signs are erected on any public right-of-way prohibiting the
riding of bicycles thereon, no person shall do so.
   C.   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or trail, such
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing.
9.   Towing. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to
tow any other vehicle upon the streets of the City, except those commercially
available vehicles or apparatus so designed for that use.
10.   Following Fire Truck. No person riding a bicycle shall follow a fire
truck or other fire equipment at any time.
11.   Improper Riding. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or
reckless manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise, so as to
disregard the safety of or the operations of others.
76.06   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb, or upon the sidewalk or trail in a rack to support the
bicycle, or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
76.07   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except that a red
reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from
50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, or clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(10))
76.08   SKATEBOARDS, SLEDS, ROLLER SKATES, SCOOTERS, ETC.
Skateboards, sleds, roller skates, scooters, tricycles, and similar self-
propelled and/or motorized vehicles shall not be used or operated on any U.S.
Highway right-of-way, any City street or upon any sidewalk or trail where signs
have been placed prohibiting such use, or upon any other public place where
signs have been placed prohibiting such use. The operator of such a self-
propelled and/or motorized vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
at all times.
76.09   ENFORCEMENT.
Upon discovering a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, police
officers are encouraged to:
1.   Issue a verbal warning for the first offense;
2.   Issue a citation for a following offense.
(Chapter 76 – Ord._851 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 78
GOLF CARTS
 
78.01 Definitions 78.02 Golf Cart Operation Allowed
 
78.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Golf cart” means three- or four-wheeled recreational vehicle generally
used for transportation of person(s) in the sport of golf.
2.   “Operate” means to ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or the
operation of a golf cart in any manner, whether or not the golf cart is moving.
3.   “Operator” means a person, who operates or is in actual physical control
of a golf cart.
4.   “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designated, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
5.   “Street” or “Highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular travel.
78.02   GOLF CART OPERATION ALLOWED.
1.   Pursuant to the authority granted under Section 321.247 of the Code of
Iowa, golf carts, only equipped as specified herein, may be operated on
specifically, designated public streets, as listed in Subsection 2, between
sunrise and sunset by any person at least 18 years of age possessing a valid
driver's license and proof of security against liability as specified in
Section 321.20.B. of the Code of Iowa. In addition, the number of passengers
permitted on a golf cart shall not exceed the number of seats intended for
passengers. Further, any golf cart operated on any public street pursuant to
this section shall be equipped with each of the following:
   A.   A clearly visible slow moving vehicle emblem displayed to the rear.
   B.   A bicycle safety flag of at least six feet in height.
   C.   Adequate brakes.
   D.   Fully operating headlights and taillights.
   E.   Child restraint devices as follows:
      (1)   A child under one year of age and weighing less than twenty pounds
shall be secured during transit in a rear-facing child restraint system that is
used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      (2)   A child under six years of age who does not meet the description in
Paragraph “(1)” and shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system
that is used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
      (3)   A child at least six years of age but under eighteen years of age
shall be secured during transit by a child restraint system that is used in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions or a safety belt or safety
harness of a type approved under Iowa Code 321.445.
(Subsection 1 – Ord._845 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
2.   Public Streets Designated. Golf carts operated pursuant to the provisions
of this section may not be operated on the following, specifically, designated
public streets:
   A.   Truck routes as designated in
Chapter 66.
   B.   City streets with a speed limit greater than 30 mph.
   C.   South Eighth Street from Wisconsin Street to U.S. Highway 67 (Cody
Road).
   D.   U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road), a primary road extension within the City.
However, a golf cart shall be allowed to cross U.S. Highway 67 (Cody Road) at a
right-angle only.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Fees for Impoundment
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
Abandoned Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
                                        Vehicles
80.04 Extension of Time                 80.09 Proceeds from Sales
80.05 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.10 Duties of Demolisher
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] and Sec. 321.90)
1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
   A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
   B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours. In order for any vehicle to be exempt from the provisions set forth
in this section, it is necessary for an additional one mile to appear on the
vehicle’s odometer every 24 hours.
   C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 24 hours.
   D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
   E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to
create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
   F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of
any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may
employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or
disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the
abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police
authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police
authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the
registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been taken
into custody, no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle. Notice
shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant
to the vehicle.
2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all of
the following:
   A.   A description of the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
   B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
   C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
   D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
   E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is
deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the vehicle
at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to dispose of
the personal property by sale or destruction.
3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or
by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police
authority or private entity, or of the assessment of fees and charges provided
by this section, may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters.
5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day reclaiming
period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have any right,
title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property.
6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title,
claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the expiration
of the 10-day reclaiming period.
7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identities
and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles, but shall be published within the same time
requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice
in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
80.04   EXTENSION OF TIME.
The owner, lienholders, or claimants may, by written request delivered to the
police authority or private entity prior to the expiration of the one day
reclaiming period, obtain an additional five days within which the motor
vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3c])
80.05   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received (or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received)
notice under Section
80.03 shall present to the police authority or private entity, as applicable,
the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of financial liability coverage
as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as
established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.07   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of
the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.08   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.09   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the
amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.10   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
 
90.01 Definitions 90.02 Water Well Construction Prohibition
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions contained in Section
95.01 of this Code of Ordinances and other definitions as used throughout this
Code and various other applicable City codes, and unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter
are as follows:
1.   “Building lateral” or “private water service pipe” means that pipe and all
associated appurtenances (including any corporation and/or saddle attached to
the public water main), extending from the public water main to the building
which it is intended to service.
2.   “Customer” means any person who utilizes, in any manner, water provided by
the public water system.
3.   “Property line” means the line or lines defining the lot upon which the
structure or proposed structure is located which is intended to be served by
the water system.
4.   “Public water main” means a water main supply pipe, owned, controlled,
maintained, and subject to the jurisdiction of the Iowa-American Water Company,
its successors, and assigns, which is provided for public or community use.
5.   “Readily and reasonably available” means that connection to the public
water main can be made without incurring any provable financial hardship or
other hardship as the City Council may determine.
6.   “Water emergency” means that period of time during which water is not
available, or its availability is limited, due to severe shortages in supplies,
interruptions in the water transmission or distribution systems, contamination
of water supplies, or other conditions where use restrictions or prohibitions
are necessary in order to safeguard the safety and health of the general public
and to provide water for essential public uses (e.g., fire protection).
7.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing potable water.
90.02   WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION PROHIBITION.
No person shall drill, construct, install, replace, or rehabilitate any water
well used for any purpose on any property located within the City where the
dwelling or other structure to be supplied with water is within 200 feet from a
readily and reasonably available public water main and access is not required
by easements or other encumbrances caused by passage through property owned by
another. The City reserves the right to make the final determination as to the
availability of a public water main. Exceptions to this limitation on future
well permits may be made for non-potable water wells for the purpose of
irrigation, livestock watering, industrial non-drinking uses and “closed-loop”
systems. Any exceptions will comply with the rules and guidelines of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources in place at that time.
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
 
93.01 Water Conservation Emergency 93.04 Level III
93.02 Level I                      93.05 Level IV
93.03 Level II
 
93.01   WATER CONSERVATION EMERGENCY.
Whenever a water emergency, as defined in Subsection
90.01(6), is determined to exist based upon all the available data at hand, the
procedures, measures, and provisions given in this chapter shall be in effect
to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of water consumption until the
Council declares the water emergency to be ended. There shall be four levels of
water emergencies.
93.02   LEVEL I.
Under a Level I water emergency, all customers of the water system are
encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to
preserve the resources available. Customers are encouraged to comply with the
following voluntary standards:
1.   No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. (If a hand-held hose or drip irrigation system is used, watering
may be done at any time.)
2.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading
pools, reflecting pools, ornamental fountains, or any other outdoor pool or
pond, or any other such structure making similar use of water.
3.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, porches, or building exteriors.
4.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
5.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
6.   Private car/truck washing should be done using a bucket. No hoses should
be used. (Vehicles may be washed at a commercial car wash where the water is
recycled.).
93.03   LEVEL II.
Under a Level II water emergency, no person shall use potable processed water
of the water system in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawns is prohibited.
2.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees, and shrubs
less than four years old; and new seedling or sod is permitted once per week
with an application not to exceed one inch or four hours, whichever is less,
and then only between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
3.   The washing of cars, trucks, trailers, and other vehicles or equipment is
prohibited except at commercial establishments which provide that service.
4.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading
pools, reflecting pools, ornamental fountains, or any other outdoor pool or
pond, or any other such structure making similar use of water.
5.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, porches, or building exteriors.
6.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
7.   Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
8.   Use of water-consuming comfort air conditioning equipment which consumes
in excess of five percent of the water circulating in such equipment is
prohibited.
9.   Tank load water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
93.04   LEVEL III.
Under a Level III water emergency, no person shall use potable processed water
of the water system in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire
protection, is prohibited.
2.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing
services is prohibited.
3.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited. (Watering of livestock is
permitted.)
4.   Recreational and leisure water use, including land and golf course
watering and other incidental or recreational use, is prohibited.
5.   Water use not essential for the preservation of life, or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited.
6.   The sale of water to customers outside of the City limits will be
discontinued.
93.05   LEVEL IV.
Under a Level IV water emergency, no person shall use potable processed water
of the water system in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   Any and all domestic, commercial, industrial, and agricultural (including
the watering of livestock) water use is strictly prohibited under any
circumstances.
2.   Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water
that has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restrictions.
Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City water system, such
as water condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected from
rain or snow, may be used without restrictions.
3.   The Mayor may immediately proclaim any level of water emergency and such
proclamation and the provisions enumerated herein accompanying that
proclamation will remain in effect until such time as the Council can adopt a
resolution confirming such emergency.
4.   The resolution declaring a water emergency shall be published once in a
local newspaper serving the City and, upon publication, shall serve as notice
to and shall require compliance with this section by all persons using water
from the water system until such time as the Council, by resolution, declares
the emergency to be terminated.
5.   Any person found to be using City water in violation of this section may
be subject to any legal remedy specified in this Code.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Definitions                       95.07 Interruption of Service
                                        (Liability Limited)
95.02 Duties and Responsibilities of    95.08 Indemnity
City and Officials
95.03 Standard Penalties, Enforcement,  95.09 Compliance with Other Applicable
Legal Remedies, and Discontinuation of  Codes
Service; Surcharges
95.04 Customer’s Contract with the Cit95.10 Adoption of Rules and Regulations
95.05 Right of Access, Inspection, and  95.11 Sewer Main Back-Up Damages and
Grant of Easements                      Claims Reimbursement
95.06 Right to Refuse Service
 
95.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
1.   “ANSI” means standards of the American National Standard Institute, latest
edition.
2.   “ASTM” means standard of the American Society of Testing Materials, latest
edition.
3.   “Biohazard” means any infectious or potentially infectious materials
including, but not limited to the following: semen, vaginal secretions,
cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid,
peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in dental procedures, any body fluid
visibly contaminated with blood, and all body fluids in situations where it is
difficult or impossible to differentiate between body fluids. Also included are
any unfixed tissue or organ other than intact skin from a human (living or
dead), and human immune-deficiency virus (HIV) - containing cell or tissue
cultures, organ cultures and HIV or Hepatitis B (HBV) -containing culture
medium or other solutions as well as blood, organs, or other tissues from
experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.
4.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20?, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
5.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
6.   “Building lateral” means the sewer piping from the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and extending
to the public sanitary sewer.
7.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
8.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
9.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of discharged
domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, directly or indirectly, into the
public sewer system.
10.   “Domestic wastewater” means any sewage produced and originating from
residential dwelling units with a (BOD) of not more than 250 milligrams per
liter and suspended solids of not more than 300 milligrams per liter.
11.   “Eligible senior citizen” means any residential user of the public sewer
system over the age of 65 whose income level, as verified annually through the
use of the various income verification statements (i.e., federal income tax
return, bank statements, W-2’s, social security statements, etc.) as determined
and approved by the City Administrator, is less than 150 percent of the Federal
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) designated poverty level (which includes
social security benefits).
12.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
13.   “Health department” means the County Health Department.
14.   “IDNR” means the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
15.   “Industrial wastewater or process wastewater” means any wastewater
permitted to flow or escape from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or
business establishment or process, or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from domestic wastewater.
16.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
17.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
18.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
19.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
20.   “Person” means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, political subdivision, governmental agency,
trust, estate, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents,
successors, heirs, or assigns.
21.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
22.   “Property line” means the line or lines defining the lot upon which the
structure or proposed structure is located which is intended to be served by
the public sewer.
23.   “Property owner” means the contract purchaser of real estate, if there is
one of record, otherwise the record holder of legal title to real estate as
shown on the records of the County Assessor’s Office.
24.   “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in the public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.
25.   “Public sewer main” means a sewer main owned, controlled, maintained, and
subject to the jurisdiction of the City Municipal Utilities Department, its
successors, and assigns, which is provided for public or community use.
26.   “Readily and reasonably available” means that connection to the public
sewer main can be made without incurring any provable financial hardship or
other hardship as the Council may determine.
27.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial
waste.
28.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
29.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
30.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
31.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
32.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
33.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
34.   “Standard sampling manhole” means a structure located on-site from which
industrial wastewater is discharged. The purpose of a “standard sampling
manhole” is to provide access to the sewer for the City to sample or measure
discharges.
35.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
36.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water
pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
37.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
38.   “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
39.   “User unit” means each single-family, multi-family, or mobile home
dwelling unit; each commercial building unit; each governmental building unit;
or each industrial building unit.
40.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.02   DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY AND OFFICIALS.
1.   The City Administrator is responsible for the appropriate and timely
administration of the provisions of this chapter. The City shall supervise the
installation of building laterals and their connection to the public sewer main
and enforce all regulations pertaining to sewer services in this City in
accordance with this chapter. This chapter applies to all replacements of
existing building lateral pipes as well as to the installation of new ones. The
City Administrator shall make such rules, not in conflict with the intent and
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed, day-to-day
operations of the sewer system. In the event of an emergency, they may make
temporary rules, which may conflict and not conform with the intent of this
chapter, for the protection of the system until a final decision can be
rendered by the Council.
2.   Authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, installation of metering devices, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3.   While performing the necessary work on private property, authorized
employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company/owner and the company/owner shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the City employees and the City shall indemnify the
company/owner against loss or damage to its property by City employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company/owner, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company/owner to maintain safe conditions as required.
4.   The authorized employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
95.03   STANDARD PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL REMEDIES, AND DISCONTINUATION OF
SERVICE; SURCHARGES.
In addition to those legal remedies and enforcement procedures enumerated in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances and others listed in this chapter, the
City may institute any remedy allowed by law including the following to
administer the provisions of this chapter. The City Administrator may impose a
monthly “surcharge” in an amount approved by Council resolution under the
following conditions:
1.   Without notice, in the event that evidence is found indicating tampering
with the equipment furnished and owned by the City.
2.   Without notice, in the event that evidence is found indicating
unauthorized use of the system.
3.   For failure of a customer to permit the City reasonable access, after due
notice is given, to change out or to check for metering system accuracy.
4.   For failure of a customer to adequately safeguard, locate or relocate a
meter after due notice is given.
5.   For failure of a customer to repair any faulty building lateral or service
piping within a building after due notice is given.
6.   Without notice, in the event of a condition determined by the City to be
hazardous.
95.04   CUSTOMER’S CONTRACT WITH THE CITY.
The rules, regulations, and sewer rates hereinafter referred to shall be
considered a part of the contract with every person supplied service through
the sewer system and every such person, by utilizing such service, shall be
considered as expressing consent to be bound by this contract whether having
signed an application or contract for said service or not.
95.05   RIGHT OF ACCESS, INSPECTION, AND GRANT OF EASEMENTS.
Each person supplied with sewer service through the City sewer system shall
permit and grant to the City, after due notice and presentation of proper
identification (if requested), reasonable access to the property and buildings
served by the City sewer system for the purposes of inspecting, maintaining,
and/or repairing or disconnecting any and all metering equipment and devices or
any other piping or fixtures connected in any matter to the sewer system or for
the purpose of inspecting for compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Further, there is hereby established a permanent easement across and through
those properties served by the City sewer system for the use of the City to
read and/or maintain all metering devices.
95.06   RIGHT TO REFUSE SERVICE.
The City may refuse service to persons, not presently customers, when, in the
opinion of the City, the capacity of the sewer system will not permit such
service.
95.07   INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE (LIABILITY LIMITED).
The City does not guarantee a constant supply of sewer service to any customer
and shall not be liable for damages for any failure to supply the same, nor
shall it be liable for any claims or damage by reason of the breaking or
blockage of any building lateral, building drain, or other equipment not
specifically attributable to proven City negligence in the maintenance and
performance of the public sewer system.
95.08   INDEMNITY.
If any loss or damage is caused to the property of the City or any accident or
injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or
wrongful act of the customer, member of the customer’s household, or any agent
or employee of the customer, the cost of the necessary repairs or replacements
shall be paid by the customer to the City and any liability otherwise resulting
shall be that of the customer.
95.09   COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE CODES.
In addition to the specifically highlighted and mentioned provisions in the
Sanitary Sewer chapters, the construction and installation of any building
lateral and any such connection with the public sewer system shall comply with
all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether regulatory, procedural, or
enforcement provisions, of any code or regulations currently in use by the
City.
95.10   ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.  
Amendments to this and all subsequent chapters dealing with the public sewer
system shall be adopted by ordinance of the Council only after first having
duly held a public hearing to consider said amendments.
95.11   SEWER MAIN BACK-UP DAMAGES AND CLAIMS REIMBURSEMENT.  
No reimbursements will be granted for any damages allegedly caused by any sewer
main jetting activities. Reimbursements may be granted for damages allegedly
caused by sewer main back-ups (except those caused by “flood waters”), provided
each of the following conditions are met:
1.   The City’s backed-up sewer main must be the sole, indisputable cause of
the alleged back-up damages.
2.   The City must be notified of the alleged damages within one hour of the
back-up or the discovery thereof.
3.   The City must have on-site, visual confirmation within the structure and
the City’s sewer main of the back-up and resulting, alleged damages within one
hour of notification of an alleged back-up or the discovery thereof.
4.   The City will pay all reasonable costs up to a maximum, not-to-exceed
$1,500.00 incurred in the mitigation of clean-up of, repair of, and/or
replacement of property, allegedly damaged, based upon detailed supporting
invoices. The City will retain the right to repair property to a satisfactory
condition as opposed to replacement.
5.   All property damaged and selected to be replaced by the City will become
the property of the City immediately upon reimbursement.
6.   All reimbursement offers will be final and any offer accepted will be
considered as payment in full for any and all damages incurred, and the
property owner/tenant will agree that no further actions and/or compensation of
any kind will be sought regarding the claim in question.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Mandatory Connection Required   96.10 Connection Requirements
96.02 Building Lateral Installation   96.11 Completion by the City
Permit Required
96.03 Building Lateral Installation/  96.12 Depth Requirement
Connection Permit and Inspection Fees
96.04 Connection Deadline             96.13 Stormwater
96.05 Inspection Required             96.14 Owner’s Responsibility
96.06 Abandoned Connections           96.15 Limited Responsibility for Permit
                                      Revocation
96.07 Contractor Qualifications and   96.16 Use of Sewage Lift/Sump Pumps
Approval                              Prohibited
96.08 Bond and Agreement Required     96.17 Private Construction of Public
                                      Sewer Mains Prohibited
96.09 Tapping Mains
 
96.01   MANDATORY CONNECTION REQUIRED.  
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human habitation,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future, be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
City, is hereby required, at said owner’s expense, to install suitable sewage
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days
from the date of receipt of the official written notice to do so, provided that
said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line, is readily and
reasonably available, and does not require the need to obtain easements or
other encumbrances caused by the passage through property owned by another, or
require an addition to the existing main, if the City deems that such addition
is necessary for said connection.
96.02   BUILDING LATERAL INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City. Before or in conjunction with
the issuance of a building permit for any first-time, new construction where
sewer service will be provided by the City and before any person makes a
connection or reconnection with the public sewer system, a written permit must
be obtained from the City. The application shall be filed with the City on
blanks furnished by the City. The application shall include any and all
information deemed necessary by the City to adequately describe the work being
done, protect the property owner’s and the City’s interests in the work being
performed, and to serve as a permanent utility record of the pertinent
information involved with the building lateral. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information deemed
necessary to affect the intent of the foregoing statement. The City shall issue
the permit if the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and
if all fees required under this chapter have been paid. The City may at any
time revoke the permit for any violation of this chapter and require that the
work be stopped.
96.03   BUILDING LATERAL INSTALLATION/CONNECTION PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
There are two classes of sewer installation/connection permits and fees: (a)
for residential installation/connections; (b) for commercial or industrial
installation/connections. The property owner or agent shall make an application
on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the City. At such time as an application for a
building lateral installation/ connection permit is filed with the City, a
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City in the following amounts:
1.   For each new residential connection, a permit request shall be accompanied
by a fee as established by resolution of the Council, except as specifically
noted otherwise herein.
2.   For each existing residential reconnection† 4 , a permit request shall be
accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the Council, except as
specifically noted otherwise herein.
3.   For each new commercial or industrial connection, a permit request shall
be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the Council, except as
specifically noted otherwise herein.
4.   For each existing commercial or industrial reconnection† 5 , a permit
request shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the
Council, except as specifically noted otherwise herein.
The Council may, under special conditions or circumstances, negotiate and
require other, higher connection fees than those established by resolution of
the Council, but shall not, under any circumstance, require a fee less than
those established by resolution of the Council.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For purposes of this chapter, the term “reconnection” means any
4 replacement, reattachment, relocation, excavation of or the repair of any building
  lateral or any portion thereof, except for the repair of an inoperable or buried curb
  stop.
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For purposes of this chapter, the term “reconnection” means any
5 replacement, reattachment, relocation, excavation of or the repair of any building
  lateral or any portion thereof, except for the repair of an inoperable or buried curb
  stop.
96.04   CONNECTION DEADLINE.
All approved connection and reconnection permits shall require the owner to
complete construction and connection of the building lateral to the public
sewer main within 30 days from the issuance of the permit, and under any
circumstances no later than 60 days after receipt of the official notice to
connect, except that when, in the judgment of the Inspector, the applicant has
made sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the applicant’s control
or peculiar hardship the period of time set forth for the completion of the
connection shall be inequitable or unfair to the applicant, an extension of
time within which to comply with the provisions herewith may be granted.
96.05   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All new, first-time connections with the public sewer system before being
covered, shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the City. As soon as
all pipe work from the public sewer system to inside the building has been
completed and before any backfilling is done, the City shall be notified and
shall cause to be inspected the work as to workmanship and material. No sewer
service pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the lateral has been so inspected and approved. If the City refuses to approve
the work, the contractor or owner must proceed immediately to correct the work.
96.06   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When any portion of a building lateral is permanently abandoned, the lateral
shall be disconnected at the public sewer main, and the connection shall be
made absolutely watertight to the satisfaction of the City.
96.07   CONTRACTOR QUALIFICATIONS AND APPROVAL.
Any connection to a public sewer main shall be made only by a person, approved
by the City, who, by education, license, or training, is so qualified to do so.
The City Administrator shall have the right to suspend the approval of the
person making the connection for any violation of any provision of this
chapter. A suspension, unless revoked, shall continue until the next regular
Council meeting. The City Administrator shall notify the person immediately by
certified mail of the suspension, the reasons for the suspension, and the time
and place of the Council meeting at which he or she will be granted a hearing.
At this Council meeting the City Administrator shall present a written report
to the Council. After said hearing time, the Council may revoke the suspension
or take any further action that is necessary and proper.
96.08   BOND AND AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
Prior to the installation and construction of a building lateral within the
public right-of-way and/or any connection of a building lateral to a public
sewer main, the person doing the work shall submit to the City an executed Hold
Harmless and Waiver of Liability Statement on a form supplied by the City and a
License and Permit Bond in an amount not less than $10,000.00. Said bond shall
be obtained from and secured by a responsible surety bonding company authorized
to operate within the State, conditioned to indemnify and save the City
harmless against all losses or damages that may arise from or be occasioned by
the making of connections with the public sewer main, or excavations therefore,
or by carelessness, negligence, or unskillfulness in making the same.
96.09   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into public sewer mains shall be made by an approved contractor and in
accordance with the following:
1.   Connection of the building lateral into the public sewer main shall be
made at an existing wye branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If no existing, properly located wye branch is available, the
property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install a wye branch in the
public sewer main at the location specified by the City or use an approved
banded, saddle w/hub attached to the main. No building laterals will be
installed directly into any hole cut into the public sewer main. The invert of
the building lateral at the point of connection shall be at the same or a
higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint
shall be made, and the connection shall be made secure and watertight by
encasement in concrete or by some other method approved by the Inspector.
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the City.
At no time shall a building lateral be constructed so as to enter a manhole
unless special written permission is received from the City and then only in
accordance with any special conditions as may be required by the City.
2.   A separate and independent building lateral shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. The building
lateral from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building lateral, provided, however, that the minimum
size shall then be not less than six inches for the building sewer lateral. Any
multi-family or multi-use structure may utilize one building lateral sized
accordingly, but in no case shall it be less than six inches in diameter.
3.   An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact location of the tap
and lateral routing shall be filed with the City and attached to or recorded on
the permanent application form.
96.10   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
The installation of the building sewer and its connection to the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code, the current
edition of SUDAS as adopted by the City in
Chapter 163, the laws of the State, and other applicable rules and regulations
of the City. Old building laterals may be used in connection with new building
construction only when they are found, on examination and test by the City, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
96.11   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partially refilled for more than 24
hours after the building lateral is installed and connected with the sewer
system, or should the work be improperly done and not approved, the City shall
have the right to finish or correct the work, and the City may assess the costs
to the property owner. If the contractor is responsible for the uncompleted or
improperly completed work, said contractor must reimburse the City any and all
associated costs incurred in remedying the situation before the contractor will
be granted another installation/construction permit. If the property owner is
assessed, such assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as
general property taxes. Any such condition is hereby deemed to be a nuisance
and as such may be abated per the process as defined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.12   DEPTH REQUIREMENT.
Whenever possible, the building lateral shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the sewer shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost, and in all cases shall be a minimum
of 12 inches below the finished grade. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer main, sanitary
sewer carried by such building drain may be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building lateral. (See Section
96.16.)
96.13   STORMWATER.
No person shall make a connection of roof downspouts, interior and exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, garage floor drains, or other sources of
surface run-off or groundwater to a building lateral or building drain which in
turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
96.14   OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building lateral and associated appurtenances to the public sewer main shall be
borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the City from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building lateral. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner of the property connected to the public sewer system to keep in
good repair, operable, and free of any leaks the building lateral and
associated appurtenances whether located upon private property or in the public
right-of-way. When any building lateral and/or associated appurtenances become
defective and create a nuisance in violation of this code, the nuisance shall
be corrected at the property owner’s expense within 30 days after the date of
receipt of official notice from the City of such violation. If not made within
such time, the City shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
96.15   LIMITED RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERMIT REVOCATION.
All permits to connect with the public sewer shall be issued with the express
condition that the City may, at any time before the work is completed, revoke
and annul the same and no interested party shall have a right to claim damages
as a consequence of any such permit being revoked or annulled.
96.16   USE OF SEWAGE LIFT/SUMP PUMPS PROHIBITED.
No new construction shall be built below the usable level of the public
sanitary sewer system so as to require the installation and use of a sewage
lift/sump pump, without the express written consent of the Council.
96.17   PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC SEWER MAINS PROHIBITED.
The City will construct or contract for the construction of all public sewer
mains within an established public right-of-way except as pertains to approved
subdivision development. No private party shall otherwise construct any type of
sewer within these public right-of-ways. This does not include the approved
installation of any building lateral being attached to an already existing
public sewer main. The cost of all public sewer main construction will be borne
by the City except during the course of an approved subdivision development or
except when a property owner desires an extension of the existing public sewer
main in advance of the City’s projected construction date. The property owner
can request that the City proceed with this construction as soon as is
practical, with the cost to be borne by the property owner making the request.
The cost of all building laterals connecting to the public sewer main shall be
borne by the property owner.
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater                         97.06 Special Facilities
97.02 Prohibited Activities              97.07 Control Manholes
97.03 Specifically Prohibited Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.04 Powers of City                     97.09 Special Agreements
97.05 Waste Interceptors Required        97.10 Interference with Equipment
                                         Prohibited
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface
water, groundwater, pool water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewer or storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Inspector. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged upon the approval of the Inspector to a storm
sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this chapter.
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
97.03   SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the City that such wastes can jam either the sewers, sewage treatment process
or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The following substances are specifically prohibited:
1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, infectious or biological wastes, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not limited to,
cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public
sewer.
3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair, fleshing entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
   A.   Any waters or wastes having:
      (1)   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 parts per
million by weight; or
      (2)   Containing more than 300 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids; or
      (3)   Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the
average sewage flow of the sewage treatment plant shall be subject to the
review of the Inspector.
   B.   Where necessary, in the opinion of the City, the property owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to:
      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 250 parts per million by
weight; or
      (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 300 parts per million by weight; or
      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or
wastes.
   C.   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the City and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until said approvals are obtained in writing.
6.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150?.
7.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º and 150º F.
8.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of one and one-half
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City.
9.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
10.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive requirement to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the City for such materials.
11.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other tastes or
odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage
to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public agencies or
jurisdictions for such discharge to the receiving waters.
12.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the City in compliance
with applicable State or federal regulations.
13.   Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or a
chlorine demand of sufficient concentration or quantity to injure or interfere
with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to animals or humans, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters or the effluent of the sewage
treatment plant. The introduction of heavy metals and similar toxic substances
to the system shall be limited in accordance with current State and federal
pretreatment standards and effluent guidelines with respect to average and
maximum concentrations and quantities. In the absence of specific constituent
pretreatment standards, limits will be established by the City.
14.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
   A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
   B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
   C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
   D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs”
as defined herein.
15.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.04   POWERS OF CITY.
If any waters are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in Section
97.03 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the City may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the City may:
1.   Reject the wastes;
2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by the regularly listed sewer charges under the provisions
of
Chapter 100 of this Code of Ordinances.
If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
97.05   WASTE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amount, or any flammable wastes, sand, or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors of grease,
oils, sludge, and sand shall be maintained by the property owner, at his or her
expense, in continuously efficient operations at all times.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the property owner at such owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building
lateral carrying industrial wastes or which possess the properties enumerated
in Section
97.03 shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary
meters, flow control valves, and other appurtenances in the building lateral to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be continuously accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner, at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the
owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be obtained and
determined by the City or by a certified laboratory in accordance with the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building lateral is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by a certified laboratory utilizing customarily accepted methods
to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. (Normally, but not always,
B.O.D. and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of
all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.)
97.09   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any commercial or
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
commercial or industrial concern.
97.10   INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance.
or equipment which is part of the public sewage works. No person shall open or
enter any manhole of the sewer system except by authority of the City.
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required               98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required             98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate, or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
98.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.
No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 20,000 square feet.
CHAPTER 99
SERVICE METERING AND METER REQUIREMENTS
 
99.01 All Water Used to be Metered 99.06 Meter Accuracy Testing and Service
                                   Test Charge
99.02 Meter Locations              99.07 Metering Equipment Replacement
                                   Required
99.03 Meter Setting                99.08 Unauthorized Tampering
99.04 Cost of Repairs              99.09 Reading of Meters Required
99.05 Sizing of Meters             99.10 Second or Water-Only Meters Authorized
 
99.01   ALL WATER USED TO BE METERED.
All water shall pass through and shall be accurately measured through meters
furnished by the City and/or Iowa American Waterworks (IAW). The only
exceptions to this requirement will be fire suppression systems, authorized and
required on-site appliances (which may be connected to the public water mains
by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of the City
and/or IAW), and situations where there can be calculated a defined known
volume of water. In the case of fire sprinkler systems or on-site appliances,
no other connections can be incorporated in the piping supporting the system
and there shall be no valves except main control valves at the entrance to the
building which must be sealed open in the case of fire sprinkler systems or a
hydrant valve which must be left open in the case of on-site hydrants.† 6  (See
Chapter 159)
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: This chapter is applicable to those customers who are also
6 serviced by the Municipal Water System or to those customers who are not
  serviced by the Municipal Water System and who have elected to utilize metered
  billing per the provisions of this chapter.
99.02   METER LOCATIONS.
All meters shall be located as near as practicable to the point where the
building lateral first enters the premises, and the inlet side of the meter
base shall be no farther than a maximum of 12 inches from that point. All
meters shall be located so that they are easily and readily accessible to meter
readers and repairmen and protected from freezing and other potentially
damaging conditions, including strain imposed by adjacent plumbing, and shall
only be located within the particular premises which they directly serve. (In
multi-use buildings, meters may be grouped together for convenience in a
common, public use area). Any meter found to be in violation of this provision
shall be relocated at the expense of the property owner within 30 days after
receipt of notice to do so from the City. If relocation is not able to be done,
radio read equipment will be provided/installed by the City at the expense of
the property owner.
99.03   METER SETTING.
1.   The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for the
proper setting of the meter base including shut-off valves no more than six
inches distance from the meter, one on either side. Meter pits may be used only
upon approval of the City and shall be of a design and construction approved by
the City. Plumbing adjacent to the meter shall be supported mechanically by a
meter yoke or other approved means so that removal of the meter will not cause
the meter connections to be out of line or shift lengthwise.
2.   The City may, if necessary, require remote or data endpoint transmitters
to be placed wherever they may be necessary to facilitate reading. All new
construction and reconstruction will be required to have remote or data
endpoint capable equipment. This equipment will be supplied/installed by the
IAW or the City. All new, first-time meters and meters installed after a
reconnection shall be installed immediately upon the completion of the plumbing
rough-in inspection. Customers failing to install a meter within such time
frame will be charged the monthly “Contractor’s Fee” as shown in
Chapter 100 until such time as the meter is installed and inspected as required
herein.
99.04   COST OF REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter or outside meter reader is found to be inoperative, it
shall be replaced as soon as possible. If it is found that damage to the device
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer and/or
property owner, then the customer and/or property owner shall be liable for the
cost of repairs or replacement and said cost shall be added to the monthly bill
as an additional charge.
99.05   SIZING OF METERS.
Water meter sizes shall be determined solely by the City or IAW.
99.06   METER ACCURACY TESTING AND SERVICE TEST CHARGE.
Any customer may submit a written request to have a meter tested to verify its
accuracy at any time. There will be a service test charge added to the
customer’s next billing for this test (see
Chapter 100). Should the meter register more than two percent fast, the
customer shall be entitled to a credit adjustment on the next bill following
the testing based on the over registration of the meter computed on the number
of gallons or cubic feet consumed in the previous six-month period. Should the
meter register more than two percent slow, the customer shall be charged an
additional amount on the next bill following the testing based on the under
registration of the meter computed on the number of gallons consumed in the
previous six-month period.
99.07   METERING EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT REQUIRED.
All meters shall be replaced by the City or IAW on an as needed basis to be
determined by the City or IAW.
Any and all meters and remote readers shall be replaced immediately when they
cease to record accurately.
99.08   UNAUTHORIZED TAMPERING.
It is unlawful for any person, except the City or IAW, to disconnect, alter, or
move any meter, metering wire, or remote meter reading device, or to break any
seal wire of the City or IAW.
(In any prosecution with regards to tampering with any meter or any meter
appurtenances as described above, proof that tampering did occur in some
fashion, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time the registered customer utilizing that particular meter and associated
appurtenances, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the
person who tampered with the meter or associated appurtenances in violation of
this section.)
99.09   READING OF METERS REQUIRED.
In order to insure and maintain system accuracy, all meters shall be read at
least once per month by the City. When service is to be changed into another
customer’s name, or service is to be permanently discontinued, or in the normal
course of changes in occupancies (“moves”), the remote or data endpoint device
shall be read, compared, and adjusted or replaced as necessary.
99.10   SECOND OR WATER-ONLY METERS AUTHORIZED.
When requested, any customer may install and utilize one (1) or more additional
City supplied meters at any property location in accordance with all other
requirements of this Code and the following situation-specific requirements
where such installation is for the metering of water-only uses and where it can
be conclusively shown that any such water metered will not be discharged to or
entering the City’s sanitary sewer system in any way (i.e. lawn & garden
watering, “hot-water heating systems,” swimming pools, other exterior-only
uses, etc.):
1.   The customer must purchase the additional meter(s) from the City for the
purchase cost of the meter and there shall be an activation/installation/
deactivation fee per additional meter installed which shall be payable at the
time of application.
2.   Charges may be assessed against any property for failure to pay any amount
due and owing on said additional meter(s). (Ord.#622 12/1/03)
3.   Each property’s plumbing configuration shall be inspected by the City
prior to supplying and immediately following the installation of any additional
meter and not less than every six months thereafter, prior to the refund of any
consumer deposit in connection therewith, prior to the deactivation of any
additional meter account, and upon a change in ownership and/or occupancy, to
assure metering accuracy.
4.   Any water acquired and recorded through an additional meter which enters
the City’s sanitary sewer system shall be considered a violation of this Code
and may be prosecuted in any manner allowed for herein and/or the City may
immediately begin charging for sewer service on the additional meter account
(s).
5.   Prior to deactivating an additional meter account, the customer must
modify the property’s plumbing so that any and all water use is acquired and
recorded through a single metering point, the additional meter must be returned
to the City in good working order, and the property’s plumbing reconfiguration
must be inspected and approved by the City. (Ord. #600 8/19/02)
6.   The repair, upkeep, and replacement of any water-only meters installed are
the customer’s responsibility and shall abide by the above regulations.
(Section 99.10 – Ord._840 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
100.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 100.06 Bill Adjustment
100.02 Rate                           100.07 Bill Complaints
100.03 Customer Deposits Required     100.08 Charges Assessed and/or Service
                                      Termination for Nonpayment
100.04 Billing Procedures for Sewer   100.09 Authority to Render and Collect
Service                               Bills and System Accountability
100.05 Billing Procedures and Charges
for Special Services
 
100.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
Each customer shall pay for sewer service provided by the City based upon the
amount of water used as determined by meters provided for in
Chapter 99 of this Code of Ordinances, or based upon a flat rate as specified
below, unless specifically waived in writing by the City Council or as
specified herein. Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
100.02   RATE.
There shall be and there is hereby established a sewer service charge for the
use of and for the service supplied by the Municipal Sanitary Sewer Utility
based upon the amount of water used, flate rates, or excess discharges as
follows:
 
Charge Descriptors                     Sewer Service Charges
Regular metered charge                 $25.74 per user unit
Eligible senior monthly metered charge $23.04 per user unit
Depreciation and replacement reserve   $5.72 per user unit (included in base
                                       meter charge)
Monthly metered usage charge           $2.12/500 gallons (above first 500)
Non-metered monthly flat rates         $76.82 (flat rate)
                                       $59.05 (contractor rate)
Meter activation/Deactivation fee      $50.00 per additional meter installed
1.   “Seniors” means any residential customers of the Sanitary Sewer Utility,
65 years of age or older, that have registered for said discount at City Hall
prior to any billing date. (See definition of “eligible senior citizen” for
further clarification.) Any such user shall be charged the “Monthly Metered
Minimum Charge, Eligible Seniors Only” amount as spelled out above, provided
that such user elects to use “metered” billing. Any such user, who would
otherwise qualify, that elects not to use “metered” billing shall then be
charged the “Non-Metered Monthly Flat Rate, Seniors” amount as spelled out
above.
2.   “Eligible Senior Citizen” discount shall apply only to senior citizens
residing within the City and the dwelling unit, and not to rental units, rental
houses, rental apartments, laundry rooms/common areas, etc., that may be owned
but not occupied by a senior citizen. Senior citizens will not be eligible for
this discount if anyone other than a spouse or other senior citizen resides at
that service location for a period greater than 30 days. Senior citizens
seeking this discount must annually verify their eligibility by no later than
May 15. Eligibility will be verified through methods determined and approved by
the City Administrator as outlined in Section
95.01(11). Absent timely and appropriate verification as specified herein,
billing will be at the regular, non-discounted rate.
3.   Governmental and specifically designated “quasi-governmental” user units
will be charged for services at the City Council’s discretion.
4.   All “user units” or multiples thereof who are also connected to the
municipal water system shall be metered to define water consumption, upon which
sewer service charges are based. Any single-family residential “user unit” that
is not connected to the municipal water system and that elects NOT to utilize
metered billing for sewer services shall be billed the applicable “Non-Metered
Monthly Flat Rate” amount as spelled out above.
5.   All commercial, industrial, and governmental “user units” or multiples
thereof shall be metered under all circumstances. (Any such “user unit” that is
not metered as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter
(September 9, 1993) shall make arrangements for and shall be metered within 30
days from the receipt of a notice from the City to do so.
6.   Common areas, such as laundry rooms in apartments, etc., shall be
considered as single user units regardless of the number of users who use it.
7.   The billing period for each “user unit” shall be monthly.
8.   In no case shall the minimum service charge be less than that shown in the
rate chart in Section
100.02.
9.   In the event that multiple “user units” are served by a single meter, the
minimum monthly service charge per “user unit” shall be applied to each
connected “user unit” to determine the total minimum monthly service charges
applicable to the multiple use meter. If two or more users are serviced off of
one meter, they are to be granted the minimum number of gallons (500) times the
number of user units (i.e., 2 x 500 = 1,000).
10.   In the event that a property containing multiple “user units” is served
by a single meter, the plumbing shall be modified to provide a separate meter
for each “user unit” at such time as the property is sold or otherwise changes
ownership or control. Until such time as the plumbing is modified to comply
with this chapter, the billing will be administered as mentioned above with no
consideration for the number of occupied versus vacant units.
11.   The monthly billing for each “user unit” shall include both the minimum
charge and the metered usage charge as spelled out herein based upon the meter
reading, unless otherwise noted herein.
12.   All flat rate billings will continue in force until service is
permanently terminated. There will be no discontinuation in billing for such
things as vacations, temporary occupancies, etc. Metered billings only may be
discontinued for a period of time to accommodate vacations, vacancies,
temporary occupancies, etc. (similar to the provisions in Chapter 92) if a
request is confirmed with the Billing Clerk ahead of time, specific start and
stop dates are given, and inside/outside meter readings are obtained.
13.   The monthly billing method will automatically be changed to a flat rate
billing and will remain so until the situation is corrected for those “user
units” NOT connected to the Municipal Water Supply System who have elected to
use metered billing where individual private well debris has plugged the City’s
water meter three or more times during any six-month period.
14.   “Contractor’s fees” as shown herein shall be charged to all utility hook-
up applicants commencing upon the completion of the plumbing rough- in
inspection.
(Section 100.02 – Ord._853 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
100.03   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
Customer deposits, covering all services supplied by the City, shall be
required for each and every service provided to each and every user unit in
connection with new customers and of those who have an unacceptable credit
record or who have a prior record of failure to pay service charges rendered by
the City.
1.   Such deposits shall be as follows and shall be submitted prior to
supplying said services and/or issuing a building lateral installation/
connection permit:
Classification Amount
Classification                       Amount
Sewer/garbage (with meter)           $150.00
Sewer/garbage (without meter)        $150.00
Sewer only (with meter)              $100.00
Sewer only (without meter)           $100.00
Garbage only - Residential           $50.00
Sewer only (with meter) - Commercial $100.00
Deposits listed are MINIMUMS ONLY and are based on a maximum meter size of not
more than ¾”. Customers requiring larger or multiple meters will be required to
pay a proportionally larger deposit based on the size and number of meters.
 
2.   Customer deposits may be transferred from one location to another, or into
another person’s name, provided that the customer’s bill is paid in full and is
not delinquent in any way, and the customer deposit amount shall be adjusted
upward, if necessary, to reflect the current required amount as specified
herein and paid prior to said transfer.
3.   Customer deposits are required to guarantee payment for any customer-
related damages to any metering device and payment for any municipal service-
related charges. To this end, the customer deposit shall be credited and then
refunded, if appropriate, in the following manner: first to any metering device
damages; next to any garbage service-related charges; next to any sewer
utility-related charges; and the remainder thereafter may be refunded to the
customer.
4.   For those “Sewer Only” single-family residential customers who are on a
“metered billing” basis and request that the meter be removed from the
premises, then the customer deposit service status difference shall be
refunded. Otherwise, the meter will remain on the premises, the billing will be
adjusted accordingly to reflect the flat rate amount, and the customer deposit
shall not be refunded until such time as the meter is removed.
100.04   BILLING PROCEDURES FOR SEWER SERVICE.
1.   The charges aforesaid shall be billed monthly by such methods as shall be
adopted by the City Administrator subject to Council approval. Said billings
and the minimum monthly billings (and surcharges, if applicable) shall be
billed no later than the last day of each month and all bills for said services
shall be due and payable and received in the office of the Billing Clerk on or
before the 15th day of the month following the date of the billing and will be
considered delinquent and eligible for assessment if not paid in full by that
time. “On or before the 15th day” means on or before 5:00 p.m. on the close of
the normal business day if paying in the office or by drop box or 4:45 p.m. if
paying on-line on the 15th. If the 15th of the month falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or a holiday, then payment must be received no later than the close of
the next following business day. If any payment is not received in the office
of the Billing Clerk on or before the 15th day of the month following the date
of the billing, it shall be deemed delinquent, and a late charge shall be added
thereto in the amount of 10 percent. (Governmental units, sub-units, and
designated “quasi- governmental units will not be charged any penalties.) There
will be no compounding of collection charges (i.e., penalties on penalties).
Delinquent accounts may also have their water shut-off in accordance with Iowa
law and be charged for a water shut-off fee. If the total accumulated
collection charges and/or certified mailing charges reach or exceed $10.00,
these charges will be assessed as any other charges as provided for herein. The
Billing Clerk may waive the late charge mentioned above once per calendar year
per customer.
2.   Billings for those industrial wastewater load charges as shown in the
above table shall be done monthly in conjunction with the regular billing and
shall be calculated based on the usage recorded for that month adjusted for the
quantities calculated as determined by the City’s sampling. Any unpaid amount
covered by this paragraph shall be subject to the same procedures for
collection as specified for other types of service charges listed herein.
3.   Billing for contract “bulk disposal” shall be done as soon as possible
after service is provided.
4.   Billing to leased or rental properties may be either to the property owner
or to the tenant/renter, but the property owner shall ultimately be responsible
for any unpaid charges, and/or assessments.
5.   Residential customers of the Municipal Sanitary Sewer Utility, as defined,
who are not also customers of the Municipal Water System may elect to use or
change the billing method from flat rate to metered billing, or vice versa,
provided appropriate customer deposits are on file. If going from metered to
flat rate billing, a reading will be taken on the day requested. If the request
falls before the 15th of the month, then the final metered bill will be based
on usage only, and then that current month’s billing will reflect the non-
metered, monthly flat rate as applicable. If the request falls after the 15th
of the month, then the final metered bill will be based on the final usage
combined with the monthly minimum charges. If going from flat rate billing to
metered billing, the meter will be installed by the 15th of the month to be
reflected in that month’s billing. If the meter is installed after the 15th of
the month, then the customer will be billed the flat rate charge for the
current month and the metered billing will begin with the next month’s billing.
6.   If a customer deposit and request for service is filed with the Billing
Clerk on or before the 15th of any month, the billing shall start with that
month’s billing and if it is filed after the 15th of the month, the billing
will begin with the next month’s billing. If a person moves out of the City or
is no longer a customer of the sanitary sewer system on or before the 15th of
any month, such person shall not be charged a minimum service charge but shall
be charged for any actual usage of service.
7.   In the event that the City receives any returned checks from the bank for
lack of sufficient funds, the customer will have three days to pay for the
check and the NSF charges.
8.   Billing may be temporarily discontinued to accommodate vacations,
vacancies, etc., to those “metered” users if a request is confirmed with the
Billing Clerk ahead of time, specific start and stop dates are given, and
inside/outside meter readings are obtained.
9.   The bill format, structure, content, and wording will be determined by the
City Administrator. In addition to specifying any and all amounts due,
information contained on the bill must clearly indicate to the customer that
the bill serves as the customer’s only form of notice and that the customer
will receive only one other prior notice in the event that charges must be
assessed for nonpayment.
100.05   BILLING PROCEDURES AND CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.
Following is a listing of special service charges not associated with actual
water consumption:
Description Amount
Description                              Amount
Meter service test                       $50.00/test
Leak test                                $50.00/test
Meter damage charges                     Cost plus $50.00
NSF check charge                         $30.00
Building lateral and/or curb stop locate $50.00
Water shut-off fee                       $46.00 (or contractual rate with IAW)
Iowa Dept of Administrative Services     $7.00
(DAS) Collection Fee
(Section 100.05 – Ord._853 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
100.06   BILL ADJUSTMENT.
Adjustments to bills may be made only by the City Administrator or City Council
to take into account such occurrences as billing errors, meter errors,
incorrect readings, etc. Where metered billing is used and when all or a
portion of the metering system experiences some type of metering failure, the
following procedures shall be used for bill adjustments:
1.   When the water meter itself fails to properly record the usage, the next
billing, after discovery of the failure, will be based on the usage that may
have been recorded since the last reading or on an estimated amount based on
the average of the last 12 readings observed, whichever is higher.
2.   When only the remote reader fails to properly record the usage, the next
billing, after discovery of the failure, will be based on the actual reading
obtained from the water meter itself. In these instances when a bill is
incurred where it is more than twice the customer’s normal monthly bill payment
arrangements may be established whereby:
   A.   In addition to their current monthly bill, the amount of the “large
bill” above the normal monthly bill can be paid back over a period of months
equal to the amount of the “large bill” minus the normal monthly bill divided
by the normal monthly bill (i.e. (100- 25)/25=3 months), or;
   B.   In addition to their current monthly bill, an amount equal to 20% of
the “large bill” can be paid until such time as there is no outstanding amount
due.
Failure to make payment in full each month under one of the above-referenced
programs will automatically make the full amount due and owing with the next
bill issued following the missed or partial payment.
100.07   BILL COMPLAINTS.
Questions and/or complaints about the bills will first be handled or processed
through the Billing Clerk. If satisfaction is not achieved, an appeal may then
be made, in writing, to the City Administrator for a decision on the matter.
After this decision, an appeal may then be made, in writing, to the City
Council, whose decision shall be final.
100.08   CHARGES ASSESSED AND/OR SERVICE TERMINATION FOR NONPAYMENT.
The Billing Clerk shall notify each sewer service customer classified as the
“property owner” and “sewer-only” tenants and the respective property owner,
whose sewer service bill, or any portion thereof, is past due, that any unpaid
sewer service charges will be certified as delinquent to the Scott County
Auditor by the City, assessed, and act as a lien against the property and hence
collected as property taxes, unless the total outstanding sewer service charges
and other related charges are paid in full and received in the office of the
Billing Clerk by the close of business on or before the date specified in the
notice. (For the purpose of this section, “date of notice” shall be the date
that the notice is dated.) If any due date above falls on a holiday, Saturday,
or Sunday, the payment must be received no later than the close of the next
following business day.) The above stated notice will be the sewer utility
bill. If past due sewer charges and/or related charges are not paid in full 30
days after the billing date on the utility bill, that amount will be assessed.
A separate notice will be sent to the property owner of past due tenant
accounts by regular mail on the same day as the above-mentioned utility bill
informing them of the past due amount and the assessment proceedings. Pursuant
to the provisions allowed within Section 476.20(1)(b) of the Code of Iowa, as
amended, in addition to the assessment provisions contained herein, or in lieu
thereof, the City may cause to have a property’s water service terminated for
nonpayment of charges after due notice is provided.
100.09   AUTHORITY TO RENDER AND COLLECT BILLS AND SYSTEM ACCOUNTABILITY.
1.   It is hereby made the duty of the City Administrator to render bills for
sewer service and all other charges in connection therewith and to collect all
monies due therefrom.
2.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewer system
shall be paid to and held by the City separate and apart from all other funds
of the City. All of said sums and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of said system as may be delivered to the City, shall be deposited in
a separate fund designated the “Sewer Revenue Fund.” The City shall administer
said fund in every respect in the manner provided by the Code of Iowa and all
other laws pertaining thereto, except that all such revenues collected shall
remain a permanent part of this fund and shall not be transferred to any other
fund except upon specific written approval of the City Council.
3.   The City shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper
records, books, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be
made of all transactions relative to the sewer system, and, at regular annual
intervals, the Council shall cause to be made an audit, by an independent
auditing firm or the State of Iowa, of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewer system. The City shall be required annually to
prepare a budget of the sanitary sewer system to show the required revenues and
expenses. If necessary, sewer service charges will be adjusted to produce
adequate income to retire the indebtedness; meet operation, maintenance, and
replacement needs; and required reserves.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.02 Definitions                       105.09 Open Dumping
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required and    105.10 Waste Storage Containers
Nuisance Conditions
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.11 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Prohibited           105.12 Public Sanitary Landfills
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.13 Presumption of Liability in
                                         Enforcement
105.07 Littering Prohibited
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from
all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing
in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in any
premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
8.   “Processing facility” means any incinerator, baler, shredder, or similar
facility or process employed to reduce the volume of or change the
characteristics of solid waste prior to final disposal.
9.   “Property served” means any property which is being used or occupied and
is eligible to receive refuse collection and disposal service as provided
herein.
10.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
11.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-
family dwelling up to and including five separate dwelling units.
12.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
13.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
14.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
15.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
16.   “Scavenging” means the collecting, picking up, or gathering of discarded
material no longer of value for its original purpose, but which has value if
reclaimed.
17.   “Single-family dwelling” means a structure containing one dwelling unit
only.
18.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of
Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
   B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
   C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
   D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
   E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
   F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A of
the Code of Iowa.
   G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
      (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
      (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing to
ensure production is not interrupted.
19.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
20.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED AND NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse
accumulating on the owner’s premises. The keeping of garbage in containers
other than containers prescribed by this chapter or the keeping upon premises
of garbage or rubbish which is allowed to become offensive and noisome shall
constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 50. (The fact that garbage, refuse, or other waste remains on any
premises in the City in violation of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence
that the property owner of such premises is responsible for the violation).
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(567 IAC 23.2 and 100.2)
1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any
structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(567 IAC 23.2[3] “a”)
2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at
a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance
with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3] “b”)
3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3] “c”)
4.   Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises. However, the burning of landscape waste produced
in clearing, grubbing, and construction operations shall be limited to areas
located at least one-fourth mile from any building inhabited by other than the
landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used
to ignite landscape waste.
(567 IAC 23.2[3] “d”)
5.   Outdoor Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation,
and ceremonies (including such as the American Legion Flag Retirement),
contained within commercially produced, outdoor fireplaces, wood burning
stoves, barbecue grills, outdoor fire pits/rings, chimineas, and other such
devices intended for such purposes may be used. Commercially produced,
combustible wood products (logs, chips, etc.) sold and intended solely for the
purpose of use in such fireplaces, wood burning stoves, fire pits/rings,
chimineas, etc., may be used.
6.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training
of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3] “g”)
7.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make an application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[2])
8.   Rubber tires, chemicals, furniture, carpeting, household appliances, vinyl
products (such as flooring or siding), trade waste, garbage, rubbish,
residential waste, railroad ties, and other structural materials shall not be
burned.
9.   Use of Accelerants Prohibited. With the exception of the use of
commercially produced and available “charcoal lighter fluid,” the use of any
accelerant in connection with any listed permitted open burning activity is
prohibited. The term “accelerant” as used in this section means any manmade,
processed liquid or material used for the purpose of artificially increasing
the natural burn rate of any material, (i.e., gasoline, diesel fuel, etc.).
10.   Unattended Fires Prohibited. At least one adult shall visually monitor
and must be physically present in the immediate vicinity of any listed
permitted open burning activity. There must be a sustainable water source
present and/or another means readily available for extinguishing the fire until
such fire is completely extinguished. In remote areas where an extinguishment
source or other extinguishment method is not readily available, an adult shall
be present at all times with a viable means of communication for alerting
emergency services whenever a fire is present.
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid
waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or
placed in acceptable containers and set out for collection.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13[2] and 400 IAC 27.14[2])
105.09   OPEN DUMPING.
No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of any
solid waste at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the
Directors of the State Department of Natural Resources unless the person has
been granted a permit by the State Department of Natural Resources which allows
the dumping or depositing of solid waste on land owned or leased by the person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.307)
105.10   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers capable of holding
all refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times
of successive collection. The owner of any multiple dwelling shall furnish or
require the tenants to furnish proper garbage containers.
1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the
following specifications:
   A.   Container Specifications. Unless otherwise waived by resolution of the
Council, the only waste storage containers to be used for collection purposes
shall be those as approved and provided by the City. The City shall deliver to
every dwelling unit one container (roll cart) for waste storage and collection
and one container (roll cart) for recycling storage and collection. There shall
be a $10.00 service and processing charge for any permitted change in container
size after an initial 60-day trial period. There shall be no such charge during
the 60-day trial period immediately following the initial delivery of the carts
to the dwelling unit.
   B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premises, where refuse accumulates and where its storage
in portable containers as required above is impractical, shall maintain metal
bulk storage receptacles of sufficient size and number with lids or covers.
   C.   Residential Yard Waste. Residential yard waste shall be collected as
specified and approved by the City and/or contractor. Only those types and
styles of yard waste collection containers (biodegradable-photodegradable
polyethylene bags, paper bags, etc.) and/or banding devices for shrubbery/
brush, or a combination of the above, as designated by the City and/or
contractor, shall be used for the collection of yard waste.
2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored
upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be
stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
refuse awaiting collection shall be placed out-of-doors at a point as close as
possible to the curb line or driving surface edge by the owner or occupant of
the premises served. Containers or other wastes placed at the curb line or
driving surface edge shall not be so placed more than 12 hours in advance of
the regularly scheduled collection day and shall be promptly removed from the
curb line following collection.
4.   Nonconforming Containers and Extraneous Waste. Only those containers as
specified and approved by the City shall be placed at the street’s edge for the
collection and disposal of waste and recyclables. Unless otherwise approved by
the City, any waste, recyclables, or other materials not placed within approved
containers shall not be collected and shall be deemed a nuisance and may be
immediately abated as provided for in this code.
105.11   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers
not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such
containers.
2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3.   Unlawful Disposal. Dispose of refuse at any facility or location which is
not an approved sanitary disposal project.
4.   Scavenging. Scavenge (as defined herein) materials from any premises. This
does not include the collection of cans or bottles which are eligible to be
refunded under Iowa law, provided that the cans or bottles are not scavenged
from within solid waste storage containers.
5.   Unlawful Collection. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing, or disposing of refuse within the City without a license therefore
issued by the City.
6.   Burn Barrels. Burn anything in any barrel, device, or enclosure other than
such burning, or the use of commercial burning devices approved by this Code or
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, or the supervised burning of official
documents or records which are required by law to be destroyed by burning or
mutilation.
105.12   PUBLIC SANITARY LANDFILLS DESIGNATED.
Solid waste generated or produced within the City shall be disposed of at a
processing facility approved by the City and by the Director. Such processing
facilities are designated as official “public sanitary landfills.”
105.13   PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY IN ENFORCEMENT.
In addition to the provisions contained within Section
105.07 (Littering Prohibited) and Section
1.08 (Presumption of Liability), the owner of any vehicle which is positively
identified at the scene of and involved in an incident of open or illegal
dumping of solid waste, or the owner (as identified by the presence of
reasonably conclusive evidence discovered amongst any illegally dumped solid
waste) shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced
and shall be subject to any penalties or other remedial action as set forth
herein. (It is the intent of this section to effect those provisions of the
Code of Iowa enumerated in Sections 455B.361 through 455B.364, as amended).
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.06 Collector’s License
106.03 Loading                 106.07 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.08 Lien for Nonpayment
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
The collection of solid waste within the City shall be only by collectors
licensed by the City.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or refuse containing such materials shall be
leakproof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair. Vehicles shall not exceed 25 cubic yards when making pickups in
residential areas. Larger units may be used in commercial and industrial areas.
Vehicles shall also be equipped with rotating yellow lights or flashing lights
and shall have said lights in operation when pickups are being made.
106.03   LOADING.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid
waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss
of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each
week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as frequently
as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner
of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
106.06   COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing,
or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that person within the
City without first obtaining from the City and annual license in accordance
with the following:
1.   Application. Application for a Solid Waste Collector’s License shall be
made to the City and provide the following:
   A.   Name and Address. The full name and address of the applicant, and if a
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
   B.   Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type of
collection and transportation equipment to be used.
   C.   Collection Program. A complete description of the frequency, routes,
and method of collection and transportation to be used.
   D.   Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of disposal
or processing facilities to be used.
2.   Insurance. No collector’s license shall be issued until and unless the
applicant has submitted to the City, in addition to all of the other
requirements as set forth herein, a certificate of insurance indicating that
the applicant has not less than $1,000,000 in public liability insurance
covering all aspects of their operations within the City, and such certificate
shall further indicate that the City is an “additional insured” under this
policy and that the insurer will, unconditionally and without exception, notify
the City no less than 30 days prior to the policy’s expiration and/or
cancellation date.
3.   License Fee. A license fee in the amount of $100.00.
4.   License Issued. If the City, upon investigation, finds the application to
be in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport, process,
or dispose of refuse without hazard to the public health or damage to the
environment and in conformity with these laws and ordinances, the requested
license shall be issued for a period of one year from the approval date.
5.   Licenses Denied; Appeal. If the City refuses to issue a requested license,
the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for such refusal
and of the applicant’s right of appeal to the Council. The Council shall
consider any appeals at its next regular meeting and may affirm, reverse, or
modify the determination.
6.   License Renewal. The annual license may be renewed simply upon payment of
the required $100.00 license fee if operated in substantially the same manner
as provided in the original application and by providing the City with a
current listing of vehicles, equipment and facilities in use.
7.   Owner May Transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent
the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned,
occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly in
an approved sanitary disposal project.
8.   Grading or Excavation Excepted. No collector’s license or permit is
required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from
grading or excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed
in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that
none of the material being transported spills upon any public right-of-way.
9.   License Not Transferable. No license authorized by this chapter may be
transferred to another person.
(Section 106.06 – Ord._854 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
106.07   COLLECTION FEES.
1.   All residential premises located within the corporate limits of this City
shall be serviced only by licensed garbage and trash collection contractors
designated by the Council.
2.   It is hereby found and determined that the periodic collection of garbage
from all places in the City benefits all occupants of places and premises in
the City, and such occupants or persons in possession, charge, or control of
any place in or from which garbage is created, accumulated, or produced are
liable for and shall pay the garbage collection fees established below.
3.   Garbage collection service for residential premises is provided by the
City and it shall be mandatory for all occupants or persons in possession,
charge, or control of residential places and premises in the City to use the
City’s designated collection service unless such requirements (mandatory
collection and payment of fees) are otherwise specifically waived by resolution
of the Council. Said waiver request must be submitted in writing and may only
be submitted and considered from residential premises consisting of four or
more units that can verify that they will be utilizing the services of a City-
licensed contractor.
4.   In consideration for the collection and disposal services provided to the
residential premises located in the City, the following rates shall apply:
   A.   Regular residential rate:   $18.00/month
   B.   Senior citizens† 7 :   $17.00/month
   C.   Commercial establishment using residential services (without
dumpster)   $18.00/month
5.   The above-listed charges are calculated on a once per week pickup basis.
Any other number of pickups per week will be billed according to the above-
listed rates times the number of weekly pickups.
6.   Billing to multi-family residential premises and/or mixed occupancy
(commercial/residential) premises, at the option of the property owner, may be
either to the individual residential tenants separately or to the property
owner collectively. If the property owner elects to receive the billing, it
will be calculated by multiplying the number of tenants times the regular
residential rate as spelled out. If the property owner elects to use a
commercial container (dumpster), the property owner will be responsible for any
additional charges charged by the contractor and said charges will be
negotiated between the property owner and contractor and billed to and
collected by the contractor.
7.   In mixed occupancy (commercial/residential) premises, the commercial
occupants are prohibited from using the residential collection services
enumerated herein.
8.   Customer Deposits. Customer deposits, covering these services supplied by
the City, shall be required as provided in Section
100.03 of this Code.
9.   If a tenant fails to pay their deposit and/or garbage bill for two months,
the delinquent charges will be billed to the property owner and any additional
charges from that point forward will be billed to the property owner and will
not be changed back to the tenant until the deposit and/or bill has been paid
in full.
10.   If a residential service has sewer billed to the premises, the garbage
charge cannot be billed separately.
(Section 106.07 – Ord._854 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: See Section
7 95.01(11) for the definition of “eligible senior citizen” and Section
  100.02 for the applicable conditions and requirements to be eligible for this
  billing status.
106.08   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
100.08 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served, and any
lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted            110.15 Franchise Fee Exemptions
110.02 Rights and Privileges        110.16 Franchise Fee Collection
110.03 Pipes and Mains              110.17 City Responsible
110.04 Construction and Maintenance 110.18 Franchise Fee Modified
110.05 Excavation                   110.19 Franchise Fee Indemnify
110.06 Utility Easement             110.20 Franchise Fee Remit
110.07 Relocation Not Required      110.21 Franchise Fee Cost
110.08 Relocation Reimbursement     110.22 Franchise Fee Reimbursement
110.09 Indemnification              110.23 Obligation to Collect and Remit Fee
                                    Modified
110.10 Information                  110.24 Management Fees
110.11 Applicable Regulations       110.25 Termination
110.12 Term of Franchise            110.26 Validity
110.13 Police Regulations           110.27 Assignment
110.14 Franchise Fee
 
110.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City of
LeClaire, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under, and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, and
public places to serve customers within and without the City and to furnish and
sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of this
franchise, the Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of
which is subject to City Council approval upon application by the Company. This
franchise shall be effective for a 25-year period from and after the effective
date of this ordinance.† 8
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 767, adopting a natural gas franchise for the
8 City, was passed and adopted on December 16, 2013. Voters approved the franchise
  at an election held on December 18, 2023.
110.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa 2011, or as subsequently amended
or changed.
110.03   PIPES AND MAINS.
Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the purpose
of laying, relaying, repairing, or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and
other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not to
unreasonably interfere with the construction of any water pipes, drain, or
sewer or the flow of water therefrom, which have been or may hereafter be
located by authority of the City.
110.04   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements (whether
titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in accordance
with Iowa law including Company’s tariff on file with and made effective by the
Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff”), at its cost and
expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over,
or under any public street or alley in the City in such a manner as the City
may reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction
reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the street or alley. If the City has
a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley, or public improvements or
an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of the
Company installations, the City shall select said alternative route, or
construction method. The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking
the right-of-way for City projects that require the Company to relocate Company
facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the Company,
copies of its relocation plan and profile and cross-section drawings. If tree
removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are
necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City, at its
own cost, shall be responsible for said removals. If the timing of the tree
removals does not coincide with the Company facilities relocation schedule and
Company must remove trees that are included in the City’s portion of the
project, the City shall either remove the trees, at its cost, or reimburse the
Company for the expenses incurred to remove said trees. If project funds from a
source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility
facilities, the City shall attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the
Company to compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
110.05   EXCAVATION.
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation of gas pipes, conduits, or apparatus, Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring it to the condition as existed immediately prior to excavation.
Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current City
Code regarding its depth and composition. The Company shall not be required to
restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent
to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously
existing condition or to a condition exceeding its previously existing
condition to the extent any alterations are required for the City to comply
with City, State, or federal rules, regulations, or laws. When excavations are
made by the Company, its agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors,
whether on public or private property, the Company shall restore the ground
involved in the excavation to a level, compacted condition equivalent to its
pre­excavation condition in order to avoid the creation of groundwater drainage
problems. To the extent that the Company is notified by the City of problems
resulting from excavations as contemplated by this section, the Company will
take prompt, commercially reasonable action to investigate, and if necessary,
to remedy such problems and to notify the City of such remedial action.
110.06   UTILITY EASEMENT.
Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-way shall
not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City
abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, or public ground where the
Company has facilities in the vicinity, the City shall provide Company with not
less than 60 days advance notice of the City’s proposed action and, upon
request, grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future
facilities and activities. If the City fails to grant the Company a utility
easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley, or public ground, the City shall, at its cost and expense, obtain
easements for existing Company facilities.
110.07   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense, Company
facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at Company
expense at the direction of the City at any time during the previous 10 years.
110.08   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required by Sections
110.03,
110.04,
110.05,
110.06, and
110.07 of this chapter, if the City orders or requests the Company to relocate
its existing facilities or equipment in order to directly or indirectly
facilitate the project of a commercial or private developer or other non-public
entity, City shall reimburse or the City shall require the developer or non-
public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a
precondition to relocation. The Company shall not be required to relocate in
order to facilitate such private project at its expense.
110.09   INDEMNIFICATION.
The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the Company’s
negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent
arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.10   INFORMATION.
Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in City right-of-way, including documents, maps,
and other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”).
The Company and City recognize the information may, in whole or part, be
considered a confidential record under State or federal law or both. Therefore,
the City shall not release any information without prior consent of the Company
and shall return the information to Company upon request. City recognizes that
Company claims the information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise
protected from public disclosure by State or federal law on other grounds and
agrees to retain the information in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City
agrees that no documents, maps, or information provided to the City by the
Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such
documents or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical
Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or
Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended
from time to time.
110.11   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the
system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board or its successors and Iowa law.
110.12   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in the
quantity and quality consistent and in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board the Company’s tariff made effective by
the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and Iowa law.
110.13   POLICE REGULATIONS.
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by
the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company.
110.14   FRANCHISE FEE.
A franchise fee is imposed upon, and shall be collected from, the natural gas
customers of the Company receiving service pursuant to the tariff and located
within the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be imposed
upon the gross receipts, minus uncollectible accounts, derived from the sale of
natural gas and distribution service pursuant to the tariff. City imposes the
franchise fee upon the following revenue classes:
1.   Residential customers    zero percent.
2.   Non-residential customers    zero percent.
3.   Transportation customers    zero percent.
110.15   FRANCHISE FEE EXEMPTIONS.
The City may, as allowed by Iowa law, exempt customer classes of sales from
imposition of the franchise fee, or modify, decrease, or eliminate the
franchise fee. The City reserves the right to cancel any or all the franchise
fee exemptions and also reserves the right to grant exemptions to customer
classes in compliance with Iowa law and Section
110.17 of this chapter. The City does therefore exempt the customer classes in
Section
110.14 from paying franchise fees.
1.   Customer classes exempted by the City at time of imposing a franchise fee
percentage greater than zero percent.
110.16   FRANCHISE FEE COLLECTION.
The City recognizes the administrative burden collecting franchise fees imposes
upon the Company and the Company requires lead time to commence collecting said
franchise fees. The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or
before the first Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90
days of receipt of information required of the City to implement the franchise
fee, including the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to, or
exempted from City imposed franchise fee. The City shall provide the
information and data required in a form and format acceptable to the Company.
The Company will, if requested by the City, provide the City with a list of
premises considered by the Company to be within the corporate limits of the
City.
110.17   CITY RESPONSIBLE.
The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes subject
to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The City shall be
solely responsible for notifying Company of its corporate limits, including,
over time, annexations, or other alterations thereto, and customer classes that
it wishes to subject to, or to the extent permitted by law, exempt from paying
the franchise fee. The City shall provide to the Company, by certified mail,
copies of annexation ordinances in a timely manner to ensure appropriate
franchise fee collection from customers within the corporate limits of the
City. The Company shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from
customers in annexed areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided
to the Company by certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting
franchise fees in the annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving
annexation ordinances from the City.
110.18   FRANCHISE FEE MODIFIED.
The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in any
24-month period. Any such ordinance exempting classes of customers, increasing,
decreasing, modifying, or eliminating the franchise fee shall become effective,
and billings reflecting the change shall commence on an agreed upon date which
is not less than 60 days following written notice to the Company by certified
mail. The Company shall not be required to implement such new ordinance unless
and until it determines that it has received appropriate official documentation
of final action by the Council.
110.19   FRANCHISE FEE INDEMNIFY.
The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature arising out of
or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise fee. In addition,
the Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise fees from any customer
originally or subsequently identified, or incorrectly identified, by the City
as being subject to the franchise fee or being subject to a different level of
franchise fees or being exempt from the imposition of franchise fees.
110.20   FRANCHISE FEE REMIT.
The Company shall remit franchise fee revenues to the City no more frequently
than on or before the last business day of the month following each quarter as
follows.
1.   January, February, and March;
2.   April, May, and June;
3.   July, August, and September, and
4.   October, November, and December.
MidAmerican shall provide City with notice at least 30 days in advance of any
changes made in this collection schedule, including any alterations in the
calendar quarters or any other changes in the remittance periods.
110.21   FRANCHISE FEE COST.
The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee administration are not
charged directly to the City and agrees it shall, if required by the Company,
reimburse the Company for any initial or ongoing costs incurred by the Company
in collecting franchise fees that Company, in its sole opinion, deems to be in
excess of typical costs of franchise fee administration.
110.22   FRANCHISE FEE REIMBURSEMENT.
The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or refund
any franchise fees that have been collected from City customers and remitted to
the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information
in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is
required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating any
franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.23   OBLIGATION TO COLLECT AND REMIT FEE MODIFIED.
The obligation to collect and remit the fee imposed by this ordinance is
modified or repealed if:
1.   Any other person is authorized to sell natural gas at retail to City
consumers and the City imposes a franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero
or a lesser rate than provided in this chapter, in which case the obligation of
Company to collect and remit franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the
lesser rate;
2.   The City adds additional territory by annexation or consolidation and is
unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon all persons selling
natural gas at retail to consumers within the additional territory, in which
case the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company in the
additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee being
paid by any other retail seller of natural gas within the City; or
3.   Legislation is enacted by the Iowa General Assembly or the Supreme Court
of Iowa issues a final ruling regarding franchise fees or the Iowa Utilities
Board issues a final nonappealable order (collectively, “final franchise fee
action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the ability of the City to impose
a franchise fee or the ability of Company to collect from City customers and
remit franchise fees to City. Within 60 days of final franchise fee action, the
City shall notify Company and the parties shall meet to determine whether this
ordinance can be revised, and, if so, how to revise the franchise fee on a
continuing basis to meet revised legal requirements. After final franchise fee
action and until passage by the City of revisions to the franchise fee
ordinance, Company may temporarily discontinue collection and remittance of the
franchise fee if, in its sole opinion, it believes it is required to do so in
order to comply with revised legal requirements.
4.   The other provisions of this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding,
the Company shall be completely relieved of its obligation to collect and remit
to the City the franchise fee as, effective as the date specified below, with
no liability therefor under each of any of the following circumstances as
determined to exist in the sole discretion of Company:
   A.   Any of the imposition, collection, or remittance of a franchise fee is
ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of
such ruling or as may be specified by that Court.
   B.   The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation making imposition,
collection, or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful, effective as of the date
lawfully specified by the General Assembly.
   C.   The Iowa Utilities Board, or its successor agency, denies the Company
the right to impose, collect, or remit a franchise fee provided such denial is
affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of the final
agency order from which the appeal is taken.
110.24   MANAGEMENT FEES.
Upon implementation of a franchise fee the City shall not, pursuant to Chapter
480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or charge Company right-of-way management
fees for permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation,
pavement cutting, or inspections of Company work sites and projects or related
matters.
110.25   TERMINATION.
Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a shorter or longer period for
cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching
party may terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in
breach of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal
law. A party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the
alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other
party.
110.26   VALIDITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
110.27   ASSIGNMENT.
This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law
and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company with
an original signed and sealed copy of this chapter within 10 days of its final
passage. The Company shall, within 30 days after the Council approval of this
chapter, file in the office of the Clerk of the City, its acceptance in writing
of all the terms and provisions of this chapter. Following Council approval,
this chapter shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The
effective date of this chapter shall be the date of publication. In the event
that MidAmerican Energy Company does not file its written acceptance of this
chapter within 30 days after its approval by the Council, this ordinance shall
be void and of no effect.
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted         111.10 Applicable Regulations
111.02 Rights and Privileges     111.11 Term of Franchise
111.03 Placement of Appliances   111.12 Police Regulations
111.04 Relocation                111.13 Assignment
111.05 Utility Easement          111.14 Insurance Coverage
111.06 Excavation                111.15 Nonexclusive
111.07 Franchise Fee             111.16 Termination
111.08 Pole Attachment Agreement 111.17 Validity
111.09 Indemnification
 
111.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
hereinafter called the “Company,” and its successors and assigns, the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City of
LeClaire, Iowa, hereinafter called the “City,” a system for the transmission
and distribution of electric energy along, under, over, and upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, and public places to serve customers within and without the
City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the City and its inhabitants.
For the term of this franchise, the Company is granted the right of eminent
domain, the exercise of which is subject to Council approval upon application
by the Company. This franchise shall be effective for a 20-year period from and
after the effective date of this ordinance, provided however that there may be
a re-evaluation option prior to the end of year 10 with the opportunity for
both parties to request amendments. If such a request to reevaluate or amend
the ordinance is made and the parties are unable to agree to amend the
ordinance within 60 days, then either party may terminate this franchise
agreement at the end of year 10. If neither party requests such reevaluation by
means of a written notice to the other party at least 60 days prior to the
expiration of year 10, this franchise will continue without change.† 9
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 698, adopting an electric franchise for the
9 City, was passed and adopted on February 2, 2009. Voters approved the franchise
  at an election held on February 3, 2009.
111.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, 2007, or as subsequently
amended or changed, and to the extent consistent with same, and all lawful
ordinances of the City.
111.03   PLACEMENT OF APPLIANCES.
The Company shall have the right to erect, at its sole expense, all necessary
poles and to place thereon the necessary wires, fixtures, and accessories as
well as excavate and bury conductors for the distribution of electric energy in
and through the City, but all said conduits and poles shall be placed as not to
interfere with existing utilities or City-owned structures, which City-owned
structures have been or may hereafter be located by authority of the City and/
or as allowed by State and federal utility regulation, and to the extent
consistent with the foregoing City ordinances. The Company shall secure permits
from the City as necessary prior to placing utilities in the right-of-way. The
Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove, at Company expense, any
tree extending into any street, alley, or public grounds to maintain electric
reliability, safety, to restore utility service, and to prevent limbs,
branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and facilities of the
Company. The pruning of trees shall be done to current nationally accepted
safety and utility industry standards, ANSI A300-2001, American National
Standard for Tree Care Operations, and ANSI Z133-2006 Pruning, Repairing,
Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush Safety Requirements, or
subsequent revisions to these standards, and City ordinances regarding the
trimming of trees and the protection of its facilities upon public grounds. The
removal of trees or pruning in public grounds other than public right-of-ways,
excluding emergency and outage situations, shall require prior approval from
the City.
111.04   RELOCATION.
The Company shall, at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its
installations in, on, over, or under any public street or alley in the City in
such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of
facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the
street or alley or any public improvement of, in, or about any such street or
alley, or reasonably promoting the efficient operation of any such improvement.
The Company will notify the City if project funds from a source other than the
City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities. The City
shall attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to
compensate the Company for the costs of relocation. Annually, during the first
quarter of each year, the parties hereto shall cause their respective
representatives to meet to discuss each party’s planned construction projects
for the next five years of infrastructure construction, replacement,
enhancements, abandonments, or maintenance within the City. Following the
procedures and standards applicable to such projects, the parties will develop
plans to facilitate the placing of overhead electric distribution facilities
underground in conjunction with City projects in the public right-of-ways or in
strategic areas of the City. Any conversion of overhead electric distribution
facilities to underground electric distribution facilities shall comply with
the Iowa Utilities Board rules and regulations, Company tariffs applicable to
City required conversions of overhead facilities to underground facilities, the
National Electric Code and the National Electric Safety Codes as adopted by the
Iowa Utilities Board. The Company shall not be responsible for any costs
incurred by customers to convert or to upgrade customer wiring due to a change
to the electric distribution system in the City. The City and the Company
recognize that customers outside of the conversion project area may be impacted
financially or may be required, at their expense, to modify customer-owned
electric facilities as a result of any electric distribution conversion work.
The Company shall not be liable for any expenses incurred by any customer(s)
resulting from rewiring costs or as a result of the inability of a customer(s)
to receive electricity from an underground electric distribution system. This
includes customers outside the conversion project area affected by the electric
distribution system conversion project. The City and the Company recognize that
the subsoil conditions may prevent converting overhead facilities to
underground facilities.
111.05   UTILITY EASEMENT.
Prior to the City abandoning any street, avenue, alley, or public ground where
the Company has electric facilities located, the City shall grant the Company a
utility easement for said facilities.
111.06   EXCAVATION.
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the excavation of conduits or the erection of poles and wires or other
appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets,
and shall replace the surface, restoring the original condition in accordance
with City ordinances. The Company agrees that for a period of 24 months
following the closing of a Company trench or excavation, the Company shall be
responsible to make repairs required as a result of settling of said trench or
excavation. Trenches that are jointly occupied by the Company and other
entities shall be repaired by the Company. MidAmerican shall not be responsible
for any repair or restoration of trenches or excavations made by other entities
in which MidAmerican is not a participant.
111.07   FRANCHISE FEE.
The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee on the retail customers
of the Company located within the corporate limits of the City pursuant to Code
of Iowa. The franchise fee shall only be imposed following adoption of an
ordinance authorizing said franchise fee. The City will work with the Company
to develop a methodology and timeline to implement the franchise fee. The
established fee shall not exceed an amount greater than five percent of the
gross receipts, less uncollectible amounts, derived by the Company from the
transmission, distribution, or sale of electricity to retail customers located
within the corporate limits of the City. The funds collected shall be remitted
quarterly to the office of the Clerk. Any ordinance establishing a franchise
fee shall be adopted no later than March 15th of any year, with a start date of
July 1.
111.08   POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT.
The City reserves the right, upon written notice to the Company, to place upon
Company poles without charge, within the City limits, wire, and pole fixtures
for municipal purposes, excluding the sale, transmission, or delivery of
electrical energy. Prior to the installation of any City-owned equipment on the
Company-owned distribution system, the City will enter into a pole attachment
agreement with the Company. The City shall reimburse the Company for any
modifications required to accommodate the City equipment. Free access to the
Company facilities shall not be allowed or continued for any communications or
information or data transmittal systems owned or leased by the City for which
subscribers pay a fee. In the event that a clearance, guying, grounding or
other system design or construction problem (hereafter “problems”) is
identified by the Company, or the Iowa Utilities Board or its inspectors, and
said problem is a result of City facilities, the City shall correct the problem
within the time limits of the Iowa Utilities Board or the Company. If the City
fails to correct the problem(s), the Company is authorized to remove the City
facilities with no liability to City for the loss of system integrity. The City
shall reimburse the Company for its actual costs and expenses of removing such
problems.
111.09   INDEMNIFICATION.
The Company shall defend, indemnify, and save harmless the City from any and
all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, including attorney’s
fees and other such defense costs, on account of injury or damage to any person
or property, caused or occasioned, in whole or in part, by the Company’s
negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the electric facilities or use of the public right-of-ways
authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not be
obligated to defend, indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or
damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or
agents. Additionally, the Company shall execute the City’s standard “Hold-
Harmless and Waiver of Liability” statement. (See attached Exhibit “A”).
111.10   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
The Company shall construct, extend, operate, and maintain its facilities in
accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its
successors, and to the extent consistent with the City’s ordinances.
Additionally, the Company agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to
serve the entire corporate limits of the City, including any areas annexed
during the term of this franchise to the extent such areas are not within the
exclusive service territory of another electric utility. (See Section 476.25[3]
of the Code of Iowa).
111.11   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish electric energy in
the quantity and quality consistent with applicable State laws and regulations
and the needs of the electric users and residents of the City.
111.12   POLICE REGULATIONS.
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by
the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company. From time to
time, the City may, in the exercise of its police powers, adopt ordinances
governing the use of its right-of-ways and the Company shall be subject to all
such ordinances to the extent such are not inconsistent with State and federal
statute and regulation governing the operation of the Company, and are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this franchise. The Company reserves the
right to challenge or contest the City’s interpretation or application of any
said laws, codes, ordinances, statutes, and regulations.
111.13   ASSIGNMENT.
This franchise shall apply to and bind the City and the Company, their
successors, and assigns; provided that any assignment by the Company shall be
subject to the approval of the Council by resolution, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld, except that no consent shall be required for any
assignment or transfer by merger, consolidation, or reorganization. The City
shall have 60 days from the effective date of the assignment to adopt the
resolution. If the City fails to adopt a resolution affirming or rejecting the
assignment during the 60-day period, the assignment shall be deemed approved.
111.14   INSURANCE COVERAGE.
The Company shall provide to and maintain with the City a current certificate
of insurance verifying that it has the capacity to perform the indemnification
called for in Section
111.09. Insurance coverage may be satisfied under a program of self-insurance.
111.15   NONEXCLUSIVE.
This franchise is non-exclusive and is limited solely to the providing of
electric service to customers within the corporate limits of the City.
111.16   TERMINATION.
The City reserves the right to terminate this franchise if the Company
substantially breaches the terms and conditions of this agreement. The City
shall provide the Company, via certified mail, notification of the specific
alleged failure(s) to comply with the terms and shall have 60 days to commence
corrective actions. Completion of the corrective actions will be within a time
limit agreed to by the City and the Company. If the Company fails to resolve
the situation within the agreed upon schedule, the City may terminate this
franchise. The Company shall not be considered to have breached the terms and
conditions of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with the rules
and regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or federal agencies having
jurisdiction over Company operations. The Company shall not be considered to
have breached the terms and conditions of this franchise if the alleged breach
is the result of the actions of a third party or the City. The Company shall
not be excused from complying with any terms and conditions of this franchise
by any failure of the City to insist upon or seek compliance with any terms or
conditions.
111.17   VALIDITY.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision, or
part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed to be a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any remaining section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 563, adopted by the LeClaire City Council on December 6, 1999,
grants the nonexclusive right to Clinton Cablevision, its successors and
assigns, to establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, renew,
reconstruct, and remove a cable television system across public property in the
City limits for an initial term of five years, in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the United States of America and the State of Iowa and the
ordinances and regulations of the City of LeClaire, including the nonexclusive
right, privilege, and authority: (1) to sell and supply audio and video
communication service to persons within the City; (2) to use public property
within the City; and (3) to engage in such further activities within the City
as may or hereinafter be consistent with the generally accepted principles
applicable to the operation of a cable television system.  This ordinance and
amendments thereto have not been included as a part of this Code, but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect. The original
Cable T.V.Franchise Ordinances No. 241 and No. 242 were adopted by the LeClaire
City Council on November 3, 1980, and were approved by the voters at an
election held on February 24, 1981. A letter of acceptance of the Ordinances
was filed with the City by Clinton Cablevision on April 7, 1981. The above-
referenced ordinances (No. 241 and No. 242) were repealed by Ordinance No. 510,
adopted by the LeClaire City Council on August 5, 1996, which said ordinance
has since been repealed by the above referenced Ordinance No. 563.
 
CHAPTER 113
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION RATES
 
113.01 Authority                   113.03 Notice of Rate Change
113.02 Rate Regulation Proceedings 113.04 Delegation of Power
 
113.01   AUTHORITY.
The City has the legal authority to administer and shall enforce against any
non-municipally owned cable television system operator, as permitted therein,
the provisions of Part 76, Subpart N of the Rules, and Regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), concerning Cable Rate Regulation, 47
C.F.R. §§76.900 et. Seq., as they currently read and hereafter may be amended,
which are herewith incorporated by reference.
113.02   RATE REGULATION PROCEEDINGS.
Any rate regulation proceedings conducted hereunder shall provide a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, including
but not limited to, the City or its designee, the Cable Operator, subscribers,
and residents of the franchise area. In addition to all other provisions
required by the laws of the State and by the City, and in order to provide for
such opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested party, the
City shall take the following actions:
1.   The City shall publish notice as provided in Section 362.3 of the Code of
Iowa, and shall mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a notice of the
intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates and/or
charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the
FCC.
2.   The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable television
rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the rate review
in question; that any interested party has a right to participate in the
proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceeding, explaining
how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any such views;
that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable television rates in
question will be governed by the Rules and Regulations of the FCC; and that the
decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
3.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or not the
rates or proposed rate increases are reasonable. The City may delegate the
responsibility to conduct the proceedings to any duly qualified and eligible
individual or entity. If the City, or its designee, cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC Rules and Regulations, it may announce the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC Rules
and Regulations, and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
public notice accordingly.
4.   In the course of the rate regulation proceeding, the City may request
additional information from the Cable Operator that is reasonably necessary to
determine the reasonableness of the basic service tier rates and equipment
charges. Any such additional information submitted to the City shall be
verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system supervising
the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity and submitted by way of
affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the response is true and
accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge, information, and belief formed
after reasonable inquiry.
5.   The City may request proprietary information, provided that the City shall
consider a timely request from the Cable Operator that said proprietary
information shall not be made available for public information, consistent with
the procedures set forth in Section 0.459 of the FCC Rules and Regulations.
Furthermore, said proprietary information may be used only for the purpose of
determining the reasonableness of the rates and charges or the appropriate rate
level based on a cost-of-service showing submitted by the Cable Operator.
6.   The City may exercise all powers under the laws of evidence applicable to
administrative proceedings under the laws of the State and by the City to
discover any information relevant to the rate regulation proceeding including,
but not limited to, subpoena, interrogatories, production of documents, and
deposition.
7.   Upon termination of the rate regulation proceeding, the City shall adopt
and release a written decision as to whether or not the rate or proposed rate
increase is reasonable or unreasonable, and, if unreasonable, its remedy,
including prospective rate reduction, rate prescription, and refunds.
8.   The City may not impose any fines, penalties, forfeitures, or other
sanctions, other than permitted by the FCC Rules and Regulations, for charging
an unreasonable rate or proposing an unreasonable rate increase.
9.   Consistent with FCC Rules and Regulations, the City’s decision may be
reviewed only by the FCC.
10.   The City shall be authorized, at any time, whether or not in the course
of a rate regulation proceeding, to gather information as necessary to exercise
its jurisdiction as authorized by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
and the FCC Rules and Regulations. Any information submitted to the City shall
be verified by an appropriate official of the cable television system
supervising the preparation of the response on behalf of the entity, and
submitted by way of affidavit or under penalty of perjury, stating that the
response is true and accurate to the best of that person’s knowledge,
information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry.
113.03   NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE.
With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the FCC Rules and Regulations, and
over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the Cable
Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the cable
programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the
services provided, including the program services included in the tier or
tiers. Said notice shall be provided within five business days after the change
becomes effective.
113.04   DELEGATION OF POWER.
The City may delegate its powers to enforce this chapter to municipal employees
or officers (the “Cable Official”). The Cable Official will have the authority
to:
1.   Administer oaths and affirmations;
2.   Issue subpoenas;
3.   Examine witnesses;
4.   Rule upon questions of evidence;
5.   Take or cause depositions to be taken;
6.   Conduct proceedings in accordance with this chapter;
7.   Exclude from the proceeding any person engaging in contemptuous conduct or
otherwise disrupting the proceedings;
8.   Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by
consent of the parties; and
9.   Take actions and make decisions or recommend decisions in conformity with
this chapter.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a retail alcohol
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide
credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to retail sales
by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as follows:
   A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are defined
as follows:
      (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
      (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
   B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file, written
permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16 or 17
years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
      (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
      (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B, a
person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
   C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
   D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
   E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall require
the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual harassment
upon commencing employment.
   F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing
or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic liquor
in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa Department
of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for
immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed
premises, subject to rules adopted by the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle
used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original
package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to
use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
12.   Permit or allow any person under 21 years of age to remain upon licensed
premises unless over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision
does not apply to holders of a Class “B” beer permit or an establishment
employee when employed in compliance with State law.
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of
a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the
age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective
of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed
with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper
or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be construed to include
cigars.
3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of
the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other
chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to
be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing
and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the
required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed
at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as provided in
Section 453A.13 and Sec. 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in
the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this
subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
14 days.
2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit
shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                     122.11 Time Restriction
122.02 Applicability               122.12 Revocation of License
122.03 Definitions                 122.13 Hearing
122.04 License Required            122.14 Record and Determination
122.05 Application for License     122.15 Appeal
122.06 License Fees                122.16 Effect of Revocation
122.07 Insurance & Indemnification 122.17 License Exemptions
Required
122.08 License Issued              122.18 Charitable, Nonprofit, and Local
                                   Civic Organizations Requirements
122.09 Display of License          122.19 Use of Public Property Prohibited
122.10 License Not Transferable
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
(Section 122.01 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
122.02   APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of this chapter are only applicable to those peddlers,
solicitors and transient merchants who are not part of a recognized and
approved City-wide or special event or a City Public Vending Permit under
Chapter 123. (See
Chapter 49 and Section
122.17[8])
122.03   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
3.   “Transient merchant” means and includes every merchant, whether an
individual person, a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, and
whether owner, agent, bailee, consignee, or employee, who shall bring or cause
to be brought within the City any goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind,
nature, or description, with the intention of temporarily or intermittently
selling or offering to sell at retail such goods, wares, or merchandise within
the City. The term “transient merchant” also means and includes every merchant,
whether an individual person, a firm, corporation, partnership, or an
association, who by itself, or by agent, consignee, or employee temporarily or
intermittently engages in or conducts, at one or more locations, a business
within the City for the sale at retail of any goods, wares, or merchandise of
any nature or description. A merchant engaging in business shall be presumed to
be temporarily or intermittently in business unless it is the intention of such
merchant to remain continuously in business at each location where the merchant
is engaged in business within the City as a merchant for a period of more than
60 days. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to
persons selling at wholesale to local merchants.
122.04   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person (not otherwise exempt by definition as stated herein) engaging in
peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient merchant in the City
without first obtaining a license, as herein provided, is in violation of this
chapter. Unless otherwise waived by the Council, any “local civic organization”
as defined herein-below, who is recognized as, conducts, or acts in the
capacity of a “City-Wide or Special Event” sponsor shall be required to obtain
a license for each and every peddler, solicitor, and transient merchant who is
a pre-identified and pre-registered participant conducting business within the
area of, during, and as an approved, integral part of a recognized and approved
City-Wide or Special Event only.
122.05   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the City Administrator for any
license required under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the
applicant’s name, permanent and local address, and business address if any,
physical description and verified driver’s license number. The application
shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s
address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such
business, and the length of time sought to be covered by the license. An
application fee in an amount, determined periodically and approved by
resolution of the City Council, shall be paid at the time of filing such
application (unless otherwise provided for herein) to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein. If, upon review of the information
provided on/with the application, the City Administrator deems it necessary to
investigate or cause to be investigated, the reputation and character of the
applicant, they shall request such investigation, and the applicant will
concede to such and pay any and all associated fees in connection therewith.
122.06   LICENSE FEES.
License fees, as determined periodically and approved by resolution of the
Council, shall be paid to the City prior to the issuance of any license, in
addition to the application fee, unless otherwise provided for herein.
1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), an annual license fee for the principal shall
be paid to the City.
2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants. In addition to the application fee for
each person actually peddling or selling goods or wares, the following
applicable license fees shall be paid to the City based upon the length of time
spent in such activity:
   A.   For one calendar day (not to exceed a maximum 24 hour-period or any
portion thereof)
   B.   For one calendar week (not to exceed a maximum, continuous 168-hour
period or any portion thereof longer than one calendar day)
   C.   For not more than six calendar months or any portion thereof longer
than one calendar week.
   D.   For not more than one calendar year or any portion thereof longer than
six calendar months.
122.07   INSURANCE & INDEMNIFICATION REQUIRED.
Prior to the issuance of any license, the applicant will submit to the City a
proof of liability insurance naming the City as an additional insured in an
amount no less than $1,000,000 and a City Hold-Harmless, Waiver of Liability,
and Indemnification Agreement.
(Section 122.07 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
122.08   LICENSE ISSUED.
If, not less than five working days after the submittal of the application, the
City Administrator finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be true and
correct, after a reasonable background information check has been performed,
and the license fee has been paid, the license may be issued.
122.09   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.10   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.11   TIME RESTRICTION.
Unless otherwise provided for or specifically approved by the City, all
licenses issued under this chapter for “door-to-door” sales shall provide that
said licenses shall be in force and effect only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. All other licenses shall be issued for a timeframe of 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.
122.12   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the City
Administrator may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the
following reasons:
1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order,
or morals.
The City Administrator shall send the written notice to the licensee at the
licensee’s local address. The notice shall contain particulars of the
complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.13   HEARING.
The City Administrator shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and
any complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged
in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the City Administrator may proceed to a
determination of the complaint.
122.14   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The City Administrator shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions
of law and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record
the City Administrator finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial
violation of this chapter or State law.
122.15   APPEAL.
If the City Administrator revokes or refuses to issue a license, the City
Administrator shall make a part of the record the reasons for such revocation
or refusal. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing
before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse,
modify, or affirm the decision of the City Administrator by a majority vote of
the Council members present and the City Administrator shall carry out the
decision of the Council.
122.16   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3.   Garage Sales by Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents conducting a
“garage sale” as defined in the City’s Zoning chapter (Section
170.07(7)(C), as amended) and farmers who offer for sale their own products.
4.   Students. Students representing the local school districts conducting
projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
7.   Individual peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants who are a pre-
identified and pre-registered participant conducting business within the area
of, during, and as an approved, integral part of a recognized and approved
City-Wide or Special Event only. (See Sections
122.04 and
49.05)
8.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally operated
exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional basis
for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[15])
9.   Individual peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants who are
conducting business in accordance with City Code
Chapter 123 shall conform to all of the limitations and requirements identified
in
Chapter 123.
(Section 122.17 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
122.18   CHARITABLE, NONPROFIT, AND LOCAL CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS REQUIREMENTS.
“Local Civic organizations” defined as those recognized organizations domiciled
within the corporate City limits, holding a “non-profit” or “not-for-profit”
status, or any City Council-recognized organization domiciled within the
corporate City limits, and authorized representatives of charitable or
nonprofit organizations domiciled within the corporate City limits operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa, desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature only are exempt from the operation of
Sections
122.04 and
122.05,
122.17, and
122.18. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the City
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the City Administrator finds that the organization is a bona fide locally
domiciled charity, nonprofit organization, or Council-recognized organization,
the City Administrator may issue, free of charge, a license containing the
information as required herein to the applicant.
122.19   USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
Unless otherwise identified and licensed as a participant in a City-Wide or
Special Event, any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business
of a transient merchant in this City shall be prohibited from using any public
property for any reason whatsoever without express, written, prior permission
from the City for said use.
CHAPTER 123
PUBLIC VENDING AND VENDORS
 
123.01 Purpose                         123.04 Operational Period
123.02 Definitions                     123.05 Permitted Public Vending
123.03 Public Vending Areas Designated 123.06 Conditions and Requirements
 
123.01   PURPOSE.
This chapter establishes requirements for the public vending of foodstuffs,
goods, and merchandise, under certain circumstances, on public streets,
sidewalks, or alleys. It is the purpose of this chapter, to provide those
persons who engage in those types of vending operations with clear and concise
regulations to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, as well as to
preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the community.
123.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Public vending” means the permitted sale or offering for sale of
foodstuffs and/or other permitted goods or merchandise for immediate on-site
delivery or consumption on public property within those areas specifically
designated herein.
2.   “Vendor” means any person or entity specifically permitted to conduct
“public vending” activities by the City.
123.03   PUBLIC VENDING AREAS DESIGNATED.
Public vending will only be permitted in the public areas specifically
designated by the City. The recognized public areas are: those public
properties within the larger area bounded by the southerly street right-of-way
line of May Street, the westerly street right-of-way line of Cody Road, the
northerly street right-of-way line of Territorial Road, and the meander line of
the westerly bank of the Mississippi River and those public properties
including and adjacent to LeClaire Public Library, LeClaire City Hall, and the
City Center Plaza. The specific, fixed locations - of not more than 100 square
feet in area and not more than 10 feet in any dimension - and the number of
locations within the generally designated area above will be determined by the
City Administrator, who will first consult with the Tourism Board, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, and the Public Works Director, prior to designating a
specific vending area or areas.
123.04   OPERATIONAL PERIOD.
Public vending will be allowed only pursuant to the time frames specified
within the vendor’s permit and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., seven days a week. (Other hours of operation may be granted for vendors
when the products are related to a specific activity, and such other
considerations and conditions are incorporated to affect the intent of this
chapter.)
123.05   PERMITTED PUBLIC VENDING.
Fixed location, public vending (as herein specified) where the sale or offering
for sale of various foods and foodstuffs (as approved and permitted by the
County Health Department) and dry goods or merchandise (i.e., crafts,
souvenirs, etc.) are hereby permitted.
123.06   CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
The City may issue a permit for public vending at those fixed, designated
locations after careful consideration and consultation with the parties
identified in Section
123.03 above, consideration of the applicant’s proposed business, and
assurances that the following conditions are in existence or have been or will
be met:
1.   All applications for fixed location public vending must be received at
least 30 days before the proposed start of operations unless otherwise waived
by the Council. All applications and requested locations, special conditions,
or exceptions will be approved by the Council.
2.   Fixed locations will be assigned, and permits will be issued on a first-
come, first-served basis, with consideration of existing vendors in the area.
Locations may be changed by request and/or at the discretion of the City only
upon review and consideration of the provisions as spelled out above for the
issuance of a new permit.
3.   The sale or assignment of a location and/or permit is expressly
prohibited.
4.   The applicant will operate with a minimum of equipment.
5.   The applicant’s proposed mode of operation will neither impede the free
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the designated area, nor interfere
with such pedestrian movement into or out of retail establishments and
businesses in the downtown area.
6.   The applicant will conduct vending from one site only and completely
within the boundaries described in the permit. The applicant’s permit may be
immediately revoked if business is operated at a location other than the one
specified, unless otherwise approved by the City.
7.   The applicant must obtain all necessary permits and abide by any and all
health regulations as required by the Scott County Health Department or other
agencies.
8.   A fixed, designated location must be available that will not interfere
with the operation of an existing vendor or business establishment in the
designated area.
   A.   At least 200 feet will separate vendors from existing vendors and
storefront businesses selling the same product unless the established vendors
and businesses provide written permission.
   B.   Vendors will consult with the owner or tenant of the property
immediately adjacent to the site and must secure written permission to operate
in that area. Written permission(s) must be submitted to the City for its
records.
9.   Vendors will be limited to the use of only those facilities (i.e. mobile
push carts, tents, vending trailers, etc.), that are specifically intended or
pre-manufactured for said use from which to sell their items. (Other
facilities, vehicles, trailers, materials, or items of any nature are expressly
prohibited.) The maximum exterior dimensions of the applicant’s facilities will
not exceed a size of 10 feet wide by 20 feet long by eight feet high. Signage
must be permanently attached to the facilities.
10.   Vendors will be neatly dressed at all times. No cut-offs, ragged T-
shirts, or any attire containing any reference to, or indication of drugs, sex,
or profanity of any nature will be permitted.
11.   The applicant will completely remove their facilities and any and all
associated appurtenances and refuse at the close of each business day and
storage will be at a location other than the one specified on the permit.
12.   The applicant will seek permission to conduct public vending by
submitting a letter (along with a completed application form) describing the
vending plan in detail, including a complete listing of goods to be sold, hours
of operation, and a detailed diagram or picture of their facilities.
13.   The applicant will execute and submit to the City the City’s standard
Hold-Harmless, Waiver of Liability, and Indemnification Agreement.
14.   Vendors will have five working days from the date of approval of their
permit application(s) to submit an approved certificate of insurance to the
City as required herein.
15.   The fixed location, Public Vending Permit fee shall be set by Council
resolution.
16.   The applicant shall, at their own expense, procure and maintain and
provide evidence for each permit location and for the duration of each permit,
not less than $1,000,000.00 CSL in casualty and liability insurance (including
completed products liability) in a responsible company or companies authorized
to do business in the State, as approved by the City, and that the City will be
named and shown as an “additional insured” on such policy. The applicant and
any person(s) claiming through or under the applicant and any respective
sureties, covenant and agree to defend, protect, completely indemnify, and hold
harmless the City, its agents, employees, and assigns from any and all actions,
claims demands for damages, expenses, (including attorney’s fees), or liability
of any kind or nature whatsoever, which may be occasioned by or arising out of
any accident or other occurrence causing or inflicting injury and/or damage to
any person(s) or injury and/or damage to property, in, upon, or about the
permitted property which may in any way be caused by the accidental,
intentional, or negligent action of the applicant or any person(s) claiming
through or under the applicant, or which may result there-from as a result of
the authorized use, occupancy, or tenancy of the permitted property for the
public vending.
17.   The applicant shall file, in the Office of the Clerk, a certificate of
insurance evidencing the coverage(s) as outlined above. The policy will have an
effective date of at least the day the permit is effective and shall provide 30
days’ notice to the City of cancellation or change in policy amounts or types.
Cancellation or a decrease in the amounts or types of coverage is sufficient
grounds for immediate revocation of the permit without hearing or other due
process.
18.   The City shall not be liable to the applicant for any business
interruption, or any loss or damage to property, or injury to or death of
persons, occurring or in any manner growing out of or connected with
applicant’s operation, whether or not caused by the alleged negligence or other
fault of the City or by any of the City’s agents, employees, invitees,
licensees, or assignees.
19.   The applicant is responsible for maintaining the area within and in
proximity to their location in a clean and hazard-free condition at all times.
No food preparation by-products (i.e., grease, oil, liquids, or materials of
any nature, smoke, noxious fumes, etc.) shall emanate from the facilities nor
be allowed to come in contact with any public property at any time. Sufficient,
supplementary waste receptacles must be provided at all times during the
applicant’s operations. The exterior of all facilities must be maintained in
good condition by the applicant. Facilities may be temporarily anchored or held
in place only through the use of weighted items (water barrels/jugs, sandbags,
etc.) and no anchor drilling or staking on public property will be permitted.
20.   Vendors shall abide by all regulations of this chapter and further agree
to relocate, at the discretion of the City, during festivals and at other times
should conditions warrant. Also, the vendor may be required to discontinue
their operation in order to accommodate and eliminate conflicts with “special
events or City-wide events.”
21.   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall
result in the immediate revocation of the vendor’s permit to operate and cause
the immediate removal of the facilities and any and all associated
appurtenances and refuse.
22.   Request for exceptions to the provisions of this chapter must be
submitted to the City Administrator in writing and will only be reviewed and
considered on a case-by-case basis by the Council.
23.   Any vendor, not holding an annual vendor’s permit as mentioned above and
not classified as a “local civic organization,” who is interested in selling
during festivals or special events must comply with all sections of this
chapter.
24.   City-wide and Special Events. A recognized “Local Civic Organization”
conducting a special event may file with the City the specified certificates of
insurance and the indemnification waiver form covering any and all vendors
participating in that organization’s event in lieu of those provisions
contained in Subsections 13 through 17 above pertaining to individual vendor
insurance and indemnification requirements. Applicants participating in a City-
wide or special events may also be exempted from the provisions of Subsections
9 (facility limits) and 15 (permit fees) above if waived by the City Council.
All other provisions of this Code not expressly waived either herein or by
action of the City Council will apply.
25.   “Local businesses” defined as those recognized commercial businesses
owning, renting, leasing, or otherwise regularly occupying and operating a
commercial business from a permanent, fixed, commercially zoned structure
within the City, which only exhibit, offer, or sell products from their
respective businesses, may provide public vending under the following
circumstances:
   A.   The local business may exhibit, offer, or sell those products from
specifically designated public vending locations outside of and immediately
adjacent to the commercial premises, providing that the appropriate ADA
clearances and access-ways are maintained at all times.
   B.   The local business may apply for a Public Vending Permit for a private
or public parking location immediately adjacent to their premises. The
specified business location may be filled with any single vendor provided that
each vendor has met all of the requirements above except that the local
business may pay a one-time blanket permit fee, as set by Council resolution,
to cover the vendors at this location.
   C.   All other provisions and requirements not expressly waived either
herein or by action of the City Council will apply.
   D.   This section DOES NOT apply to, nor is it to be construed to afford
relief to, those vendors or local businesses hired by, contracted with,
organized under, or in any way offered to participate in any festival or City-
wide or special event.
CHAPTER 124
MOVING BUILDINGS
124.01 Permit Required                    124.12 Control and Supervision
124.02 Application for Permit             124.13 Notice Required
124.03 Investigation                      124.14 Default in Performance of
                                          Conditions
124.04 Issuance of Permit                 124.15 Approval of Route
124.05 Denial of Permit                   124.16 Obstructing Streets
124.06 Terms and Conditions of Permit     124.17 Lights and Barricades
124.07 Public Property Damage and Deposit 124.18 Wires and Structural Supports
124.08 Certificate of Liability Insurance 124.19 Trees, Plants, and Shrubs
124.09 Owner’s Completion Bond or Deposi124.20 Repairs of Public Property
124.10 Clearance of Site and Safety       124.21 Refunding of Deposits
Measures Required
124.11 Suspension or Revocation of Permit
 
124.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved any building in,
into, through, or from the City without first obtaining a permit therefore.
Such permit shall be known as a “House Moving Permit.”
124.02   APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Any person desiring such a permit shall file an application therefore in
writing on a form to be furnished by the City for that purpose. Such
application shall specify the following:
1.   The character and size of the building to be moved.
2.   The reason for such moving.
3.   The use, purpose, and occupancy for which said building or structure is to
be used.
4.   The location from which, and to which, said building is to be moved.
5.   A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the
property to which said building is to be moved, provided said location is in
the City.
6.   The streets on, over, or through which it is desired to move said
building.
7.   Whether the building conforms to the zoning laws in the location to which
it is to be moved.
124.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon the filing of the application, the Building Inspector and/or Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer will investigate the building and record the results
of such investigation, together with recommended action thereon. 
124.04   ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
The City may approve the issuance of a House Moving Permit when all the
necessary requirements and conditions of this chapter have been complied with.
A permit fee in the sum set by Council resolution shall be paid to the City
upon the issuance of each house moving permit.
124.05   DENIAL OF PERMIT.
No permit shall be issued to move any building or structure which, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer:
1.   Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous.
2.   Is infested with pests or is unsanitary.
3.   If it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation.
4.   Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of
deterioration, disrepair, or infestation that its relocation at the proposed
site within the City would cause appreciable harm to or be materially
detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of
600 feet from the proposed site.
5.   If the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the City.
6.   If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any
ordinance of the City; or
7.   If the moving of the building or structure causes unreasonable damage to
the trees, plants, and shrubs on and along the public streets.
Provided, however, if the condition of the building or structure, in the
judgment of the Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, admits of practicable and effective repair, the permit may be issued
upon the terms and conditions as set forth herein.
124.06   TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
When a House Moving Permit is granted, such terms and conditions as may be
deemed reasonable and proper may be imposed, including, but not limited to,
conditions involving the public streets or other public property in the City
on, over, or through which the building or structure shall be moved and the
requirements of changes, alterations, additions, or repairs to be made to or
upon the building or structure, or land, to the end that the relocation thereof
will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public
welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district to
which it is to be moved. Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the
permit or appended in writing thereto.
124.07   PUBLIC PROPERTY DAMAGE AND DEPOSIT.
The applicant shall deposit with the City a cash deposit in the amount of
$5,000.00 to cover any damages to public property that may be caused by said
action.
124.08   CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE.
Every person moving a building in the City shall file with the City a
certificate of liability insurance issued by a solvent corporation holding a
certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State, which
certificate shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section.
The certificate of liability insurance required under this section shall insure
the person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for
injury to or death of any person, or damage to any property growing out of the
moving of such building, to the amount or limit of $500,000.00 exclusive of
interest and costs, on account of injury to or death of any one person, and
subject to the same limit as respects injury to or death of one person, of
$500,000.00 exclusive of interest and costs, on account of moving any one
building resulting in injury to or death of more than one person, and of
$500,000.00 for damage to property of others, resulting from moving any one
building and shall list the City as an additional insured.
124.09   OWNER’S COMPLETION BOND OR DEPOSIT.
Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of
the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the City
a State corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows: that all of the work
required to be done to complete the relocation, alteration, and reconstruction
of the building pursuant to the conditions of the said permit shall be fully
performed and completed within a reasonable time to be specified by the City in
the permit. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to the estimated cost
of the work proposed to be done plus 10 percent thereof, and shall name the
City as thereof, and shall be in a form approved by the City Administrator. In
lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or lessee may post
an additional cash deposit in the amount of said bond. An extension of time for
said completion may be granted in writing by the City when circumstances shall
so justify, but no such extension shall release any surety or other security.
124.10   CLEARANCE OF SITE AND SAFETY MEASURES REQUIRED.
Prior to and during the process of moving a building, the owner shall perform
the following, if applicable:
1.   Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee or
authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order that all gas,
water, and sewer pipelines that are to be disconnected from the building may be
securely capped and sealed.
2.   Immediately after the moving of any building or structure, the permittee
or authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other
holes or openings.
3.   Within 10 days after the moving of any building or structure, the
permittee or authorized agent shall complete the following work:
   A.   Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the property.
   B.   Fill with dirt or sand any septic tank or cesspools located on the
property.
   C.   Fill any openings, excavations, or basements remaining on the land with
dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property, unless
otherwise directed by the Director of Public Works.
   D.   Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of
flammable liquids.
   E.   Remove all refuse, debris, and waste materials from the property.
124.11   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The City, at any time for sufficient cause, may revoke or suspend any permit
granted under this chapter.
124.12   CONTROL AND SUPERVISION.
Every building which is moved on, over, or through the public street, way, or
park in the City shall be under the control of the City and every such building
shall be moved in a careful manner and the work shall be prosecuted with
diligence and to the satisfaction and approval of the City. This section in no
way relieves the person having charge of the moving of any building of the
obligation to furnish proper supervision.
124.13   NOTICE REQUIRED.
Notice must be given by the person to whom the permit is issued or by an
authorized representative, to the City not less than 36 hours or more than 48
hours before the actual work of moving a building or structure is to commence.
124.14   DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE OF CONDITIONS.
Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of
any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the City,
said notice to state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the
period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to complete such work. After
receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time therein specified,
either cause the work to be done or forfeit to the City the completion bond or
cash deposit as required herein. If the permittee defaults, the City shall have
the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building
or structure and to clear, clean, and restore the site or sites.
124.15   APPROVAL OF ROUTE.
The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must be
approved by the City.
124.16   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into, on, over,
through, or from any public streets, ways, or parks in the City shall permit
said building to remain in any one location of any such street, way, or park
for a period longer than 24 hours except by written permission obtained from
the Police Chief, or to obstruct traffic on any railroad.
124.17   LIGHTS AND BARRICADES.
The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain proper
lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street, way, or
park during the hours of darkness.
124.18   WIRES AND STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS.
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit has been
granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove, or displace any pole or
other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any public
utility or of the City or to cut, displace, or change the location of any wire,
cable, or other equipment upon said pole or structure, the person to whom such
permit has been granted or an authorized representative shall obtain permission
in writing from the owner or owners of such pole, structure, or the wires,
cables, or other equipment thereon, and shall notify the owner or owners at
least 48 hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will
necessitate the removal of such obstructions. The person to whom said permit is
granted shall not, at the expiration of said time of notice or at any time,
cut, move, or in any way disturb such public utility or City property; and such
work shall be done daily by the authorized workers of the utility or the City,
whichever is the owner. The person to whom said permit is granted shall pay to
said public utility or to the City, as the case may be, any and all costs or
expense for the removal, rearrangement, or replacement of any pole or
structural support of wires, cables, or equipment thereon or of any damage to
such property.
124.19   TREES, PLANTS, AND SHRUBS.
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been
granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant any tree,
plant, or shrub belonging to or under the control of the City, the person to
whom such permit has been granted or an authorized representative shall notify
the City at least 48 hours prior to that time that the moving of such building
will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. The person to whom said
permit is granted shall not, at the expiration of said time of notice or at any
time, trim, move, remove, replant, or otherwise disturb such trees, plants, or
shrubs; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workers of the City
unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the City. The person to whom said
permit is granted shall pay to said City any and all costs or expense for the
trimming, moving, removing, or replanting of any trees, plants or shrubs, or of
any damage thereto.
124.20   REPAIRS OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit has been
granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public property,
in addition to any other remedies the City may have, the City may cause such
damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit
required herein, or the City may require the person to whom such a permit has
been granted, and to whom said notice has been given, or an authorized
representative to effect such repairs. If such person fails to make necessary
repairs within the period of time designated in said written notice, the City
may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost thereof deducted from
the deposit required therein.
124.21   REFUNDING OF DEPOSITS.
When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is
completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been
repaired to the satisfaction of the City, and all costs of repairing damage or
performing other work, as provided herein, have been paid, the deposit, as
required by Section
124.06 hereof, or such portion thereof then remaining unused under the
provisions of this chapter shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit
receipt representing the said money so deposited. Should the cost, however, of
repairing damages and/or performing other work as in this chapter provided,
exceed the total amount of money deposited, the person to whom said permit was
granted shall be held liable for the amount of damage and/or other costs which
are in excess of the amount deposited, and the City shall collect such part of
the claim which is in excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit
was granted.
CHAPTER 125
WRECKING BUILDINGS
 
125.01 Permit Required                   125.06 Approval and Issuance of Permit
125.02 Application for Permit            125.07 Permit Fees
125.03 Deposit                           125.08 Regulations for Proceeding with
                                         Work
125.04 Certificate of Insurance and Hold 125.09 Supervision
Harmless Waiver
125.05 Inspection of Premises
 
125.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful to wreck or demolish any building or structure in the City
without first securing a permit therefore. Any building or structure means any
building or accessory building that includes any vertical structure surrounding
greater than 50 percent of the building footprint, includes removing any water,
sewer, electrical, gas, or other utility connection, or is within 10 feet of
another building or accessory building.
125.02   APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
An application for a permit to wreck or demolish any building or structure in
the City shall be made in writing to the City. Such application shall give the
location of the building or structure, the date when wrecking or demolition is
to commence, and the approximate time which such wrecking or demolition shall
take place.
125.03   DEPOSIT.
Before a permit is issued, the permittee or applicant shall deposit with the
City the following sums (in the form of cash, money order, or a cashier’s
check) to ensure that the property is in a proper and safe condition after such
wrecking or demolition.
For buildings not exceeding 10,000 cubic feet   $5,000.00
For buildings not exceeding 25,000 cubic feet   $6,000.00
For buildings not exceeding 30,000 cubic feet   $7,000.00
For buildings not exceeding 40,000 cubic feet   $8,000.00
For buildings not exceeding 50,000 cubic feet   $9,000.00
Plus, an additional $1,000.00 for each additional 10,000 feet or fractional
portion thereof. By “proper and safe condition” it is meant that all debris is
cleared away and that any excavation remaining is filled in, compacted, and
seeded over. If the Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer finds that such property has been put into the proper condition as
provided for in this section, the City shall return the deposit. If the site is
not cleared of any and all debris and any excess fill, or work is not commenced
to do so within 10 days of the finish of the wrecking or demolition, the City
shall proceed with the work and the cost of such work shall be deducted from
the deposit. If any amount is left from such deposit after the City has
performed the work, such balance shall be returned to the person who deposited
it. If said deposit is not sufficient to cover the cost of such work, the City
may assess the property to recover any amount due and outstanding.
125.04   CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND HOLD HARMLESS WAIVER.
A certificate of insurance showing that public liability insurance in an amount
not less than $500,000.00 has been obtained by the applicant shall accompany
any such application along with a signed original of the City’s standard Hold
Harmless and Waiver of Liability.
125.05   INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
Before any such permit shall be approved, the Building Inspector and/or
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises where the
wrecking and demolition work is to take place and ascertain that provision for
proper care has been made so as not to endanger any sewer or water connections
with the City sewer and water systems, or any electrical wires or
installations.
125.06   APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
If the Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer finds
that the terms of this chapter are being complied with by the applicant, such
officer shall issue a permit for such wrecking or demolition.
125.07   PERMIT FEES.
The Council shall establish by resolution, the permit fees and other costs
associated with any provision of this chapter as referenced herein.
125.08   REGULATIONS FOR PROCEEDING WITH WORK.
All wrecking or demolition shall be performed in a workmanlike manner and with
the least amount of noise possible. Care shall be taken to protect neighboring
structures with adequate shoring and whatever else is needful to protect such
structures. Adequate protection shall be provided to prevent injury to any City
or public utility appurtenances. It shall be the duty of all persons working on
or responsible for such wrecking or demolition to see to it that the general
public is warned to keep away from such premises, and is not permitted to enter
in or on or frequent such structures.
125.09   SUPERVISION.
The Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
supervise such wrecking or demolition and shall inspect such premises at least
once daily during such wrecking or demolition.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store, or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the City.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
Excavations of streets, parking, and alleys shall be done in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 141 of this code.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 10
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
10 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.03 relating to property owner’s
   responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Awnings
136.02 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.12 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.03 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.04 City May Order Repairs                136.14 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.05 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.15 Defacing
136.06 Permit Required                       136.16 Debris on Sidewalks
136.07 Sidewalk Standards                    136.17 Merchandise Display
136.08 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.18 Sales Stands
                                             136.19 Objects Obstructing
136.09 Failure to Repair or Barricade        Pedestrian Use of Sidewalks
                                             Prohibited
136.10 Interference with Sidewalk
Improvements
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow,
ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks.
136.03   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or,
in the absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that
portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain
the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.04   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d and e])
136.05   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.06   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the City and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set by
Council resolution.
136.07   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
(See
Chapter 163 – Standard Public Works Improvements Specifications.)
136.08   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.09   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.10   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.11   AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.12   ENCROACHING STEPS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.13   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.14   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.15   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.16   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.17   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall
more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such
purposes.
136.18   SALES STANDS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
136.19   OBJECTS OBSTRUCTING PEDESTRIAN USE OF SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
Except for objects placed by the City or as otherwise allowed by this chapter,
it is unlawful for any person, persons, firm, company, or corporation to place
any stick, pole, post, stone, box, or any other article of whatsoever kind of
character, upon or across any of the sidewalks of the City in such a manner as
to obstruct the free and unobstructed use of the sidewalks for pedestrians
traveling or desiring to travel the same.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any request to vacate a street or alley shall be in writing and submitted to
the office of the City Administrator who shall refer the matter to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for study and a recommendation prior to further
consideration by the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall,
after due notification and hearing thereon, submit a written report, including
recommendations in general and specific recommendations pertaining to easements
over that right-of-way when it deems it necessary to accommodate the needs of
any and all adjoining private properties so that those adjoining private
properties will have free and unencumbered access to and/or across the vacated
right-of-way for any and all purposes, to the City Council within 30 days of
the request for vacation was referred to it.
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall each cause to be
published a notice of public hearing at which time said request for vacation is
to be considered. In addition to the above, written notice shall be delivered
by certified mail to each property owner of record who owns property within 200
feet of any boundary of the proposed vacation area. Said notice shall be
delivered no less than seven clear days prior to the date set for the public
hearing.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the City
Council finds that:
1.   Public Use. The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for
the use of the public and, therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no
longer justified.
2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When, in the judgment of the City Council, it would be in the best interest of
the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, they may
do so by resolution following notice and hearing as set out above in Section
137.03 and only after or in conjunction with the recording of the associated
vacation instrument. When disposing of any vacated public right-of-way, the
City Council shall consider easements over that right-of-way when it deems it
necessary to accommodate the needs of any and all adjoining private properties
so that those adjoining private properties will have free and unencumbered
access to and/or across the vacated right-of-way for any and all purposes.
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of a vacated street or alley right-of-way, or portion
thereof, by gift, except to a governmental body for a public purpose or to a
fair. When the City Council, at their sole discretion, determines that a
vacated street or alley is to be disposed of pursuant to Section
137.05 above, the vacated property may be disposed of through either one of the
following two methods:
1.   Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 354.23, of the Code of Iowa, (as
amended) where the vacated parcel shall first be divided into equal portions*
and disposed of and conveyed to the immediately adjoining proprietors through
the vacation instrument (ordinance or plat acceptance resolution) after payment
of an application and processing fee as set by Council resolution.
*(In lieu of dividing the parcel into equal portions, the City may dispose of
the vacated parcel in whatever portions are agreed upon in advance, in writing,
between the immediately adjoining proprietors).
2.   Through a publicly noticed, sealed-bid process wherein the minimum,
acceptable bids will be determined as follows:
   A.   Where the vacated property is of such a size or configuration to render
it “unbuildable” per those requirements as established in the Zoning
Regulations Chapter, and/or the property is 600 square feet or less in total
area, the minimum acceptable bid will be established on a square foot basis
where the square foot value shall be determined by the Council.
   B.   Where the vacated property is of such a size or configuration so that
it could be rendered “buildable” per those requirements as established in the
Zoning Regulations Chapter, and/or the property is more than 600 square feet in
total area, the property will be appraised and the minimum acceptable bid will
be established on a square foot basis by dividing the appraised value by the
square footage, and then adding the City’s costs to determine the total cost.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED Subject
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED   Subject
NO.
52        July 8,   Alley Vacation/Disposal - Block 6, Original Town of LeClaire
          1953
54        April 5,  Street Vacation - Market St. (2nd to Cody)
          1954
57        July 1,   Public Land Vacation (S.60’ of Outlot 33 in LeClaire’s Addition)
          1957
58 and 59 July 1,   Vacation and Disposal - 14th St. (Cemetery)
          1957
72        November  Alley Vacation - Blk. 47, Orig. Town
          27, 1961
73        November  Street Vacation/Disposal-Davenport St. and 15th (Partial)
          27, 1961
74        November  Street and Alley Vacation/Disposal -5th/6th/7th St. and Alleys
          27, 1961
81        April 24, Alley Disposal - Blk. 33, Orig. Town
          1963
86        September Public Land Vacation (South Half of “Market Square” in Block 25, Original
          22, 1965  Town of LeClaire
91        June 1,   Alley Vacation - Blk. 46, Orig. Town
          1966
94        March 1,  Alley Vacation - Block 1 Original Town of LeClaire
          1967
98        November  Alley Vacation - Blk. 24, LeClaire’s Add.
          8, 1968
121       May 6,    Correcting Q.C.Deed (Ordinance #81)
          1970
130       June 2,   Alley Vacation - Blk. 44, Orig. Town
          1971
132       September Alley Disposal - Blk. 44, Orig. Town
          1, 1971
146       April 26, Land Vacation - East ½ Block 11, Original Town
          1972
149       July 19,  Street Vacation - Ewing Street - Part
          1972
151       September Relocate/Dedicating Ewing St., - west of North 3rd Street
          6, 1972
165       December  Alley Vacation - Blk. 5, LeClaire’s Addn.
          18, 1974
167       February  Alley Disposal - Blk. 5, LeClaire’s Addn.
          5, 1975
169       June 18,  Alley Vacation - Blk. 26, Parkhurst and Chamberlin’s Addn.
          1975
186       July 20,  Land Vacation - North 160 feet of Block 25, Orig. Town
          1977
187       June 15,  Alley Vacation - Blk. 18, Parkhurst and Chamberlin’s Addn.
          1977
221       November  Street Vacation - 3rd Street - Part
          5, 1979
263       August 2, Street Vacation - Ewing Street - Part
          1982
276       December  Street Vacation - “I-80 Roadway”
          20, 1982
293       November  Alley Vacation - Blk. 20, LeClaire’s Addn.
          21, 1983
312       February  Street Vacation - Oak Street - Part
          18, 1985
317       July 1,   Street Vacation - Iowa Drive - Part
          1985
342       August 4, Correcting Ord. #169
          1986
361       March 2,  Alley Vacation - Block 8, Town of Parkhurst
          1987
364       May 4,    Street Vacation - Front Street - Part
          1987
376       September Street Vacation - Front Street - Part
          9, 1987
407       October   Alley Vacation - Block 7, Town of Parkhurst
          17, 1988
423       August    Street Vacation - Benton Street - Part
          14, 1989
424       August    Alley Vacation - Block 4, LeClaire’s Addn.
          14, 1989
441       June 3,   Alley Vacation - Blk. 25, Parkhurst’s and Chamberlin’s Add.
          1991
445       January   Alley Vacation - Block 28, LeClaire’s Add.
          6, 1992
446       February  Street Vacation - East/West port. Of Woodland Drive
          3, 1992
457       May 3,    Street/Alley Vacation - S.of Woodland Drive Michael Oelrich Req.
          1993
463       August    Street Vacation - Southerly Right-Way Valley Drive
          16, 1993
469       February  Partial Street Vacation - South 9th between Dodge and Davenport
          21, 1994
491       June 5,   Alley Vacation Block 15 Schloffel’s Subdiv. and westerly 35’ of South 9th
          1995      Street intersect. w/Dodge St. extend. S.for 180’
496       July 17,  Alley Vacation Block 40 of Orig. Town of LeClaire
          1995
508       June 17,  Vacation of portion of S.4th Street South of May and Alley S.of May St. in
          1996      Block 28 of Original Town of LeClaire (Fairwynd Addition)
557       July 6,   Vacation of a portion of 15th Street Public Street Right-of-Way located
          1999      within the Glendale Cemetery
570       April 17, Alley vacation of 20’ of ROW within Block 14 in the Town of Parkhurst
          2000      Addition
574       August 21 Vacation of portion of S.3rd Street Public Street R.O.W.located South of May
          ,2000     Street
585       March 19, Alley vacation of 20’ of ROW Block 7 of LeClaire Add.
          2001
587       October   Alley Vacation of 20’ ROW Block 11 of Original Town
          1, 2001
588       October   Alley Vacation of 20’ ROW Block 9 of Original Town
          1, 2001
589       October   Alley Vacation of 20’ ROW Block 54 of Original Town
          15, 2001
595       May 20,   Alley Vacation of 20’ ROW Block 48 of Original Town
          2002
602       August    Vacation of northerly portion of Welcome Ctr. Drive (between Eagle Ridge Road
          19, 2002  and Iowa Drive)
603       September Alley Vacation of 20’ ROW Block 58 of Original Town
          16, 2002
634       October   Vacation of portion of Woodland Lane Public Street R.O.W.
          18, 2004
643       June 20,  Vacation and Disposal of Public Street and Alley ROW-Reynolds Street-7th and
          2005      8th, 7th Street-Reynolds to Ewing, Alley between Ewing/Reynolds/7th/8th
648       October   Vacation and Disposal of Public ROW-/Reynolds Street 4th to 5th (Portion) and
          17, 2005  Alley between Jones/Reynolds/4th/5th (Portion)
651       December  Vacation and Disposal of Public ROW-Benton Street between Fifth and Sixth
          5, 2005
665       August 7, Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-way from Reynolds Street-East of
          2006      Cody Road and West of the I.C.and E.Railroad property
667       August 7, Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-way Block #30 (Between Fourth and
          2006      Fifth and May and Davenport Streets)
670       October   Vacation and Disposal of Public Alley Right-of-Way Block #30 (Between Fourth
          2, 2006   and Fifth and May and Davenport Streets)
674       March 5,  Vacation and Disposal of Public Street Ewing between Sixth-Eighth, and the
          2007      Right-of-Way of Ewing between Seventh-Eighth
676       July 16,  Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-way Portion of West Canal Shore
          2007      Drive Public Right-of-way
687       May 5,    Repeal ROW Vacation and Disposal - Reynolds Street East of Cody Road to West
          2008      of I.C.and E Railroad Property Ord. #665
697       December  Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-Ways of portion of Front Street from
          15, 2008  Dodge Street to Jones Street
709       September Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-Way North Fifth Street between
          8, 2009   Reynolds and Ewing Streets
718       June 7,   Vacation and Disposal of Reynolds ROW East of Cody Road West of Railroad
          2010      Property to Dana Development Amended 8-4-14 See Ordinance #770
713       July 19,  Vacation and Disposal of Public Alley ROW between Reynolds and Ewing and
          2010      Sixth and Seventh Streets
750       July 16,  Vacation and Disposal Public St. ROW (North Third St.) between Holland and
          2012      Walnut Streets.
757       July 15,  Vacation and Disposal portion of N.Fifth St. Chestnut to North of Byron
          2013      Street
760       September Vacation and Disposal Public ROW N.Fourth St. from Chestnut to Market Street
          4, 2013   and Chestnut from Fourth to Fifth
764       October   Amend Ord. #757 (Vacation and Disposal portion of N 5th St.) and #760
          21, 2013  (Vacation and Disposal portion of N Fourth St/Chestnut St.)
769       August 4, Vacation and Disposal of Alley in Block #13 of the Original Town of LeClaire
          2014      between 2nd/3rd and South of May Street
          August 4, Vacate Reynolds Street lying between the East R.O.W.line of Cody Road
770       2014      (U.S.67) and the West R.O.W.line of the I.C.and E railroad property -
                    Ordinance #718 Amendment
773       July 20,  Vacate and Dispose of a portion of Public ROW in the Rose Knoll Subdivision
          2015      of Lot #11
779       August 1, Vacate and Dispose of Public ROW “Antoine LeClaire’s Addition”.
          2016
785       February  Vacate and Dispose of a portion of Public ROW - “Welcome Center Drive”
          20, 2017
800       December  Vacate and Dispose of portion of ROW of Dodge Street between Sixth and Eighth
          3, 2018   Street and Public ROW in Block #45 and Block #46
821       March 7,  Vacate and Dispose of portion of Public ROW at Corner of N.Second Street and
          2022      N.Chestnut Street
825       July 5,   Vacate and dispose of portion of Reynolds Street, North Fourteenth Street and
          2022      alley
838       April 1,  Rescinding Ordinance 825 vacating and disposing of a portion of Reynolds
          2024      Street, 14th Street and alley
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
 
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
203           December 18, 1978
223           October 15, 1979
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing
street.
2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of LeClaire, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS
 
140.01 Permit Required 140.03 Specifications
140.02 Fees
 
140.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall commence or proceed with construction of any automobile
driveway or parking area over, across, or upon any portion of the public right-
of-way adjoining a permanently paved street without first having obtained a
written permit to do so from the City.
140.02   FEES.
Permit fees will be established by Council resolution and must be paid to the
City before any work or replacement commences.
140.03   SPECIFICATIONS.
All plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum requirements
before a permit will be issued:
1.   All driveways or parking areas meeting the criteria established herein,
which are constructed, replaced, or rebuilt, will be constructed of reinforced
Portland cement concrete (P.C.C.) or asphalt cement concrete (A.C.C.) at least
six inches thick in accordance with the City’s standard public works
improvements specifications where they abut paved, concrete, or asphalt
streets.
2.   Where a driveway or parking area is constructed across the sidewalk space,
it will conform to the sidewalk grade as established by the City.
3.   The width of any driveway or parking area for other than residential
dwellings will not exceed 30 feet at the property line. Where two or more
adjoining driveways or parking areas of any property type are provided for the
same property, a safety island of not less than three feet in width at the
property line will be provided. No more than two such driveways or parking
areas will be allowed to any piece of property on any street for each 100 feet
of continuous frontage thereof.
4.   The width of the driveways or parking areas for a residential dwelling
will not be more than 12 feet per garage stall but no more than 30 feet at the
property line, except for lots located on a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 24 feet
in width.
5.   Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing will be entirely removed for
the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line. If an existing joint
in said curb is within five feet of the end of the driveway opening, remove the
existing curbing, etc., to said joint, otherwise cut said combined curb and
gutter or separate curbing, making a neat edge at right angles to the edge of
the pavement and vertical. Integral curbing, which is that type placed with the
pavement and molded as an integral part of it, must be removed for the full
depth from the top of the curb to the bottom of the pavement. The edge must be
cut as described above. No combined curb and gutter, straight curb, or integral
curb will be removed within five feet of a public crosswalk.
6.   Where driveways or parking areas cross open ditches in the public right-
of-way, culverts of at least 12 inches will be installed.
7.   Any and all driveways, parking areas, private drives, and the areas
immediately adjacent thereto that are constructed or reconstructed over,
across, or upon any public right-of-way in the City, will be installed and
maintained at all times by and at the sole expense of the property owner,
except when the City, in the course of conducting repairs to or during the
construction of public facilities or improvements, disturbs or damages said
drive or parking areas. In these instances, the City will replace the damaged
or disturbed drive or parking areas with a similar material to that which
existed previously.
8.   Any and all driveways and private drives used for any purpose other than
strictly residential uses will be constructed no less than 50 feet from any
public right-of-way intersection measured from the nearest edge of the drive to
the closest right-of-way line.
CHAPTER 141
EXCAVATING, FILLING, AND GRADING
141.01 Definition                             141.14 Care of Excavated Material
141.02 Permit Required                        141.15 Cleanup
141.03 Manner of Excavating                   141.16 Protection of Watercourses
141.04 Sidewalks                              141.17 Backfilling
141.05 Restoring Surface                      141.18 Trenches in Pipe Laying
141.06 Supervision                            141.19 Prompt Completion of Work
141.07 Tunneling Required                     141.20 Urgent Work
141.08 Protective Measures and Routing        141.21 Emergency Action
Traffic
141.09 Clearance For Vital Structures         141.22 Noise, Dust, and Debris
141.10 Protection of Traffic                  141.23 Preservation of Monuments
141.11 Relocation and Protection of Utilities 141.24 Inspections
141.12 Abandonment of Substructures           141.25 Location Records
141.13 Protection of Adjoining Property
 
141.01   DEFINITION.
“Excavation” includes removal, stripping, or disturbance of soil, earth, sand,
rock, gravel, or other similar substances from the ground.
141.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to tunnel under, make any excavation, fill, or
grade on any public property in the City without having obtained a permit as
required by City Code
Chapter 142, or without complying with the provisions of this chapter or in
violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.† 11
 
Notes
11 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Public and private properties.
141.03   MANNER OF EXCAVATING.
It is unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or
at variance with the terms of the permit therefore. Proper bracing shall be
maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and, in excavations,
the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which
extends beyond the opening at the surface. No injury shall be done to any
pipes, cables, or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels; and at
least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the excavation, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person performing the excavation
shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the
information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa. No unnecessary
damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
141.04   SIDEWALKS.
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
141.05   RESTORING SURFACE.
Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street,
alley, or other public place in the City shall restore the surface to its
original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall be properly
tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the
ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface re-laid by the applicant, in compliance with the
ordinances of the City.
141.06   SUPERVISION.
The City shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to be inspected all
excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley, or
public place in the City to insure the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Notice shall be given to the City at least 10 hours before the work of
refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences.
141.07   TUNNELING REQUIRED.
It is unlawful to make any excavation in any portion of a street or sidewalk in
the City which is paved with concrete or asphalt paving. Where necessary, and
where a proper permit has been secured, tunnels may be driven or excavated
under any such pavement provided that, upon completion of the work involved,
the tunnel shall be backfilled with compacted sand, flowable mortar, or by some
other approved methods or materials.
141.08   PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING TRAFFIC.
It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon
any public place, to place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary
for safety of the general public. Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall
conform to the requirements of the City. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic
conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to
minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the
general public. When traffic conditions permit, the City may, by written
approval, permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period
of time. Such written approval may require that the permittee give notification
to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, written
approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. Warning signs shall be
placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert traffic
within a public street.
141.09   CLEARANCE FOR VITAL STRUCTURES.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves,
underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital equipment.
141.10   PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC.
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at
all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at
intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any
public street, alley, or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for
vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the
excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at
least half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line.
141.11   RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES.
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the City and the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to
relocate an existing utility this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned
by the City shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such
work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities
shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements
with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect, by
timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything
necessary to support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across
said work. The permittee shall secure approval of method of support and
protection from the owner of the utility. In case any of said pipes, conduits,
poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating
or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure,
the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged utilities
shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such
repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section
that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to utilities and any
resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such utility damage and such
assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the permittee. The only
exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the
negligence of the utility owner. The City shall not be made a party to any
action because of this section. The permittee shall inform itself as to the
existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same
against damage.
141.12   ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
Whenever the use of substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines designed to serve single properties, the person owning, using,
controlling, or having an interest therein, shall, within 30 days after such
abandonment, file with the City a statement in writing giving in detail the
location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in
the way, or subsequently becomes in the way, of an installation of the City or
any other public body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental
function, the owner shall remove such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of
its removal during the course of excavation for construction of the utility by
the City or any other public body.
141.13   PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
The permittee shall, at all times and at the permittee’s own expense, preserve
and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of
such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of
taking appropriate protecting measures, the permittee shall obtain consent from
the owner of such private property for such purpose and if the permittee cannot
obtain such consent, the City may authorize the permittee to enter the private
premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. The permittee
shall, at the permittee’s own expense, shore up and protect all buildings,
walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of
the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or
private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and
carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench
through any lawn area, said area shall be re-seeded or the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as
required by this chapter. All construction and maintenance work shall be done
in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in
a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began.
The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees and shrubs which
exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the City.
141.14   CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any
street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those
working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets, and so that as
little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining
property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to
permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the
case in a narrow alley, the City shall require that the permittee haul the
excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at
the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure
the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required
storage and disposal sites. All material excavated shall be laid compactly
along the side of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little
inconvenience as reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as
specified by the City. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of
traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be
required by the City to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
141.15   CLEANUP.
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of
all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. All
cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at
the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
City. From time to time, as may be ordered by the City and in any event
immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at the
permittee’s own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of
any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours
after having been notified to do so by the City, said work may be done by the
City and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall
also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.
141.16   PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSES.
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of
such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street,
an adequate water way shall be provided and maintained at all times. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt,
slickings, or other run-off pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing
or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its
failure to so provide.
141.17   BACKFILLING.
Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the spoil shall be
thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of
such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material
shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts consistent with the
type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation specified by the City.
Broken pavement, large stones, roots, and other debris shall not be used in the
backfill. The number and size of each lift shall be dependent upon the types of
soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the
restoration of the surface to a density condition not less than the existing
prior to excavation unless otherwise specified. The City may require compaction
tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered
professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in the opinion of
the City, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In
order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the City. All
expenses of such tests shall be borne by the permittee.
141.18   TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing ordinances or regulations.
141.19   PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence
and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition,
or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon
more than is reasonably necessary.
141.20   URGENT WORK.
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public, or
the public interest, require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the City may have full power to order, at the time a permit is granted,
that a crew of workers and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24
hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as
possible.
141.21   EMERGENCY ACTION.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for
the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided
that the person making such excavation shall apply to the City for such permit
on the first working day after such work is commenced.
141.22   NOISE, DUST, AND DEBRIS.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner as to
avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, dust, unsightly debris, and noise, consistent with the
provisions of Section
155.05.
141.23   PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey benchmark within the City, shall not be removed or disturbed,
or caused to be removed or disturbed, without first obtaining permission in
writing from the City to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments,
reference points, or benchmarks shall only be granted upon condition that the
person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of this monument by the City.
141.24   INSPECTIONS.
The City shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the
enforcement of this chapter. The City shall have the authority to promulgate
and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter.
141.25   LOCATION RECORDS.
Every public utility shall maintain records showing the location of all its
underground facilities, except relatively minor facilities which connect a
particular premises or building to a facility serving more than one premises or
building, and except oil or gas gathering or field lines. Every public utility
shall maintain equipment which can locate such facilities in the field.
CHAPTER 142
USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY
142.01 Purpose and Rule of          142.13 Relocation or Removal
Interpretation
142.02 Definitions                  142.14 Removal of Unauthorized
                                    Facilities
142.03 Franchise Required           142.15 Abandoned and Unusable Equipment
142.04 Franchise Supremacy          142.16 Compliance with Permit
142.05 Franchise Term Limit         142.17 Emergency Removal or Relocation
142.06 Right to Occupy Right-of-Way 142.18 Coordination of Installations
142.07 Registration                 142.19 Enforcement
142.08 Right-of-Way Installation    142.20 Insurance, Bond Requirements, and
Permits                             Indemnification
142.09 Completion of Installations  142.21 Pole Attachments
142.10 Inspection                   142.22 Appeal to City Council
142.11 Revocation of Permits        142.23 No Easement, Permission Only, Not
                                    Assignable
142.12 Interference with the City   142.24 Franchise Fee Credit
 
142.01   PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION.
The Council finds it is necessary and desirable to establish uniform rules and
controls: (a) to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of
services by the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public
property for the delivery of utility or other services; (b) to protect public
and private investment; (c) to ensure the orderly use of public property and
the health, safety, and welfare of the population; and (d) to provide for the
regulation and administration of the public streets and other public property.
This chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of
the public and users of the City streets and other public property.
Accordingly, this chapter imposes fair, efficient, competitively neutral,
uniform, and reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of
facilities currently within the City’s right-of-way or to be placed herein.
142.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “City right-of-way” means the area on, below, or above a City roadway,
street, bridge, bicycle path, or City sidewalk, in which the City has an
interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and
utility easements. A City right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a
City right-of-way with regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications
or broadcasts service or utility poles owned by the City.
2.   “Right-of-way users”’ means those entities, except the City, that own or
operate facilities that are or are proposed to be installed within City right-
of-way.
142.03   FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
No person shall erect, maintain, or operate any plants or systems for electric
light and power, heating, cable television, or gas works within the City
through the use of the right-of-way to provide customers within the City
without first obtaining a franchise from the City as provided in Chapter 364 of
the Code of Iowa.
142.04   FRANCHISE SUPREMACY.
The terms of any existing franchise or other existing agreement allowing the
use of the right-of-way which are in direct conflict with any provision of this
chapter, shall control and supersede the conflicting terms of this chapter
until the expiration of such franchise or other agreement, provided, however,
that requirements set forth in this chapter relating to insurance, bonds,
penalties, security funds, letters of credit, indemnification, or any other
security in favor of the City may also be applicable in the sole determination
of the City or unless otherwise negotiated by the City and franchise grantee.
All other terms of this chapter shall be fully applicable to all persons
whether franchised or not.
142.05   FRANCHISE TERM LIMIT.
No franchise for use of the right-of-way or other public property shall be
granted for a term of more than 25 years.
142.06   RIGHT TO OCCUPY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
1.   Any person, required to register under this chapter, that occupies, uses,
or places its equipment in the right-of-way, is hereby granted a right to do so
if and only for so long as it:
   A.   Timely pays all fees as provided herein; and
   B.   Complies with all other requirements of law.
2.   The grant of right to occupy hereunder is expressly conditioned on, and is
subject to, the police powers of the City, continuing compliance with all
provisions of law now or hereafter enacted, including this chapter as it may
be, from time to time, amended and further, is specifically subject to the
obligation to obtain any and all additional required authorizations, whether
from the City or other governmental body or authority.
142.07   REGISTRATION.
1.   The City and all right-of-way users that have or propose to have
facilities within the City right-of-way shall register annually with the City
on or before January 1 of each year to provide the following information:
   A.   The identity and form of legal entity of the registrant and, if wholly
owned by another legal entity, the identity of the owning entity.
   B.   The name, address, and telephone number of the officer, agent, or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement, and for
local operations of the right-of-way user.
   C.   A description of the registrant’s existing and proposed facilities
within the City right-of-way.
   D.   A description of the service that the registrant intends to offer or is
currently offering within the City.
   E.   Information sufficient to enable the City to determine that the
registrant has applied for or received any document or certificate required by
State or federal law to provide services or facilities within the City.
   F.   Proof of registration with the Iowa One-call system, if applicable.
2.   Each right-of-way user registration, and registration by the City, shall
be accompanied by such registration fee as shall be set by Council resolution.
3.   The purpose of the registration required by this section is to assist the
City in enforcement of its regulations; and, to assist the City in the
abatement of dangerous conditions or conditions that threaten to interfere with
the property of others by reason of the registrant’s facilities.
142.08   RIGHT-OF-WAY INSTALLATION PERMITS.
1.   A right-of-way user shall obtain, by application to the City Public Works
Director, a permit for installation in the City right-of-way whenever the
right-of-way user desires to place, construct, or bury anything in the City
right-of-way. Such application shall be accompanied by:
   A.   Written and graphic material that states and shows the particular part
of or point on the City right-of-way where placement, construction, or
excavation is proposed to occur.
   B.   Statement of the beginning and ending dates for the time during which
the work is to be done and completed.
   C.   A sign-off sheet showing that all other registered right-of-way users,
the City, with facilities in the vicinity of the proposed installation or
repair work have reviewed the plan for the proposed work and have no objection.
So as not to have undue delay, the right-of-way user making application for the
permit need only wait 10 working days from the time of submitting its plans to
the other right-of-way users. Failure by a right-of-way user to respond to such
requested plan review within 10 days shall constitute an expression of no
objection. If there is a dispute between right-of-way users as to location of
the respective facilities of each in a segment of City right-of-way, the Public
Works Director shall determine the placement of such facilities in a manner
reasonably consistent with how various kinds of facilities are shown to be
placed on a model right-of-way cross section established and maintained on file
for public inspection by the Public Works Director.
   D.   Plans and specifications for the proposed work in such detail as the
Public Works Director shall reasonably require showing that the work as
proposed conforms to City ordinances, regulations, and policies.
2.   In making excavations in the City right-of-way, the right-of-way user
shall do the work in a manner devised to cause the least possible inconvenience
to the public.
3.   The right-of-way user shall properly protect, according to safety
standards generally accepted at the time that the installation in the City
right-of-way occurs, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of
barricades, warning lights, and such other or additional devices, in accordance
with the Iowa Statewide Urban Design and Specifications (SUDAS), as
circumstances may warrant. If, in the opinion of the City Public Works
Director, such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected,
the City Public Works Director shall notify the right-of-way user and the
right-of-way user shall comply immediately with the instructions of the Public
Works Director. Failure or refusal by the right-of-way user to follow such
instructions shall constitute a violation of this section.
4.   Any trenches or excavations opened by a right-of-way user in the City
right-of-way shall be filled by the right-of-way user. All backfilling in the
City right-of-way shall be done in accordance with City specifications,
including specification for the replacement of grass and other landscaping
features.
5.   Temporary street surfacing shall be placed in excavations in a City street
as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks, curbs, and
gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened, disturbed, or
damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like materials at the
expense of the right-of-way user and left in as good a condition as before the
opening, disturbance, or damage occurred. In the event that like materials for
replacement are not available, the Public Works Director may approve the use of
an alternative material that is reasonably close in effect to the original
material. The Public Works Director will consider and evaluate for approved
use, on a case-by-case basis, such alternative methods that meet standards of
good engineering practice.
6.   Where a cut or disturbance is made by a right-of-way user to a section of
a street or a sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, the
right-of-way user shall replace the full width of the existing sidewalk or
street paving and the full length of the section or sections cut, a section
being that area marked by expansion joints or scoring, or as directed by the
City.
7.   Right-of-way users shall maintain, repair, and keep in good condition for
a period of two years following such disturbance all portions of the City
street surface disturbed by a right-of-way user. Landscaping that is so
disturbed shall be repaired and maintained for a period of one year. Grass that
is so disturbed shall be repaired and maintained for a period of 60 days.
8.   No right-of-way user, or any person acting on the right-of-way user’s
behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in the City right-of-way without
five working days advance notice to the City. In the event of an emergency
involving public safety, the Public Works Director, or designee, may issue the
permit orally, but the written documentation of the application for and
issuance of the permit shall be completed as soon as practicable after the work
has started.
9.   Whenever any existing electric utility facilities, cable television
facilities, or other telecommunications facilities are installed underground in
a certain segment of the City right-of-way, any other right-of-way user shall
also locate its facilities underground in that segment of the City right-of-
way.
10.   Street crossings and sidewalk crossings by right-of-way user facilities
shall be bored at those locations where reasonably required by the Public Works
Director. Some examples of where such boring may be required are: major
streets, new streets, and locations of major events that conflict with
construction.
11.   No permit shall be issued for the installation of right-of-way user
facilities in the City right-of-way unless the right-of-way user has filed with
the City a registration statement in accordance with Section
142.07 above.
12.   No permit for installation of right-of-way user facilities in the City
right-of-way shall be issued by the City Public Works Director unless the
right-of-way user has paid such installation permit fee as shall be
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Council.
13.   Installation and repair work shall be done in accordance with the City
street tree protection policy requirements. All trees, landscaping, and grounds
removed, damaged, or disturbed as a result of installations by a right-of-way
user in the City right-of-way shall be replaced or restored as soon as is
reasonably possible, in accordance with the City street tree protection policy
with respect to effects of construction in the City right-of-way.
14.   No excavation or obstruction permit shall be required for the routine
maintenance and minor repair of equipment located in the right-of- way.
Activities constituting “routine maintenance” and “minor repair” work for
purposes of this chapter shall be restricted exclusively to work conducted on
equipment located aboveground or overhead and as more specifically limited in
the Right-of-Way Access Standards Book. Registrants shall be required to
restore the work area for such routine maintenance or minor repair projects to
the same condition that existed before the commencement of such work. Routine
maintenance and minor repair work shall be covered under the performance and
restoration bond and indemnification required under Section
142.20 of this chapter.
142.09   COMPLETION OF INSTALLATIONS.
A right-of-way user shall promptly complete all installations in the City
right-of-way so as to minimize disruption of the City ways and other public and
private property. All installation work authorized by permit within the City
right-of-way, including restoration work, shall be completed as soon as
possible but not later than 180 days of the date the City Public Works Director
issued a permit for the installation. An extension may be granted for good
cause due to circumstances beyond the control of the right-of-way user.
142.10   INSPECTION.
The City Inspector shall be afforded full access to registrant’s worksites to
review compliance with the terms of this chapter and to make any inspection or
test that the City determines is necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, and to ensure that the work for which the applicable
permit was granted is being carried out in the authorized area of the right-of-
way and within the permitted time limit. The City Inspector may issue an order
to the registrant for any work which does not conform to the applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct
the violation within 10 days after issuance of the order will be cause for
revocation of the permit pursuant to Section
142.11 of this chapter. The City Inspector shall not, however, make any
determinations or have control over the registrant’s work other than to require
that same be carried out in compliance with this chapter, within the authorized
area of the right-of-way, and within the time permitted for the work. The City
Inspector shall not make any determinations or have authority over or
responsibility for the means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures of
work being performed by the registrant, for safety precautions and programs
incident to the work, or for any failure of the registrant to comply with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations governing registrant’s performance of
the work. The City Inspector shall not make any determinations or have
authority over or responsibility for the structural integrity or safety of any
non-City equipment constructed, installed, repaired, reconstructed, replaced,
or restored in the right-of-way, nor shall it make any determinations or have
authority over or responsibility for the ability of non-City equipment to
function as intended in the right-of-way.
142.11   REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
1.   If the City determines that the permittee has committed a material breach
of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any
condition of an applicable permit, the City shall make written demand upon the
permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued
violation may be cause for the immediate forfeiture of the permittee’s
franchise, the termination of all rights thereunder, and the revocation of all
rights established and granted under this chapter. Further, a material breach,
as set forth above, shall allow the City, at the City’s discretion, to place
additional or revised conditions on the applicable permit.
2.   Within 10 business days after receiving written notification of the
breach, the permittee shall provide the City with a written plan, acceptable to
the City Inspector, for its correction. Permittee’s failure to so contact the
City Inspector, the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause
for immediate forfeiture of the permittee’s franchise, the termination of all
rights hereunder, and the revocation of all rights established and granted
under this chapter. Further, the permittee’s failure to so contact the City
Inspector, or the permittee’s failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the
permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall
automatically place the permittee on probation for one year.
3.   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the City for the
City’s reasonable costs including, but not limited to, restoration costs, the
costs of collection, and reasonable attorney’s fees incurred in connection with
such revocation.
4.   In addition to the specific remedies set forth above, any material breach
of the terms of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction as set
forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
142.12   INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY.
A right-of-way user shall so construct, maintain, operate, and locate its
facilities in the City right-of-way so as not to interfere with the
construction, location, maintenance, and operation of City sewer, water,
drainage, electrical, communications, signal, and fiber optic facilities, or
any other operations or facilities of the City. The City shall have the right
and power by resolution of its Council, or by order of its Public Works
Director, to specifically direct the location of right-of-way user facilities
with reference to City facilities, existing or proposed, in such a manner as
shall serve the public use and convenience. Failure or refusal by a right-of-
way user to promptly follow such directions shall be a violation of this
section.
142.13   RELOCATION OR REMOVAL.
Following written notice from the City, a right-of-way user shall, at its own
expense, promptly, temporarily or permanently, relocate, change or alter the
position of any facilities within the City right-of-way whenever the City shall
have determined that such relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
City public improvement, or for the operations of the City in or upon the City
right-of-way.
142.14   REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.
Following written notice from the City, a right-of-way user that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility within the City right-of-way
shall promptly remove such facilities from the City right-of-way at the right-
of-way users sole expense. A facility is unauthorized if:
1.   Any license, permit, or authorization required by federal, State, or City
regulations with respect to the facilities has not been obtained, or has been
revoked, or allowed to expire.
2.   The facilities are not installed in accordance with the permit for
installation or other requirements of this chapter.
142.15   ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.
1.   A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations with respect
to any equipment in any right-of-way, or segment, or portion thereof, must
either:
   A.   Obtain the Council’s approval by resolution of the transfer of the
registrant’s obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under this
chapter to another person. The aforementioned resolution approving such a
proposed transfer shall not be considered until the registrant has filed with
the City Inspector written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition,
or assignment, such notice to clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the
terms and conditions thereof. Similarly, the proposed vendee, assignee, or
lessee shall file an instrument with the City Inspector, duly executed,
reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of this chapter and franchise, if
applicable, and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof and all of
the obligations of the proposed transfer. The aforementioned approval by the
Council shall not be unreasonably withheld; or
   B.   Submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its equipment to the City. If a registrant proceeds under this
clause, the City may, at its option:
      (1)   Purchase the equipment;
      (2)   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
      (3)   Require the registrant to post an additional bond or an increased
bond amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonably anticipated costs
to be incurred in removing the equipment.
2.   Equipment of a registrant which fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, and which for two years remains unused, shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. The City may:
   A.   Abate the nuisance in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances;
   B.   Take possession of the equipment and restore it to a usable condition;
   C.   Require removal of the equipment by the registrant or by the
registrant’s surety; or
   D.   Exercise its rights pursuant to the performance and restoration bond.
3.   Any registrant who has unusable equipment in any right-of-way shall remove
it from that right-of-way during the next scheduled excavation, unless this
requirement is waived by the City.
142.16   COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
All installation work and activities for right-of-way user facilities in the
City right-of-way shall be in accordance with the installation permit issued by
the Public Works Director. Any work done that is not in accordance with an
applicable installation permit shall be a violation of this section by the
right-of-way user; and, failure to do work required by an installation permit
shall be a violation by the right-of-way user, regardless of involvement of
agents or contractors of the right-of-way user.
142.17   EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION.
The City shall have the right and power to cut or move any right-of-way
facilities in the City right-of-way as the City may determine to be necessary,
appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency.
The City shall endeavor to give notice of such emergency disruption, but
nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to create a duty to give such notice.
Restoration of right-of-way facilities that have been cut or moved as aforesaid
shall be done by the right-of-way user at its own expense.
142.18   COORDINATION OF INSTALLATIONS.
All right-of-way users with facilities in the City right-of-way or who expect
to install facilities in the City right-of-way shall coordinate such activities
with the City and with each other right-of-way user. Between January 1 and
February 1 of each year, all registered right-of-way users shall provide to the
City a schedule of their anticipated installations in the City right-of way for
that calendar year. Each registered right-of-way user shall meet with the City,
and with the other registered right-of-way users as scheduled by the City
Public Works Director, to schedule and coordinate installation of right-of-way
user facilities in the City right-of-way, so as to minimize public
inconvenience and costs.
142.19   ENFORCEMENT.
1.   Penalties. For violation of provisions of this chapter the City may seek
fines in the amounts of $500.00 for a first offense within a year, $750.00 for
each subsequent offense within a year. The penalties shall be assessable
against an owner or operator and shall be chargeable to its performance bond
and/or letter of credit, at the City’s discretion. Each day that a violation
occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2.   Injunctive Relief. In addition to any other remedies hereunder, the City
may seek an injunction to mitigate or terminate a violation, or employ any
other remedy available at law or equity including, but not limited to,
imposition of penalties pursuant to Subsection 1 of this section.
3.   Timely Performance or Compliance. Any failure of the City to insist on
timely performance or compliance by any person shall not constitute a waiver of
the City’s right to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that
person or any other person.
4.   Remedies Cumulative. All remedies specified in this chapter are cumulative
unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not
foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of
liquidated damages or penalties relieve an operator of its obligations to
comply with this chapter. In exercising any remedy specified in this chapter,
including Subsections 1 and 2, the City shall comply with any substantive and
procedural requirements for exercising such remedies in an owner’s or
operator’s franchise agreement or other authorization.
5.   Reduce or Waive Penalties. The City Public Works Director or attorney may
reduce or waive any of the above listed penalties for good cause shown.
142.20   INSURANCE, BOND REQUIREMENTS, AND INDEMNIFICATION.
1.   A right-of-way user that has or expects to install facilities within the
City right-of-way shall maintain in effect such insurance as the City’s risk
manager shall reasonably deem appropriate to the nature of the facilities
installed or to be installed, and the location of such installations.
2.   The Public Works Director may require performance security in an amount
commensurate with the scope of the work, to secure satisfactory installation in
accordance with the installation permit, by means of an irrevocable letter of
credit in a form approved by the City Attorney, or by cash deposit.
3.   A right-of-way user that has or expects to install facilities within the
City right-of-way shall provide the City a Hold-Harmless, Waiver of Liability,
and Indemnification Agreement regarding the installation and maintenance of
such facilities.
142.21   POLE ATTACHMENTS.
At those locations on the City right-of-way where there are already existing
utility poles of either the City or of some other right-of-way user, a second
set of poles is strictly prohibited, except when done by or at the request of
the City. If there is not sufficient space on the existing utility poles for
attachment of the proposed additional right-of-way user facilities, or if the
right-of-way user proposing to install right-of-way user facilities at the site
of the existing poles cannot reach an agreement with the owner of the poles to
allow attachment of those facilities, then those facilities shall be installed
underground.
142.22   APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL.
A right-of-way user that is denied registration, denied a right-of-way
installation permit, that has its right-of-way installation permit revoked, or
that believes that the fees imposed do not conform to the requirements of
Chapter 480A of the Code of Iowa, may request in writing that such denial,
revocation, or fee imposition be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall act
within 60 days of a timely written request. A decision by the Council affirming
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition must be in writing and supported by a
written finding establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
142.23   NO EASEMENT, PERMISSION ONLY, NOT ASSIGNABLE.
The provisions of this chapter, and the permits and authorizations granted
pursuant to this chapter, shall not be deemed to create, or grant to anyone any
easement, estate, or interest in the property of the City. A permit to install
right-of-way user facilities in the City right-of-way is a mere license, that
is, an authorization to the stated entity to go onto the land of the City to do
only that which is explicitly stated by the permit, that may be revoked by the
City as provided in this chapter, and that cannot be assigned to another. A
right-of-way user that occupies City right-of-way or makes an installation of
facilities in the City right-of-way on the basis of a purported assignment of
an installation permit granted to another entity, shall be in violation of this
section.
142.24   FRANCHISE FEE CREDIT.
For a right-of-way user that pays a franchise fee, the amount of any
registration fee paid per Subsection
142.07(2) and any installation permit fee paid per Subsection
142.08(12) shall be applied as a credit to reduce the amount due for the
franchise fee.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Building Inspector is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:
   A.   Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
   B.   Faulty construction;
   C.   The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
   D.   The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or
   E.   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used.
3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to
the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date,
time and place of hearing.
2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 12
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
   Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
12 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
   recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
   procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF LECLAIRE,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section
145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to
the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against
the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover
costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Grid System        150.03 Administration of House Numbering
150.02 General Provisions
 
150.01   GRID SYSTEM.
There is hereby established a uniform grid system to be used in the numbering
of buildings in an orderly manner as follows:
1.   Base Lines. The numbering system shall begin at the established base
lines.
   A.   Wisconsin Street. The base street for those streets running in an east-
west direction shall be Wisconsin Street. Even numbers shall be assigned to
buildings on the south side of the street. Odd numbers shall be assigned to
buildings on the north side of the street.
   B.   Cody Road. The base street for those streets running in a north-south
direction shall be Cody Road at its easternmost location. Even numbers shall be
assigned to buildings on the west side of the street. Odd numbers shall be
assigned to buildings on the east side of the street.
2.   Blocks. There shall be 14 blocks per mile. 375 feet shall be established
as a general guideline to equal a “block” in areas where streets do not occur
at regular intervals.
3.   Numbers Per Block. 100 numbers per block face are possible. In the process
of assigning numbers to buildings, a bias toward the first 50 numbers of the
number set shall be implemented. Seven and one-half feet per number shall be
the approximate figure for numbering buildings.
150.02   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Each platted lot shall have one primary structure which will be assigned a
number.
2.   Unsubdivided Land. If more than one main structure exists on a parcel of
land that has not been subdivided, each structure (home or business) should
have an individual house number. It should be noted that such instances
constitute nonconforming uses according to the Zoning Ordinance.
3.   Corner Lots. The address shall be assigned to the frontage of the lot
having the smallest dimension. If the lot has equal dimensions, the address
shall be assigned to the street on which the primary structure faces.
4.   Planned Unit Development. Planned unit developments should follow the
general grid system as closely as possible and exercise discretion in the
naming of the streets and numbering of buildings.
150.03   ADMINISTRATION OF HOUSE NUMBERING.
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City shall have the power and duty to
establish, review, and revise, if found necessary, a house numbering system or
street numbering system to be effective within the City. The authority for
administration of assigning numbers to buildings shall be placed with the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such officer shall issue addresses at
the time building permits are issued, and shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the record of all such addresses issued.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Purpose               151.04 Duty to Trim Trees
151.02 Definitions           151.05 Trimming Trees to be Supervised
151.03 Planting Restrictions 151.06 Removal of Trees
 
151.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance of the
City by regulating and providing for the planting, care, and removal of trees
on or overhanging any public right-of-way or on any public property. 
151.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Public place” means any property dedicated to the public which is
intended to be used for any public purpose.
2.   “Public right-of-way” means any property dedicated to the public which is
intended to be used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic and for the placement
of utilities.
151.03   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
No tree shall be planted in any public right-of-way except in accordance with
the following:
1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any public right-of-way shall be planted
in the non-paved area midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the
curb. In the event a curb line is not established, trees shall be planted on a
line 10 feet from the property line.
2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on the above-referenced non-paved area
if it is less than nine feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of
exposed soil surface per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet
to street intersections (property lines extended) and 10 feet to driveways. If
it is at all possible, trees should be planted inside the property lines and
not between the sidewalk and the curb.
3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall hereinafter plant on any public right-
of-way any fruit bearing tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as
cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm, or evergreens.
151.04   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees overhanging
any public right-of-way trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees as required in this chapter,
the City will cause to have the trees trimmed and the costs will be assessed
against the property as provided for in Section
155.07.
151.05   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
It is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in any public place
unless the work is done pursuant to the consent of the City.
151.06   REMOVAL OF TREES.
The City shall remove any trees on the public right-of-ways of the City which
interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon. The City
shall additionally remove any trees on public places which have become
diseased, or which constitute a danger to the public, or which may otherwise be
declared a nuisance.
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE
 
155.01 Purpose                     155.06 Administration
155.02 Adoption of Building Codes, 155.07 Failure to Comply
Standards, and Supplements
155.03 Amendments, Modifications,  155.08 Zoning Review and Compliance
Additions, and Deletions
155.04 Retroactivity of Code       155.09 Persons with Disabilities and the
                                   Elderly
155.05 Hours for Construction Work
 
155.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt by reference complete codes regulating
the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, heights, area, and
maintenance of buildings and structures to provide for the preservation of the
health, safety, welfare, and overall benefits of the citizens of the City.
155.02   ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES, STANDARDS, AND SUPPLEMENTS.
The regulations contained within Chapter 5 of the Scott County Code (Uniform
Construction Codes, including the International Building Code, the
International Residential Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, the Uniform Plumbing
Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, and the National Electric
Code), as amended and updated by County and as further specifically amended
herein-below, shall be adopted as the regulations governing any and all
construction of buildings and other structures or work done in the City.
155.03   AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS.
The following amendments, modifications, additions, and deletions to the Codes
as adopted in Section
155.02 are hereby made:
1.   “Iowa” is inserted as the name of the state and “City of LeClaire” as the
name of the municipality in those parts of the Codes where such insertions are
necessary or appropriate.
2.   A dimensioned plot plan shall be submitted to the City for review and
consideration for any work conducted on the exterior of any structure on any
lot. Each applicant shall submit a plot plan showing dimensions of the property
and locations of proposed (and existing) improvements and such other
information as may be necessary for checking compliance of proposed
improvements with the requirements of the Construction Code and Zoning
Ordinance. For all new construction and construction requiring a permanent
foundation/footing system, said plot plan shall be accompanied by a Certificate
of Survey executed by a land surveyor registered under the laws of the State,
certifying that they have surveyed the lot or parcel of real estate described
therein, and has set stakes or monuments at the corners of said tract which are
visible and available for use, a minimum of three-quarter inches steel stakes,
said Certificate of Survey to be dated not more than one year prior to the date
of application for a building permit, or sufficient survey markers shall be
readily visible to assist in verifying dimensions.
3.   All references to building line, height, and zoning are void and the
subject matter of the Zoning Regulations of the City shall be applicable.
4.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip,
use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause same
to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started prior to
obtaining said permit, the fees specified shall be doubled, but the payment of
such double fees shall not relieve any person from complying fully with any
requirements of this code in the execution of the work, nor from any other
penalties prescribed therein.
5.   The Building Official shall require a permit from the County Board of
Health approving the installation of a septic sewer system on said premises,
which permit shall be attached to the building permit to be issued by the
Building Official of the City and shall be a condition precedent to the
issuance of such building permit. The building permit of the City shall be
amended in an appropriate amount to show the issuance of such permit by the
County Board of Health. Nothing therein contained shall authorize the
installation of a septic sewer system of such City nor to permit the continued
use of septic sewer systems where the ordinances provide for connection with
the sanitary sewer system of the City.
6.   Food Waste Disposal Units Required. New structures erected, arranged, or
intended to be used for purposes which cause, result in, produce, or develop
food wastes in the direct preparation of food, occupancies such as dwellings,
restaurants, hotels, boarding houses, hospitals, and similar occupancies shall
provide and use approved food waste disposal equipment for such purposes within
the premises thereof. Existing structures, converted or altered to the uses as
described above, need not meet the requirements as set forth in this subsection
unless such structure is provided with a new kitchen. Such kitchen only shall
be provided with a food disposal unit.
7.   Causing, maintaining, or permitting graffiti of any nature or form to
remain on any exterior surface of any exterior structure whatsoever shall be
prohibited. For the purposes of the code, the term “graffiti” means the
intentional defacing of any exterior surface of any structure. (This is as
opposed to the normal, customary routine exterior surface maintenance of a
structure.)
155.04   RETROACTIVITY OF CODE.
The adoption by reference of the Codes and regulations as adopted in Section
155.02 shall not be applicable for any building for which buildings shall be
completed in accordance with the Building Code effective when the permit was
issued, and the City shall retain jurisdiction to prosecute such causes of
action and violations of the Code previously adopted and accruing prior to
December 31, 1980, as if the previous code were still in existence. It is
unlawful to erect or construct any building or structure or to commence any
work covered under these ordinances within the City in violation of, or without
complying with the appropriate provisions of such regulations. Copies of such
regulations shall be kept on file in the Clerk’s Office for inspection and
copies shall be furnished to the Building Official.
155.05   HOURS FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK.
1.   It is unlawful for any “commercial contractor” at any time to engage in or
to conduct any “construction activity” anywhere in the City except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. Permission to
engage in or to conduct “construction activities” at times other than those
mentioned herein may be granted by the City only in those instances when (i)
the public safety, health, and welfare will be enhanced and/or protected by
such authorization, or (ii) where substantial harm will be caused by the
failure to perform critical work in a timely fashion, or (iii) when the “noise
disturbance” emanating from such “construction activity” does not exceed those
decibel levels as established in Paragraph D of this section.
2.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in or to conduct any “construction
activity” anywhere in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
Monday through Saturday, before 7:00 a.m. on Monday, and at any time on Sunday,
when the “noise disturbance” emanating from such activity exceeds those decibel
levels as established in Paragraph D.
3.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the performance of any
work necessary at any time to prevent personal injury or property damage or to
restore damaged essential public services or facilities, nor shall the
provisions of this section apply to any vehicle or equipment whose operations
are regulated pursuant to the provisions of the Interstate Commerce Act.
4.   For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall be
applicable:
   A.   The term “commercial contractor” means any person who, for profit or as
an employee of such person, normally engages in an activity associated with the
construction of any building or structure, or the laying of any pavement, or
the installation of any underground piping or other such facility including,
but not limited to, the making of any excavation, the clearing of land, and the
loading or unloading of materials, equipment, or supplies.
   B.   The term “construction activity” means the construction of any building
or structure, or the laying of any pavement, or the installation of any
underground piping or other such facility including, but not limited to, the
making of any excavation, the clearing of land, and the loading or unloading of
materials, equipment, or supplies.
   C.   The term “noise disturbance” means any sound which: (i) annoys or
disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (ii) causes or tends
to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans; or (iii)
endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or (iv)
endangers or injures personal or real property; and (v) is transmitted across a
real property boundary and which exceeds the following maximum permissible
sound levels within the designated land use areas:
   D.   Decibel Levels.
      (1)   Residential District:
         a.   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. - 75 (dBA)
         b.   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. - 60 (dBA)
      (2)   Commercial District:
         a.   At all times - 75 (dBA)
      (3)   Industrial District:
         a.   At all times - 75 (dBA)
155.06   ADMINISTRATION.
The Building Inspector shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions
of this chapter; and all fees provided for in the codes and regulations shall
be paid to the Clerk or the City’s designated representative.
155.07   FAILURE TO COMPLY.
If a property owner fails to remedy a situation covered under the Building Code
or under agreements related to building and property regulations covered by
various permits which direct a property owner to complete stated work within a
stated period of time, the City Administrator may cause to have the work
completed by the City with the costs assessed against the property owner in the
following manner:
1.   Notice. The City Administrator shall notify, by certified and registered
mail, the property owner of the property owner’s failure to remedy a situation
and give that property owner a reasonable amount of time to complete the
necessary work.
2.   Completion of Work. The City Administrator shall, after a reasonable
amount of time, cause to have the work done by City workers or by private
contractors.
3.   Fee Schedule - City Workers. The Council shall establish, by resolution,
the fees and other costs associated with the City’s abatement of any violation
of any provision of this chapter as referenced herein.
4.   Fee Schedule - Private Contractors. When, in the opinion of the City
Administrator, it is desirable or necessary to have work done by private
contractors, the property owner shall be billed at 125 percent of the charge
from the private contractor to the City.
5.   Assessment of Costs. The Clerk will certify the costs to the County
Treasurer for assessment and the costs will then be collected with and in the
same manner as property taxes.
6.   Work Performed Under Emergency Situations. After reasonable attempts have
been made to contact the affected property owner, either in person or by phone,
and said property owner is either not contacted or consent is given to make the
necessary repairs and bill them, only direct City costs shall be billed to the
property owner. Equipment costs shall be billed on an hourly basis using
standard rental rates in effect at the time as listed in the current Iowa DOT
Schedule of Equipment Rates. (The provisions of this section do not apply to
non-complying property owners after due notice has been served and as such all
other provisions of this section shall apply thereto.)
155.08   ZONING REVIEW AND COMPLIANCE.
No person will construct, build, establish, modify, or maintain any structure
on any lot without having first obtained a Zoning Review Permit. The cost of
said permit will be established by resolution of the Council.
155.09   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND THE ELDERLY.
In order to make buildings and structures accessible to and functional for
persons with disabilities and the elderly, the City hereby adopts by reference
the provisions of the Code of Iowa and the Iowa Administrative Code (as they
now exist or are hereafter amended) with regard to these matters.
CHAPTER 156
LIMITATION ON BUILDING PERMITS
 
156.01 Building Permits      156.05 Stop Order
156.02 Fully Equipped Sites  156.06 Interpretation
156.03 New Areas             156.07 Certificate of Occupancy
156.04 Moratorium on Permits
 
156.01   BUILDING PERMITS.
No building permits for the construction of residential buildings, single or
multi-family dwellings, or for commercial or industrial purposes, as defined in
the Zoning Regulations, shall be issued except for construction on sites
equipped with street pavements, sidewalks, sewers (both sanitary and storm),
water service with mains installed, and street lighting and signing, unless
otherwise approved by the Council.
156.02   FULLY EQUIPPED SITES.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to permits for the construction of
residential, commercial, or industrial buildings on any lot which abuts upon an
established street already served by streetlights, stormwater, and sanitary
sewers, water mains and pavements, including curb and gutter.
156.03   NEW AREAS.
If the existing utilities of the City, including the wastewater treatment and/
or conveyance system, the natural gas and electric system, and the water supply
and/or distribution system, are not adequate to carry a load in addition to
that created by the construction of buildings on streets served by such
utilities, no additional load shall be placed on such utilities until the
capacity of the utilities has increased.
156.04   MORATORIUM ON PERMITS.
If, in the judgment of the Council, the water supply and distribution system of
the City and the wastewater treatment and conveyance system become loaded to
their full capacity, and if any additional burden or service requirement would
result in serious damage to the premises now being served with the consequent
injury to the public health and safety, then the issuance of any building
permits for the construction of new buildings, either commercial, residential,
or industrial, calling for services from or by the municipal waterworks system
or the wastewater treatment and conveyance system is prohibited until such time
that the capacity of the systems may be increased to provide for such
additional service.
156.05   STOP ORDER.
Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of this Code of
Ordinances, or in variance with the terms of any permit issued for such work,
the Building Inspector or the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may order
all work on the job stopped until such violation or variance is eliminated, and
any work or installation made in violation of this Code corrected. Such stop
order, if oral, shall be followed by a written stop order within 24 hours
(excluding Saturday, Sunday, or holidays). It shall be unlawful to do or
perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property. Such stop order may be revoked
by the Building Inspector, Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Mayor,
Council, or City Administrator.
156.06   INTERPRETATION.
Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be done
to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Inspector,
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any other officer of the City, this
shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied
with; and no provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary
powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be, or power to require
conditions not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in
an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
156.07   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
No Certificate of Occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered, or
repaired after the adoption of the Building Code shall be issued unless such
building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in compliance with the
provisions thereof.
CHAPTER 157
SWIMMING POOLS
 
157.01 Compliance Required 157.06 Fences
157.02 Private Pool        157.07 Water Supply
157.03 Location            157.08 Electrical Requirements
157.04 Permit Required     157.09 Inspection
157.05 Recirculation Pools
 
157.01   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful to construct, maintain, install, or enlarge any swimming pool in
the City except in compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
157.02   PRIVATE POOL.
The term “swimming pool” is hereby defined to mean any outdoor, man-made
receptacle, not a part of a natural water course, which has a water depth of 18
inches or more in any portion thereof, intended for swimming, bathing,
immersion, or partial immersion, or other recreational activities by human
beings, and including all appurtenant equipment a part thereof. This definition
includes “in-ground,” “above-ground,” and “on-ground” swimming pools, along
with hot tubs, spas, and “temporary, inflatable, or otherwise constructed”
swimming pools.
157.03   LOCATION.
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance
less than eight feet from any side or rear property line, or building line.
Pumps, filters, and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be
located at a distance not less than eight feet from any side property line. No
swimming pool shall be closer than eight feet to the principal building or
accessory structure having a basement, nor closer than five feet to any
principal building or accessory structure without a basement.
157.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement, or
alterations of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances within
the City unless permits therefore have been obtained from the Building
Inspector. “Temporary, inflatable, or otherwise constructed” swimming pools and
covered hot tubs and spas are exempt from the permit requirements of this
particular section only, providing all other conditions of their use as
enumerated in this chapter are complied with.
157.05   RECIRCULATION POOLS.
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of
the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the
pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool.
157.06   FENCES.
1.   Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on which there
is situated a swimming pool with a water depth of 18 inches or more in any
portion thereof shall maintain on the lot or premises upon which such swimming
pool is situated a fence, wall, or other adequate structure completely
surrounding such pool to make the same reasonably inaccessible to all persons,
including small children. Such fence, wall, or other structure must not be less
than four feet in height above the grade with no openings large enough to admit
a child except through doors or gates as hereinafter provided. Any above-ground
pool with a solid, non-collapsible, sidewall height, including access point(s)
of not less than four feet above grade, does not require fencing pursuant to
the requirements of this section providing that any access ladders, stairs, or
other such devices are removed or gated off and locked when the pool is not in
use.
Temporary, inflatable, or otherwise constructed swimming pools and hot tubs and
spas also do not require fencing pursuant to the requirements of this section
providing that the swimming pools are drained, dismantled, and placed in
storage and the hot tubs and spas are covered immediately following each use.
For any hot tub or spa “cover” to meet the requirements and intent of this
chapter, it shall be solid in nature and shall be capable of supporting not
less than 50 pounds of weight. When such pools, hot tubs, or spas are in use,
they shall be monitored at all times by at least one adult who shall be
immediately adjacent to and physically present within not more than 25 feet of
the pool’s location. Any fence, wall, or other adequate structure required
pursuant to the requirements of this section must be constructed and completed
prior to placing any water in any swimming pool.
2.   All doors or gates in fences surrounding swimming pools shall be of such a
size as to completely fill any opening in the fence, wall, or other structure,
and shall be equipped with self-latching devices capable of keeping such gate
or door securely closed. The closing or latching devices shall be located not
less than four feet above grade or be otherwise inaccessible from the outside
to small children. In lieu of such self-closing and self-latching devices, said
doors and gates may be equipped with locks which shall be kept locked at all
times when said pool is not in actual use.
3.   The Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may
allow slight modifications for good cause shown in individual cases with
respect to height of the fence, wall, or other enclosing structure or the
nature or position of the latch or other locking device. The Building Inspector
may permit other protective devices or structures to be used as the degree of
protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than
the protection afforded by the fence, wall, or other enclosing structure and
the gate, door, latch, or other locking devices described herein. Upon the
application of a property owner, the Council, only, may grant extensions of
time for compliance for good cause shown in individual cases. Such extensions
of time shall not exceed 30 days at a time.
157.07   WATER SUPPLY.
No source of water other than that secured from the City waterworks
distribution system shall be used in swimming pools.
157.08   ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
All electrical installations provided for, installed, and used in conjunction
with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance with the
ordinances regulating electrical installations. No current-carrying electrical
conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or
underground, or within 15 feet of such pools. All metal fences, enclosures, or
railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become electrically
alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other
cause, shall be effectively grounded.
157.09   INSPECTION.
The Building Inspector and/or Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
periodically inspect all swimming pools to determine whether or not the
provisions of the ordinances regarding health, sanitation, and safety
applicable thereto are being complied with.
CHAPTER 158
SOLAR ENERGY USES
 
158.01 Permit Required                              158.03 Right to Light
158.02 Provisions Relating to All Solar Energy Uses
 
158.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person, firm, or corporation shall install, construct, or alter any device
or equipment for solar energy use without first obtaining a permit, therefore.
The application shall be on forms provided by the Building Inspector and shall
contain all information needed to show that the proposed construction or
alteration complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
158.02   PROVISIONS RELATING TO ALL SOLAR ENERGY USES.
All solar energy uses shall conform to the requirements of this section:
1.   No solar hot water heating system shall be placed in such a location as to
provide more shadow or less sunlight on neighboring properties than the amounts
allowed by the provisions of Section
158.03 of this chapter.
2.   Applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be followed in
locating collectors.
3.   No collector shall be placed in any side yard closer, to the street line
or sidewalk, than 15 feet.
158.03   RIGHT TO LIGHT.
1.   Requirements. No person shall build any structure or plant or maintain any
tree or shrub in any residential area in the City without complying with each
of the terms of this chapter.
2.   Restriction. No person shall build any structure or plant or maintain any
tree or shrub taller than 25 feet or seven point six meters, unless the
structure, tree, or shrub comes within the exceptions set out in Subsection 4
of this section.
3.   Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued for any structure
that does not comply with the provisions of this section.
4.   Exemptions. An applicant for a building permit may obtain a permit for a
building higher than the restrictions set out in Subsection 2 of this section,
and a tree or shrub may be maintained higher than such restriction, if the
applicant can show any of the following conditions:
   A.   There is an existing principal residence building and the building’s
roof will not be shaded by the tree, shrub, or building more than one hour in
any day at any time of the year, except one hour after sunrise and one hour
before sunset.
   B.   There is a public street.
   C.   There is a lot with no principal residence building and the proposed
building, or the tree or shrub, will not shade any part of the lot on which
building is permitted by law and by applicable restrictions on the real estate,
at a height of 18 feet or five point five meters, for more than one hour in any
day at any time of the year, except one hour after sunrise and one hour before
sunset.
   D.   The adjacent lot is zoned for commercial purposes and is not in use as
a residence.
5.   New Subdivisions. New subdivisions may be designed with innovative ways of
preventing shading of residential buildings. Any design will be deemed to
comply with the requirements of this section if that design results in no roof
of any residence building being shaded for more than one hour in any day at any
time of the year, except one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset.
6.   Existing Buildings. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the
demolition or alteration of any existing building.
CHAPTER 159
FIRE SUPPRESSION APPLIANCES AND FIRE CODE
 
159.01 International Fire Code Adopted 159.02 Amendments
 
159.01   INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Leclaire, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, 2021 Edition, including errata and Appendix Chapters
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K and N as published by the International Code Council,
be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of LeClaire, in the State
of Iowa regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from
fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided,
providing for the issuance of permits and each, and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the
office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, prescribed in the following sections of this ordinance.
159.02   AMENDMENTS.
The International Fire Code, 2021 Edition is amended as follows:
1.   Section [A] 102.7 Referenced Codes and Standards shall be amended as
follows:Section [A] 102.7 Referenced Codes and Standards.
   All references throughout the International Fire Code to the International
Building Code shall refer to the building code as adopted elsewhere in the City
Code.
   All references throughout the International Fire Code to the International
Residential Code shall refer to the residential code as adopted elsewhere in
the City Code.
   All references throughout the International Fire Code to the International
Property Maintenance Code shall refer to the building code as adopted elsewhere
in the City Code.
   All references throughout the International Fire Code to the International
Mechanical Code shall refer to the mechanical code as adopted elsewhere in the
City Code.
   All references to the International Plumbing Code shall refer to the
plumbing code as adopted elsewhere in the City Code.
   All references to the ICC Electrical Code shall refer to the electrical code
as adopted elsewhere in the City Code.
2.   Section [A] 101.1 Title is amended by inserting ‘the City of LeClaire’ in
place of [NAME OF JURISDICTION].
3.   Section [A] 101.2.1 Appendices shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   [A] 101.2.1 Appendices. Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K and N are
specifically adopted by the City of LeClaire with amendments as noted in the
municipal Code.
4.   Section [A] 103.1 Creation of agency shall be amended by inserting
‘LeClaire Fire Department’ in place of [INSERT NAME OF DEPARTMENT].
5.   Section 104 Authority at fires and other emergencies shall be amended by
addition of the following section:
   104.12.4 Evacuation. The Fire Code Official is authorized to order an
operation or use stopped, or the evacuation of any premises, building, or
vehicle or portion thereof which has or is a fire, life safety or health
hazard.
6.   Section [A] 105.2 Application shall be amended by addition of the
following section:
   [A] 105.2 (a) Permit. A permit application will need to be completed and
submitted along with Commented [SB1]: Review permit process with City Hall and
Scott County the applicable permit fee to the City of LeClaire for installation
of the appropriate system. Permit application forms and information are
available at LeClaire City Hall located at 325 Wisconsin Street or at the City
of LeClaire website.
7.   Section 105.5 Required Operational Permits shall be amended by addition of
the following sentence: The Fire Code Official at their discretion shall send
plans for an operational permit request to an outside agency for review. The
Fire Code Official shall choose the plans review agency. The applicant shall
pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the outside agency.
The permit shall not be issued until the review fees have been paid.
8.   Section [A] 105.6 Required Construction Permits shall be amended by
addition of the following sentence: The Fire Code Official at their discretion
shall send plans for a construction permit request to an outside agency for
review. The Fire Code Official shall choose the plans review agency. The
applicant shall pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the
outside agency. The permit shall not be issued until the review fees have been
paid.
9.   Section [A] 111.1 Board of Appeals Established shall be deleted and
replaced as follows:
   [A] 111.1 Board of Appeals Established. See Section
170.34 Board of Adjustment of the City of LeClaire Municipal Code for Board of
Appeals process.
10.   Section [A] 112.4 Violation penalties shall be deleted (note: Subsection
[A] 112.4.1 shall not be deleted) and replaced as follows:
   [A] 112.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall
build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply
with such order as affirmed or modified by any court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation
be guilty of a municipal infraction. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
11.   Section 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS shall be amended by addition of the
following definition:
   CROWD MANAGER. Crowd Manager is responsible for safe crowd movement during
daily activities and special events, means of egress, assisting venue
occupants, and overseeing emergency response and evacuation plans.
12.   Section [M] COMMERCIAL COOKING APPLIANCES shall be deleted and replaced
as follows:
   [M] COMMERCIAL COOKING APPLIANCES. Appliances used in a commercial food
service establishment for heating or cooking food, and which produce grease
vapors, steam, fumes, smoke, or odors that are required to be removed through a
local exhaust ventilation system. Such appliances include deep fat fryers;
upright broilers; griddles; broilers; steam-jacketed kettles; hot­ top ranges;
under-fired broilers (Char broilers); ovens; barbecues; rotisseries;
residential stoves/ovens and similar appliances. For the purpose of this
definition, a food service establishment shall include any commercial building
or portion thereof used for the preparation and serving of food including for
employees.
13.   Section 307.2 Permit Required shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   307.2 Permit Required. Open burning shall be conducted in accordance with
Section 307 and its subsections and with Sections
105.05 of the City of LeClaire municipal Code. Open burning shall also be
conducted as required by other governmental agencies regulating emissions.
Application for such approval shall only be presented by and issued to the
owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.
14.   Section 307.4 Location shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   307.4.4 Permanent Outdoor Fire Pits or Fire Feature Devices. Fire pits shall
comply with all the following restrictions:
   1.   The fire pit must be in an approved location at least fifteen (15) feet
from a structure.
   2.   If the building is equipped with fire sprinklers and there is an
overhang in the area where the firepit is being used, then the overhang must
have horizontal sidewall sprinkler protection.
   3.   There must be an emergency stop button installed within fifteen (15)
feet (line of sight) to disconnect the fuel gas in the event of an emergency.
   4.   The emergency shut off must be labeled using a weatherproof sign with
letters on a contrasting background.
   5.   Solid fuels are strictly prohibited for fire pits and fire feature
devices.
   Exception: Fire pits and fire features used at one- and two-family
dwellings.
15.   Section 405.3 Frequency shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   405.3.1 Drills in Group E. Fire and evacuation drills in Group E occupancies
shall be conducted in accordance with Section 100.31 of the Iowa Administrative
Code. Emergency evacuation/fire drills shall be conducted at least four (4)
times a year. Not less than two (2) drills shall be conducted between July 1
and December 31 each year and not less than two (2) drills shall be conducted
between January 1 and June 30 of each year.
16.   Section 405.3 Frequency Table 405.3 shall be amended by addition of the
following footnote:
   d. Group E occupancies shall conduct fire and evacuation drills in
accordance with Section 405.3.1.
17.   Section 505.1 Address Identification shall be deleted and replaced as
follows:
   New and existing buildings shall provide approved address identification.
The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is
visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification
characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each
character shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the Fire Code Official, address
identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building
cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means
shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be
maintained.
18.   Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for Standpipe Systems shall be deleted and
replaced as follows:
   507.5.1.1 Hydrant for Standpipe Systems and/or Fire Department Connections.
Buildings equipped with a standpipe and/or a Fire Department connection
installed in accordance with Section 912 shall have a fire hydrant located on a
fire access road within one hundred (100) feet (30 m) of the Fire Department
connection as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the
building.
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed one hundred (100) feet (30
m) where approved by the Fire Code Official.
19.   Addition (New footnote to be added to IFC) Section 507.5 Fire Hydrant
Systems.
All fire hydrants erected within the public right-of-way or on immediately
adjacent easements, for the purpose of extinguishing fires, are hereby declared
to be public fire hydrants. No person or persons, except members of the Fire
Department acting in an official capacity or Water Department personnel, or
other persons that have been specifically authorized by the City and/or
Company, and then only in the exercise of authority delegated by the City and/
or Company, shall open any of said fire hydrants, or attempt to uncover or
remove any protection from, or in any manner tamper or alter any of said fire
hydrants.
20.   Section 507.5.3 Private Fire Service Mains and Water Tanks shall be
amended by addition of the following footnote:
   4. All private fire hydrants must be painted red in color.
21.   Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems shall be amended by addition of the
following sections:
   507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Height. Fire hydrants shall be installed a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches from the nominal ground level to the center of the lowest
water outlet.
   507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Outlet Direction. All fire hydrants shall be positioned
so that the four and one­half (4½") inch connection is facing the street or
driveway accessible to the fire department apparatus.
   507.5.9 Fire Hydrant Threads. All fire hydrants within the City of LeClaire
and within Scott County Benefited Fire District No. 1 shall have National
Standard Threads (NST).
   507.5.10 Size of Main. No fire hydrant shall be installed on a water main
less than six inches in diameter. Water mains shall be appropriately sized and
installed to provide the required water flow for hydrant supplied by it.
   507.5.11 Distance Between Hydrants. Public fire hydrants shall be installed
at such time as any public water main is extended for a distance of 400 feet or
more, or a water main is replaced and there is no hydrant within 400 feet in
either direction. There shall be no more than 400 feet in travel distance
between each public fire hydrant.
   507.5.12 Flow. The minimum flow requirement for a water main serving a fire
hydrant is the rate of water flow, at a residual pressure of twenty (20) pounds
per square inch (20 psi) and for a specified duration, as specified in Appendix
B of this Code.
22.   Section 901.2 Construction Documents shall be amended by addition of the
following sections:
   901.2 (a) Water Based Protection Systems. Water based fire protection
systems. A qualified person shall have a minimum National Institute for
Certification in Engineering Technologies [NICET] Level III certification for
Water Based Systems Layout OR be a Professional Licensed Engineer with
experience in life safety system design. The designer must also be licensed
with the State of Iowa Department of Inspections, Appeals & Licensing.
   Submittals must include an electronic (pdf) version of the design,
specifications, cut sheets and hydraulic calculations to the LeClaire Fire
Department. One (1) full size set of the drawing must also be sent to the
LeClaire Department located at 201 N 15th St, LeClaire, IA 52753 for review.
Both sets of drawings must be stamped and signed by the submitter.
   901.2 (b) Fire Alarm Systems. A qualified person shall have a minimum
National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies [NICET] Level
III certification for Fire Alarm Systems OR be a Professional Licensed Engineer
with experience in life safety system design. The designer must also be
licensed with the State of Iowa Department of Inspections, Appeals & Licensing.
Submittals must include an electronic (pdt) version of the drawing along with
wiring/device specifications and voltage drop calculations to the LeClaire Fire
Department. One (1) full size set of the drawing must also be sent to the
LeClaire Fire Department located at 201 N 15th St, LeClaire, IA 52753 for
review. Both sets of drawings must be stamped and signed by the submitter.
23.   Section 901.4.6 Appearance of equipment shall be amended by addition of
the following section:
   901.4.6.1 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room. A fire sprinkler riser room shall be
separated from the electrical room. The riser room shall have no electrical
panels, devices, or apparatus inside the room other than the outlets or support
equipment (lighting, air compressor, and heater) required for the use of the
fire sprinkler system and/or the fire alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room
shall not be exclusively accessed from the electrical room, but the electrical
room may be accessed from the riser room. Emergency lighting shall be provided
in the fire pump room or automatic sprinkler riser room.
24.   Section 901.4.7.3 Environment shall be amended by addition of the
following sentence:
   The fire pump room or automatic sprinkler riser room shall have a supervised
room temperature sensor.
25.   Section 901.6.3 Records shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   901.6.3.2 Records Management. Inspection record submission. Contractors who
perform installation, inspection, testing, and/or maintenance services on fire
and life safety systems are required to electronically submit all installation
and compliant & non-compliant inspection reports to the Fire Department’s 3rd
party compliance management platform approved by the Fire Code Official within
thirty (30) calendar days of the installation/inspection date. Reports
submitted after thirty (30) calendar days may incur late fees.
26.   903.2.8 Group R. shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
with a Group R fire area with the exception of; one and two family homes and
townhouses with four or less units. All automatic sprinkler systems shall be
installed in accordance with Sections 903.3.
27.   Section 903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and Decks shall be deleted and replaced as
follows:
   903.3.1.2.1 Group R Balconies and Decks. Sprinkler protection shall be
provided for all exterior balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of dwelling
units where the building is required to have a fire sprinkler system installed.
Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to
be located such that their deflectors are within one (1) inch to six (6) inches
below the structural members and a maximum distance of fourteen (14) inches
below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks.
28.   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems shall be amended by addition
of the following section:
   903.3.1.2.4 Fire Sprinklers for Canopies. A canopy covering a door that is
required to be marked as an exit shall be required to have fire sprinklers
installed outside that door if the canopy extends more than four (4) feet out
from the door and is twelve (12) feet or less in height from the ground
regardless of whether the canopy is combustible or non-combustible. Canopies
that have vehicle access under them with door openings shall be required to
have fire sprinklers installed under the total canopy regardless of whether the
canopy is combustible or non-combustible.
29.   SECTION 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS shall be amended by addition of
the following section:
   903.7 Sprinkler Zones. Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the
area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and shall provide a sprinkler control
valve and waterflow device for each normally occupied floor. The location of
sprinkler control valves must be approved by the Fire Code Official.
30.   Section 904.13.2 System Interconnection shall be amended by addition of
the following section:
   904.13.2 (a) Ventilation Operation. The ventilation system shall shut down
the make-up air to the hood and continue to exhaust upon activation of the hood
fire extinguishing system. Supply air openings other than part of the hood
system shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from any part of a Type 1 Hood.
Supply air openings closer than 6 feet must shut down upon activation of the
extinguishing system.
31.   Section 905.1 General shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   905.1 General. Standpipe systems shall be provided in new buildings and
structures in accordance with Sections 905.2 through 905.12. In buildings used
for high-piled combustible storage, fire protection shall be in accordance with
Chapter 32. For the purposes of this Section 905 “Standpipe Systems,” Sections
905.3.1 through 905.6.2 shall be amended by deleting all references to Class II
and Class III standpipe systems and inserting Class I standpipe systems in
their place.
32.   Section 905.2 Installation Standard shall be deleted and replaced as
follows:
   905.2 Installation Standard. A Class I standpipe system shall provide two
and one-half (2½) inch (63.5 mm) hose connections to supply water for use by
fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams. Also, two
and one-half (2½) inch to one and one-half (1 ½) inch reducers with one and
one-half (1½) inch caps shall be provided on each standpipe outlet. Two and
one-half (2½) inch and one and one-half (1½) inch threads shall be National
Standard Threads (NST). No hose is to be provided.
   Exception: Hose may be provided when the facility has an assigned and
trained fire brigade.
33.   Section 905.3.4.1 Hose and Cabinet shall be deleted in its entirety.
34.   Section 905.5.3 Class II System 1-Inch Hose shall be deleted in its
entirety.
35.   Section 905.3 Required Installations shall be amended by addition of the
following section:
   905.3.9 Building Footprint and Access. Where the most remote portion of a
floor or story is more than four hundred (400) feet from a hose connection or
Fire Department access road, the Fire Code Official is authorized to require
standpipes to be provided in approved locations.
36.   Section 907.1 General shall be amended by addition of the following
sections:
   907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels. Each building shall have no more than one
(1) Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP). Installation of the fire alarm panel shall
not exceed six (6) feet in height measured from the floor to the top of the
panel.
   Exception 1: Panel height may be altered by the code official.
   Exception 2: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet
the limitation in the number of panels.
   907.1.5 Fire Alarm Annunciator Panels. The Fire Code Official can require
the addition of fire alarm annunciator panels based on the size of building and
access to the building.
37.   Section 907.2 Where Required - New Buildings and Structures shall be
deleted and replaced as follows:
   907.2 Where Required - New Buildings and Structures. An approved addressable
fire alarm system complying with the provisions of this Code and NFPA 72 shall
be installed when the gross square footage of a building is equal to or greater
than the area as specified in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 inclusive,
subject to the authority having jurisdiction or by Section 907.2, whichever
shall be more restrictive.
   Buildings with eight (8) or less initiating devices may use zoned systems
provided only one (1) device is used per zone. Each device shall have a plain
English LCD (liquid crystal display). This alpha/numeric descriptor location is
required to be reported to the Scott Emergency Communications Center upon
activation of the fire alarm system.
   R-3 dwellings are not required to meet Section 907.2 of this Code.
   Exception:
38.   Section 907.2 Where Required - New Buildings and Structures shall be
amended by addition of the following sections:
   907.2 (a) Manual Fire Alarm Pull Boxes. Manual fire alarm pull boxes (“pull
stations”) shall be required where deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official.
   907.2 (b) Monitoring. All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by a UL
listed monitoring station.
   907.2 (c) Descriptive Location. Each address point identification shall have
an alpha/numeric descriptor location for the fire alarm system. This alpha/
numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the Scott Emergency
Communications Center upon activation of the fire alarm system.
   907.2 (d) Detection Location. Where corridors and/or hallways are designed
as the path of egress, and at the top of stairwells that serve more than two
(2) floors and are protected by fire sprinkler systems, they shall also be
protected by smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be of the photo electric
type or as approved by the code official.
39.   Section 907.2.1 Group A shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   Group A. A manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA 72 in Group A Occupancies and have an occupant load of
three hundred (300) or more. Group A occupancies not separated from one another
in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be
considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section.
Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be
provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.
   Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate
throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.
40.   Section 907.2.1 Group A shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   907.2.1.3 Group A Occupancies. In Group A occupancies with an occupant load
of one thousand (1000) or more, the activation of the fire alarm or fire
sprinkler system, shall automatically shut down or stop music, sound systems,
conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.
41.   Section 907.2.3 Group E shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   907.2.3 Group E. In the absence of a complete automatic sprinkler system, a
complete automatic detection system utilizing an emergency voice/alarm
communication system shall be installed throughout the entire Group E
occupancy. A Group E occupancy with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided with a fire alarm system utilizing an emergency voice/alarm
communication system in compliance with Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in
accordance with Section 907.6. As a minimum, smoke detection shall be provided
in corridors at a maximum spacing of thirty (30) feet on center, and heat or
smoke detection shall be provided in any hazardous or non-occupied areas in all
new or existing Group E occupancies.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Group E occupancies with an occupant load of less than fifty (50).
   Manual fire alarm boxes are not required in Group E occupancies where all
the following apply: Interior corridors are protected by smoke detectors with
alarm verification.
   Auditoriums, cafeterias, gymnasiums, and the like are protected by heat
detectors or other approved detection devices.
   Shops and laboratories involving dusts or vapors are protected by heat
detectors or other approved detection devices.
   Off-premises monitoring is provided.
   The capability to activate the evacuation signal from a central point is
provided.
   In buildings where normally occupied spaces are provided with a two-way
communication system between such spaces and a constantly attended receiving
station from which a general evacuation alarm can be sounded, except in
locations specifically designated by the Fire Code Official.
   Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where
the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system, the notification appliances will activate on sprinkler water flow, and
manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location.
   Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of
Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall not be
required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of one hundred (100) or
less, provided activation of the fire alarm system initiates an approved
occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5.
42.   Section 907.2.8 Group R-1 shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   907.2.8 Group R General. Group R-1; Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums
and boarding houses (non-transient) convents, dormitories, fraternities,
sororities, and monasteries; and Group R-4 shall have a monitored addressable
fire alarm system. Upon adoption of this Fire Code, Group R-1; Group R-
2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient) convents,
dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and monasteries that have existing
automatic fire alarm systems shall comply when their existing fire alarm system
needs replacement to have that fire alarm system monitored.
43.   Section 907.2.8.1 Manual Fire Alarm System shall be deleted in its
entirety.
44.   Section 907.2.8.2 Automatic Smoke Detection System shall be deleted and
replaced as follows:
   907.2.8.2 Automatic Smoke Detection System. An automatic smoke detection
system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with
Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R occupancies.
   1.   Common spaces outside of dwelling units and sleeping units
   2.   Laundry rooms, mechanical equipment rooms, and storage rooms
   3.   All interior corridors serving sleeping units or dwelling units
   Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings
that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units or dwelling units
and where each sleeping unit or dwelling unit either has a means of egress door
opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit or a
means of egress door opening directly to an exit.
   Required smoke alarms in dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R
occupancies shall be interconnected with the fire alarm system in accordance
with NFPA 72.
45.   Section 907.2.9 Group R-2 shall be deleted in its entirety.
46.   Section 907.2.9.1 Manual Fire Alarm System shall be deleted in its
entirety.
47.   Section 907.2.9.3 Group R-2 College and University Buildings shall be
deleted in its entirety.
48.   Section 907.2.11 Single- and Multi-Station Smoke Alarms shall be deleted
and replaced as follows:
   907.2.11 Single and Multi-Station Smoke Alarms. Listed single and multiple-
station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance
with provisions of this Code and the household fire warning equipment provision
of NFPA 72. Smoke alarms in dwelling units shall be addressable with sounder
bases and monitored by the building fire alarm system as a supervisory signal
only. Mini horns in dwelling units are not required if notification from a
building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with sounder bases.
   Note: Section 907.2.11 only applies to R-1, R-2, R-4 and I-1.
   Delete the exceptions for 907.6.3.
49.   Section 907.2 Where Required - New Buildings and Structures shall be
amended by addition of the following section:
   907.2.24 Mixed Occupancy Requirements. All buildings containing dwelling
unit(s) and/or guest room(s) which also contain other occupancies or uses shall
be provided with the following protection from fire in addition to all
applicable provisions of the International Fire Code, and International
Building Code duly adopted by the City.
   (1) All dwelling units and/or guest rooms shall be provided with smoke
detectors conforming to the International Fire Code, and International Building
Code.
   (2) Alarms, when required, shall be interconnected to alert all occupants
both residential and non­residential.
50.   Section 912.4.1 Locking Fire Department Connection Caps shall be deleted
and replaced as follows:
   912.4.1 Locking Fire Department Connection Caps. Locking fire department
connection caps approved by the fire department are required for all new
construction that have a water-based fire protection system where the
responding Fire Department carries approved key wrenches for removal. Existing
structures that have a water-based fire protection system shall be required
immediately after conducting the five (5) year obstruction and maintenance
testing, or if one (1) or more of the fire department caps are missing.
51.   Section 1003 General Means of Egress shall be amended by addition of the
following section:
   1003.8 Location of Preschool through Second Grade Students. In Group E
occupancies, rooms normally occupied by preschool, kindergarten or first grade
students shall not be located above or below the level of exit discharge. Rooms
normally occupied by second grade students shall not be located more than one
story above the level of exit discharge.
52.   Section [BE] 1010.2.9 Panic and Fire Exit Hardware shall be amended by
addition of the following section:
   1010.2.9 (a) Door Hardware. All exterior doors deemed necessary by the Fire
Code Official for emergency access shall have a keyed cylinder and handle for
emergency personnel to enter. These exterior doors should be numbered in a
sequential order starting with the main entrance (front office door/public
entrance). The main entrance should always be #1 with the cardinal direction
letter after. i.e. 1N, 7W. Subsequent doors will be numbered in sequential
order in a clockwise manner. The font must be a minimum six (6) inch in height
and contrast in color of the door. The inside of the door must also be labeled
with the corresponding identification two (2) inch in height and contrast in
color.
53.   SECTION 1028 EXIT DISCHARGE shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   [BE] 1028.6 Exit Discharge Pathways. Exit discharge pathways shall be paved
from all required exits of a building to a public way or parking lot.
54.   Section 1203.1 General shall be amended by addition of the following
section:
   1203.1.10 Shutdown of Emergency and Standby Power Systems. In addition to
the requirements of NFPA 10 for a remote manual stop, a keyed switch to shut
down the generator shall be located at the remote annunciator panel or fire
panel. The Fire Code Official shall determine its location. If there is no
annunciator or fire alarm panel or the location of these panels is determined
to be inadequate for this shut down button, the Fire Code Official shall
determine its location.
55.   Section 5003.3.1.4 Responsibility for Cleanup shall be amended by
addition of the following words at the end of this section:
   unless otherwise provided by a 28E Agreement or another contract.
56.   Section 5601.1 Scope shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   5601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the possession,
manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of explosives, explosive materials
and small arms ammunition. The provisions of this chapter also govern the
manufacture of display and consumer fireworks. The sale, storage and use of
display fireworks and consumer fireworks shall meet the requirements of Iowa
Code Sections 100.1, 100.19, 100.19A, 364.2 and 727.2. These Iowa Code sections
supersede other provisions of IFC Chapter 56 dealing with the sale, storage and
use of display fireworks and consumer fireworks.
57.   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations Where Above-Bround Tanks are Prohibited
shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks are Prohibited.
Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited in the entire City of LeClaire, Iowa.
   Exceptions: Commercial and industrial zones subject to all required zoning
controls, building and fire codes and approval by the Community Development
Director and the Fire Code Official.
58.   Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks are prohibited
shall be deleted and replaced as follows:
   Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks are Prohibited.
Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited in the entire City of LeClaire, Iowa.
   Exceptions: Commercial and industrial zones subject to all required zoning
controls, building and fire codes and approval by the Community Development
Director and the Fire Code Official.
59.   Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits shall be
amended by addition of the following statement:
   Section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. The storage of
liquified petroleum gas is prohibited in the entire City of LeClaire, Iowa.
   Exceptions: Commercial and industrial zones subject to all required zoning
controls, building and fire codes and approval by the Community Development
Director and the Fire Code Official.
(Chapter 159 – Ord._850 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
 
CHAPTER 160
SATELLITE OR DISH ANTENNA
 
160.01 Definition           160.04 Size and Height Limitations
160.02 General Requirements 160.05 Location on Lot
160.03 Number Allowed       160.06 Retroactivity
 
160.01   DEFINITION.
“Satellite or dish antennae” means a satellite receiver which is a concave
“dish” or antenna anchored to a foundation or structure, or which is portable,
and which is a device designed and intended to transmit or receive or intercept
microwave, television, radio, and other such signals or transmissions.
160.02   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
No satellite receiver exceeding three feet in diameter shall be erected or
placed on any lot within the corporate limits until a permit has been obtained
from the Building Department. Satellite antennas must be of a non-combustible
and corrosive resistant material, must be one solid color that is reasonable
and consistent with the surrounding environment, and comply with the
manufacturer’s specifications, unless they are in conflict with this Code of
Ordinances, in which case this Code will control.
160.03   NUMBER ALLOWED.
No more than one satellite antenna shall be allowed on any residentially zoned
lot. More than one antenna may be allowed for commercially or industrial-zoned
lots if zoned for that use or purpose.
160.04   SIZE AND HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
A satellite antenna may not exceed 15 feet in diameter in any residentially
zoned area. Satellite antennas may exceed 15 feet in diameter in commercial or
industrial-zoned areas where the uses are permitted by the zoning regulations.
Ground-mounted satellite antennas may not exceed the height of the peak of the
principal structure. Roof mounted satellite antennas may not exceed 10 feet
above the roof peak and in no instance shall exceed the maximum allowable
height for the particular zoning classification.
160.05   LOCATION ON LOT.
Satellite antennas greater than 24 inches in diameter may be located only in
the rear yard of any residentially zoned lot as said yard is defined in the
zoning regulations. Satellite antennas located in any zoning district must
conform with the applicable zoning regulations in effect for that district with
regards to setbacks, etc., except as otherwise modified herein.
160.06   RETROACTIVITY.
All satellite antennas existing prior to July 7, 1986, are exempt from the
provision herein stated. Any existing satellite antennas not in conformance
with this chapter are considered “nonconforming” structures, and, as such, may
be governed by the applicable zoning regulations.
CHAPTER 161
SIGNS
161.01 Scope, Purpose, and Intent of 161.09 Signs Permitted in Residential
Control                              Districts
161.02 Conformance with Other Codes  161.10 Signs Permitted in Commercial
                                     Districts
161.03 Definitions                   161.11 Signs Permitted in Industrial
                                     Districts
161.04 General Conditions            161.12 Sign Maintenance
161.05 Prohibited Items              161.13 Nonconforming Signs
161.06 General Requirements and      161.14 Public Hearing Required
Procedures
161.07 Construction Requirements     161.15 Penalties
161.08 Specific Sign Types and
Regulations
 
161.01   SCOPE, PURPOSE, AND INTENT OF CONTROL.
There is a significant relationship between the manner in which signs are
displayed, the public health, safety, and welfare, and the value,
compatibility, and economic stability of adjoining property, its land use, and
the City. The reasonable display of signs is necessary as a service to the
people in the conduct of competitive commercial and industrial activity and to
promote freedom of expression. The regulations in this chapter establish
standards for the display of signs in direct relationship to the above-stated
purposes and directives. This chapter also covers construction and erection of
all outdoor signs of any type or nature with respect to size and safety. These
provisions shall apply to any structure arranged, intended, designed, or used
as an advertisement, announcement, or direction.
161.02   CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER CODES.
Any structure erected under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to all
other federal, State and local codes governing such items. These codes include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1.   Chapter 306B and 306C of the Code of Iowa (as amended and updated).
2.   Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 761.117 - 761.131 (as amended and
updated).
3.   Iowa Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
(as amended and updated).
Any advertising sign falling under the jurisdiction of one or more of the
above-named codes or any others shall first comply with the applicable
provisions of said codes and secure any and all required permits and clearances
prior to application to the City for its required Sign Permit.
161.03   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and their derivations have
the meaning given herein:
1.   “Accessory sign” means any sign identifying or advertising a business,
person, activity, goods, products, or services located on the premises where
the sign is.
2.   “Adjacent area” means an area which is contiguous to and within 660 feet
of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any interstate, freeway, or primary
highway.
3.   “Advertising sign” means any outdoor sign, display, device, figure,
painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or any other device
designed, intended, or used to advertise or to give information in the nature
of advertising and having the capacity of being visible from the traveled
portion of any highway or street of the interstate system of the State or the
street network system of the City.
4.   “Approved combustible plastics” are those which, when tested in accordance
with ASTM Standard Method Test for Flammability of Plastics over 0.050-inch in
thickness (D635-44), burn no faster than two- and one-half inches per minute in
.060-inch thickness.
5.   “A-frame sign” means a type of portable signage that consists of two
panels joined together by a hinge, resembling the letter “A” when opened.
6.   “Banner” means any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible
material, with or without frames.
7.   “Beacon” means a stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects
illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner, which is intended to
attract or divert attention, except, however, this term is not intended to
include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the
safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Agency or similar
agencies.
8.   “Billboard” means a type of sign having 72 square feet or more of display
surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or supported by a
building or structure.
9.   “Building line” means the average distance from the street line of
existing buildings in any block where more than half the frontage has been
built upon in the past.
10.   “Bulletin board” means any sign erected by a charitable, educational, or
religious institution or public body which is erected upon the same property as
said institution for purposes of announcing events which are held on the
premises.
11.   “Church bulletin board sign" means a sign attached to the exterior of a
church, or located elsewhere on the church premises, used to indicate the
services or activities of the church, and including its name, if desired.
12.   “Commercial sign” means any flat or embossed painted and printed or
enameled display used as an advertising medium.
13.   “Controlled access highway” means any State or federal numbered highway
designated by ordinance as a controlled access highway by the Council.
14.   “Display surface area” means the net geometric area enclosed by the
display surface of the sign, including the outer extremities of all letters,
characters, delineation, trim, and border; provided, however, “display surface
area” does not include the structural supports for free-standing signs,
provided further that only one face of a double-faced sign, as defined, shall
be considered in determining the display surface area.
15.   “District” or “zoning district” means a section or sections of the City
for which the then effective Zoning Ordinance governing the use of buildings
and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein.
16.   “Electrical sign” means a sign of any type incorporating electric
illumination of any type from within or without. A sign illuminated only by
projecting electric lighting reflectors shall not be construed as an electric
sign.
17.   “Erect” means to construct, reconstruct, build, raise, assemble, place,
affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or, in any other way, bring into being or
establish; however, it does not include any of the foregoing activities when
performed incidental to the customary maintenance of an advertising device.
18.   “Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign on which artificial or
reflected light is not maintained stationary, and constant in intensity and
color at all times when in use.
19.   “Free-standing ground sign” means a sign which is attached to or a part
of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be
firmly in or below the ground surface and not attached to any building or any
other structure whether portable or stationary. Ground signs may be a monument
type or affixed to a pole or posts.
20.   “Identification and informational signs” means signs used for
identification or of informational nature bearing no advertising.
21.   “Illuminated signs” means any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
as a part of the sign proper.
22.   “Joint identification sign” means a sign which serves as common or
collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the
same zoning lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such a sign may
name the persons or businesses included but carry no other advertising matter.
23.   “Letter sign” means letters not self-illuminated and applied individually
and directly to a building wall, a cornice, canopy, or other similar element of
a building.
24.   “Letters and decorations” means the letters, illustrations, symbols,
figures, insignia, and other devices employed to express and illustrate the
message of the sign.
25.   “Maintain” means to cause to remain in a state of good repair, but does
not include reconstruction.
26.   “Nameplate” means a plate or sign, typically made of metal, displaying
the name of someone, such as the person working in a building or the builder of
a ship.
27.   “Nonconforming sign” means a sign existing at the effective date of the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter which could not be built
under the terms of this chapter.
28.   “Off-site sign” means a sign other than an on-site sign.
29.   “On-site sign” means a sign relating in its subject matter to the
premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or
activities on the premises.
30.   “Political sign” means an outdoor sign of a temporary nature, not larger
than 32 square feet in surface area, erected for the purpose of soliciting
votes or support for or in opposition to any candidate or any political party
under whose designation any candidate is seeking nomination or election of any
public question on the ballot in an election held under the laws of this State.
31.   “Portable swinger sign and ‘A’ frame or sandwich sign” means an
advertising device in the shape of an ‘A’ or some variation thereof, which is
temporary in nature, located on the ground, easily movable, not permanently
attached thereto and which is usually two-sided.
32.   “Portable temporary attraction sign board” means a single or double
surface painted or poster panel type sign or some variation thereof, which is
temporary in nature, usually mounted on wheels, easily movable, and not
permanently attached.
33.   “Projecting sign” means a sign attached to and projecting outward from a
building face or wall, generally at a right angle to the building.
34.   “Public property” includes all property owned by any governing or tax
levying body, whether or not devoted to use as streets, alleys, sidewalks,
parking lots, etc.
35.   “Real estate sign” means a temporary sign placed upon property for the
purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said property.
36.   “Reconstruction” means any repair to the extent of 65 percent or more of
the fair market value of the structure, excluding buildings.
37.   “Right-of-way” means land area dedicated to public use for highways or
streets and their maintenance, and includes land acquired in fee simple or by
permanent easement for highway or street purposes, but does not include
temporary easements or rights for supplementary highway or street
appurtenances.
38.   “Roof sign” means any sign wholly erected, constructed, or maintained on
the roof structure or parapet wall of any building.
39.   “Sign” means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character,
mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading
matter which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey
information when the same is placed out-of-doors in view of the general public.
For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered
to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized,
related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random
manner without organized relationship to elements or where there is reasonable
doubt as to the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to
be a single sign.
40.   “Sign facing” means the opaque or transparent surface or surfaces of the
sign, upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited.
41.   “Special event sign” means a temporary advertising device, not larger
than 32 square feet in area, erected for the purpose of notifying the public of
noncommercial community events including, but not limited to, fairs,
centennials, festivals, and celebrations open to the general public and
sponsored or approved by a city, county, or school district.
42.   “Structural trim” includes the molding, battens, cappings, nailing
strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
43.   “Structure” means any sign supporting devices including, but not limited
to, buildings.
44.   “Table or plaque” means a solid wall panel or ornament of nonferrous
metal with inscription integral or applied, not more than eight square feet in
area, not more than three inches thick attached directly to a building wall
(not a “commercial sign”).
45.   “Temporary sign” means a banner or other advertising device constructed
of cloth, canvas, fabric, or other light temporary material, with or without a
structural frame, intended for a limited period of display, including
decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations.
46.   “Visible” means capable of being read or comprehended without visual aid
by a person of normal visual acuity.
161.04   GENERAL CONDITIONS.
1.   Vision clearance at street intersections and driveway intersections shall
be maintained.
2.   All advertising signs of any nature, in excess of 20 square feet, shall
display the name of the owner.
3.   Highway directional signs and markers shall be made and installed in
accordance with the specifications of the City or the State. Included shall be
signs announcing the location of or direct traffic to given locations which
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Service areas – automobile, food, lodging.
   B.   Public and quasi-public information signs.
   C.   Business and business districts.
4.   Permitted Locations:
   A.   Advertising Signs. When allowed as a permitted or special use in a
specific district.
   B.   On-Site. When necessary to a lawfully established use and permitted
within the district as an accessory use.
   C.   Special Event Signs and Devices. When allowed as a special or temporary
use.
   D.   General. The sign is erected, constructed, and displayed in conformance
with the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
161.05   PROHIBITED ITEMS.
The following are prohibited:
1.   Pendant swinging signs, where parts of such signs are free to move in the
wind. This shall not be construed to prohibit mechanically operated moving
parts or properly supported parts designed to rotate due to wind pressure.
2.   Tacking or posting signs on trees, utility-owned poles, traffic signs, or
traffic control devices.
3.   Tacking or posting printed or similar signs on fences, walls, buildings,
railings, or other structures.
4.   Attachment to fire escapes.
5.   Placement so as to obstruct or interfere with any openings legally
required for either exits or ventilation.
6.   Portable, temporary signs on public property, unless used for a “civic
purpose” as determined and authorized by the City.
7.   Flashing or revolving beacons or moving concentrated beam lighting devices
aimed below 45 degrees from the vertical.
8.   Obsolete signs that advertise an activity, business product or service
that is no longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located.
9.   No sign shall be permitted to block any required accessway or window.
10.   No sign shall be placed onto or project over public property unless
otherwise authorized by this Code.
11.   No signs, structures, or portions thereof shall be so located as to
obstruct or prevent the operation of the Fire Department or to prevent free
passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof.
12.   No advertising sign shall be placed closer than 100 feet from any
residential district boundary.
13.   Signs that are located so as to interfere with visibility for the safe
movement of pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles.
14.   Highly reflective frame materials such as mirrored glass or chrome metal.
161.06   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
1.   Permit Required. No person shall erect, alter, or relocate within the City
any sign or other advertising structures without first obtaining a permit and
making payment of the required fee, unless otherwise exempted herein.
2.   Plans Required. Permit applications shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications of the sign, its supporting structure, details of anchorage, and
such other detailed information as may be required by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, including a plot or site plan where necessary, in order
that such officer may determine that the installation complies fully with the
provisions of this chapter and such other ordinances and codes of the City as
are applicable.
3.   Fees Required.
   A.   The Council shall establish, by resolution, the permit fees and other
costs associated with any provision of this chapter as referenced herein.
   B.   Exception: where the owner of the improvement is a tax-levying body, a
permit shall be obtained in the normal manner, but no fee shall be required.
4.   Permit Exemption. Exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner
of such signs from the responsibility of complying with applicable provisions
of this chapter. The exemptions shall apply to the requirements for a Sign
Permit only and no Sign Permit shall be required for the erection of the
following signs:
   A.   Professional Name Plates. Professional name plates erected flat on
walls of buildings and not exceeding four square feet of display surface area.
   B.   Building Construction Signs. One on-site building construction sign on
each construction site in any zoning district provided that the maximum display
surface area shall not exceed eight square feet.
   C.   Real Estate Signs. On a zoning lot in any district there may be erected
on each street frontage one unanimated, non-illuminated real estate sign not
more than 10 square feet in area.
   D.   Signs Painted on Building. Signs, including murals, painted on the
exterior surface of a building or structure.
   E.   Home Occupation Signs. Home occupation signs erected flat against the
wall of the building and not exceeding two square feet in area.
   F.   Memorial Signs. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and
dates of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other noncombustible materials.
   G.   Municipal Signs. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices,
railroad crossing signs, and danger and such temporary emergency or non-
advertising signs.
   H.   Changeable Signs. Posting of bills on signs, repainting of signs, or
the changing of letters or numbers on signs designed for changeable lettering
or numbering which were legally erected and maintained for such purposes.
   I.   Election Campaign Signs. Political signs are permitted to be placed on
private property in any district. The owner of the property on which said sign
is placed shall be responsible for its removal. Any such sign shall not exceed
32 square feet per face.
   J.   Time and Temperature Signs. Time and temperature displays without
advertising matter, providing all clearances prescribed herein for signs
similarly located are maintained.
   K.   Banners. Banners shall be exempted when used in conjunction with public
and private events as follows:
      (1)   Election Campaigns. Election campaign banners.
      (2)   Public Events. Public event banners shall be placed no more than
two weeks before the event and removed within 48 hours following the event to
which the banner applies.
      (3)   Private Sales Events. Banners placed on private property for
advertising a special sales event. (Note: banners bearing advertising matter
shall be considered wall or free-standing signs depending upon mounting and
shall meet all regulations pertaining thereto.)
   L.   Signs Within Buildings. All signs located within a building that are
not visible to the public outside of said building.
   M.   Signs on Glass Surfaces. Signs painted on or affixed to glass surfaces
of windows or doors on the outside surface, and pertaining to the lawful
business conducted therein, and not having any illumination.
   N.   Informational Signs. Directional, identification, and informational
signs provided that such signs are limited to wall and free-standing signs with
a maximum of four-square feet of display surface area.
   O.   Collection Boxes. Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit
organizations containing no commercial advertising and located on private
property.
   P.   Garage Sale Signs. See Section
170.60 of the City Zoning Regulations.
   Q.   Holiday Decorations. Holiday decorations erected by and for the
promotion of any commercial enterprise. These permits will be issued by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer and are to be for a period not to
exceed 60 days. No fee is required for non-illuminated decorations. The permit
fee for illuminated decorations shall be the same as electric signs each time
decorations are erected. All clearance requirements must be observed.
   R.   Temporary Signs. Portable, temporary signs used for “civic purposes.”
   S.   Historic site markers or plaques, gravestones, and address numbers.
   T.   Flags. State or federal flags; the flag of a commercial institution;
provided, no more than one flag is permitted per business premises, or one per
tenant in a multi-tenant building; and further provided, the flag does not
exceed 20 square feet in surface area and does not advertise a product.
   U.   A-frame signs.
5.   Special Permits. Special permits are required for the following (no fees
required):
   A.   Cloth signs on wood frames for advertising business sales, etc., when
securely attached to a building wall. Such signs may be displayed for a two-
week period only and shall not be rehung or repeated within three months. These
permits will be issued by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
   B.   Cloth banners over streets are required to have a permit issued by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Available only to noncommercial
organizations, civic organizations, or for advertising a convention (civic,
political, or commercial), but not for personal advertising of political
candidates. Such banners shall be provided with holes to relieve wind pressure,
shall be securely erected in a manner that will not impose undue strain or load
on the buildings and structures to which they are attached, must not be located
on or adjacent to any overhead power or communication wire lines, and must
provide 14-foot clearance above streets. All such banners shall be removed at
the appropriate time. Such permit, when issued, shall include regulations
contained in the permit as to location of banners, length, time they are to
remain in place, and other relevant regulations.
6.   Alterations and Repairs.
   A.   Moving Signs. A sign shall not be moved from one location to another
without first securing a new permit and such sign shall be made to comply with
all provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Alterations. Alterations to existing signs shall not be made without
first securing a new permit and when such work is undertaken the entire unit
shall be made to comply with all provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as applying to the following:
      (1)   Changing the advertising copy on a sign designed with changeable
copy panels.
      (2)   Painting the sign and/or the sign structure when no change of
ownership is involved.
      (3)   Re-posting or repairing a poster panel.
161.07   CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Small Signs. Small commercial signs and wall signs, maximum area eight
square feet for either, may be constructed entirely of wood.
2.   Combustible Plastics. Any signs may incorporate areas and/or parts of
approved combustible plastics.
3.   Plywood on Wood Battens. Auxiliary panels (cutouts) supported from poster
panels may be of plywood or wood battens, with noncombustible supports and
attachments from the poster panel face or structure.
4.   Noncombustible Construction. Except as noted above, all parts of signs,
sign structures, and poster panels shall be of noncombustible construction.
5.   Glass. No sign over or within its height distance of public property shall
contain any glass other than that of the electric lighting units. “Lighting
units” shall not be construed as including any part of a lighting unit
enclosure such as glass letters or glass facing illuminated from within.
6.   Stresses. The working stresses of chains, wire ropes, guy rods, and all
fastenings, connections, and anchorage details for all these items shall not
exceed one-quarter of their ultimate strength.
7.   Electrical Signs.
   A.   Public Property. Where over public property, not less than 85 percent
of the lettered area of an electric sign shall be illuminated. Letters shall
include figures, illustrations, etc., as described herein. Areas shall be
calculated on the basis of rectangles enclosing each inscription line and
touching the outer points of the respective words and figures in the
inscription line. In the case of irregular insignia, illustrations, etc., the
area shall be that of the smallest straight line geometric figure without re-
entrant angles which will enclose the illuminated device.
   B.   Illumination Source. Illumination source may be either filament lamps
or electric discharge lamps. Sign lighting and illuminated signs shall be of
such intensity and positioning so as not to cause any glare falling into the
sight path of any passing motor vehicle.
   C.   Enclosed or Exposed Source. The illuminative source may be enclosed
with translucent panels or may be exposed on the sign face.
   D.   Flashing and Switching. Flashing and switching devices may not be
incorporated in the design.
   E.   Requirements. An electric sign may be composed of individual
illuminated letters, attached to a building face, mounted on a marquee or
canopy or belt course of a building, on top of a parapet wall, or along the
margin of a cornice or open edge of a roof. Clearances and projections shall
comply with applicable sections of this chapter. Such letter signs may be
silhouette or backlighted. Arrangement on parapets and roof margins must be
such as not to interfere with Fire Department access.
   F.   Placement Near Traffic Signs. No electric sign is to be so placed as to
obscure any traffic light or provide a confusing background for a traffic
light.
8.   All Other Elements. All other elements of signs and sign structures shall
comply with the structural design requirements of other applicable chapters of
this Code and good engineering practice.
161.08   SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES AND REGULATIONS.
1.   Billboards.
   A.   Ground Mounted. Ground mounted billboards shall not exceed 30 feet in
height measured from the highest adjoining sidewalk level. In case no sidewalk
exists, the measurement shall be taken from the established street grade
adjacent, and in case no such established street grade exists, then the
measurement shall be taken from the average grade at the sign location. Signs,
clocks, or other advertising devices erected upon standards or separate
supports shall be placed so as to be entirely within the property lines of the
premises upon which it is located, and no part of the sign or standard shall
have a total height greater than 30 feet above the level of the street upon
which the sign faces or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level
is above the street level, nor shall the surface of any such sign exceed in
area of 250 square feet.
   B.   Face of Billboards. The face of all ground-mounted billboards shall be
set back from the street property line a distance of one foot, but in no case
shall any part be set forward of an established building line or the property
line. The one-foot restriction applies to the face of the sign panels. Electric
lighting reflectors may project forward from the sign face. Clearance
regulations for projecting signs apply to such lighting units.
   C.   Base of Billboards. The base of a billboard shall be at least three
feet above grade at the sign location. The space below may be filled with a
decorative lattice or of similar light, noncombustible construction having at
least 50 percent open area.
   D.   Duties and Responsibilities. The owners, and lessees, of any billboards
on otherwise vacant lots shall be subject to the same duties and
responsibilities as the owner of the lot with respect to keeping the premises
clean and inoffensive.
   E.   Property Line. Billboards shall not be set closer to an inside property
line than the allowable distance for buildings provided by the Zoning
Ordinance.
   F.   Overhanging Public Property. Neither the face or structural trim of a
wall-mounted billboard may overhang public property unless it meets clearance
specifications for wall signs as set forth in Paragraphs 3(A) and (B) of this
section.
2.   Roof Signs.
   A.    Roof signs shall not exceed eight feet in height except upon written
approval by the Council, measured from the highest point of the roof
immediately below the sign. Roof signs shall not extend above the height
limitations of the building on which it is mounted, either as established by
this Code or by the Zoning Regulations.
   B.   Overhanging Public Property. No roof sign shall overhang public
property, except that lighting reflectors may project not to exceed eight feet
from the sign face.
   C.   Access By Fire Department. Roof signs and their supports shall not be
placed so as to interfere with or obstruct access to or traversing of roofs by
the Fire Department.
   D.   Space Between Sign and Roof. The bottom on the face of a roof sign
shall have a clear space between the sign and the roof, unobstructed except for
the necessary vertical supports and bracing. Such space to be as follows:
      (1)   All parts of signs within five feet of exterior walls of the
building, not less than six feet.
      (2)   All parts of signs five feet or more back of exterior walls of the
building, not less than four feet.
3.   Wall Signs.
   A.   Projection. No part of a wall sign shall project more than six inches
forward of the wall to which it is attached, except that lighting reflectors
may project eight feet from such wall. The provision applies whether the sign
is over private or public property. Signs projecting a greater distance shall
be classed as projecting signs.
   B.   Height. Wall signs may be mounted above public property in which case
the clear distance from the highest point of the sidewalk (or grade if no walk
exists) to the lowest part of the sign shall be nine feet, except as noted in
the following:
      (1)   There shall be no restriction in the mounting height of a plaque or
tablet provided its maximum projection from the wall face is two inches.
      (2)   Individual letter signs with a maximum projection of one inch may
be mounted up a clear distance of not less than seven feet.
         a.   Private Commercial Property. The same restrictions in Paragraph 3
(B) shall apply for wall signs mounted over publicly used walkways or roadways
on private commercial property.
         b.   Public Alley. A wall sign may be erected over a public alley,
with a maximum projection of two inches, a minimum clearance above the alley
surface at the lot line shall be nine feet, and the maximum area 16 square
feet.
4.   Marquee Signs.
   A.   Requirements. Signs may be erected over a marquee, attached to the
front or sides of a marquee; or attached to or hung from a marquee. Such signs
may extend the full length and/or width of the marquee. Such signs shall not
exceed five feet in height.
   B.   Permanent Fixed Awning or Marquee. When signs are hung from or attached
to a permanent fixed awning or a marquee, the projections and clearances shall
be as set forth for projecting signs.
   C.   Front Attachment. When signs are attached to the front of the marquee
the extreme projection of the sign shall be considered the front of the marquee
and shall comply with all clearance distances for projecting signs.
5.   Projecting Signs.
   A.   Requirements. No projecting sign shall have a total gross area of any
one face exceeding 25 square feet, except with written approval by the Council.
   B.   Public Property. Any projecting sign overhanging public property shall
be an electrical sign or illuminated by wall-mounted or spot lighting. No
projecting sign may overhang a public alley.
   C.   Projection. Projecting signs may encroach into the public right-of-way
but can only encroach a maximum of half the distance from the lot line to the
back of curb or four feet from the building façade, whichever is less. The
innermost point of a projecting sign shall not be more than two feet from the
building wall.
   D.   Widened Streets and Curbs. Where streets are widened and curbs are set
back, all projecting signs shall be altered to conform to the above within 30
days after widening work contract is finished or order date. No notice is
required by the City to the sign owner. No liability shall accrue against the
City.
   E.   Minimum Clear Height. The minimum clear height of a projecting sign
above a public sidewalk shall be as follows:
      (1)   In Zones “C-2,” signs projecting over public property - 8 feet;
      (2)   All other zones - 10 feet, six inches.
   F.   Private Commercial Property. All of the above clearance and dimension
restrictions shall also apply to projecting signs when erected over publicly
used walkways on private commercial property, or over publicly used drives and
parking lots on such property.
   G.   One projecting sign is permitted per establishment with frontage on a
street. For a corner lot, one projecting sign is permitted for each street
frontage.
6.   Free-Standing Ground Signs.
   A.   Requirements. No free-standing ground signs shall exceed 30 feet in
height, except upon written approval by the Council, measured from the highest
adjoining sidewalk level or other grade as established herein.
   B.   Total Gross Area. No ground sign shall have a total gross area of any
one face exceeding 250 square feet, except upon written approval by the
Council. This shall be computed for the actual sign area and does not include
the supporting structure below the sign.
   C.   Supporting Structure. All parts of the supporting structure of a ground
sign shall be on private property.
   D.   Projections. A free-standing ground sign may have portions (or all) of
the actual sign projected from the supporting structure. Such projections must
comply with the provisions of Subsection 5 except projections will be measured
from the supporting structure.
   E.   Special Permits. The Council, at its discretion and on receipt of
proper application, may authorize special permits for heights and areas
exceeding the limitations above. Each unit shall require separate action.
   F.   Church Bulletins. Church bulletins must be located on private property.
Such bulletins may have portions constructed of combustible materials. Fronts
may be of glass. Maximum dimension of church bulletins shall be eight feet,
with a maximum area of 32 square feet; both limitations to include the
enclosing structure, but not the height of open column or post supports below.
   G.   One free-standing sign is permitted per establishment with frontage on
a street. For a corner lot, one free-standing ground sign is permitted for each
street frontage.
161.09   SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
In all residential districts, the following classes of signs are permitted in
accordance with the regulations set forth herein:
1.   Non-Flashing and Non-Illuminated Accessory Signs.
   A.   Name Plates. Subject to the following:
      (1)   For one- and two-family dwellings, there shall be not more than one
nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area for each dwelling unit,
indicating the name or address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation.
      (2)   For multiple-family dwellings up to 10 dwelling units, apartment
hotels, and for buildings other than dwellings, a single identification sign
not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be displayed. Any larger sign must be
approved, in writing, by the Council prior to issuance of a permit. Only the
name and address of the building and the name of the management thereof may be
contained on this sign.
      (3)   In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building,
there shall be permitted one sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area. On
corner lots two such signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. Said
signs shall be removed within two weeks after completion of the structure
indicated.
      (4)   No sign shall project higher than eight feet above the established
average grade, whichever is lower.
      (5)   No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public
right-of-way.
   B.   Temporary “For Sale” and “To Rent” Signs. Subject to the following:
      (1)   There shall be not more than one such sign per zoning lot, except
that on a corner lot two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No
sign shall exceed 10 square feet in area or be closer than eight feet to any
other zoning lot.
      (2)   No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way.
      (3)   No sign shall project higher than eight feet above the established
average grade, whichever is lower.
   C.   Accessory Signs to Parking Areas. Subject to the following:
      (1)   Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are limited to
one sign for each exit or entrance and to a maximum size of two square feet
each. One sign per parking area and designating the conditions of use, or
identity of such parking area, and limited to a maximum size of nine square
feet shall be permitted.
      (2)   No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public way.
      (3)   No sign shall project higher than seven feet above the established
average grade of the parking area.
   D.   Church bulletins. Subject to the following:
      (1)   There shall be not more than one sign per zoning lot, except that
on a corner lot, two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
      (2)   No sign shall project beyond the property line into the public
right-of-way.
      (3)   No sign shall project higher than eight feet above the established
average grade.
      (4)   May be illuminated, but not flashing.
   E.   Free-Standing Ground Signs. Freestanding ground signs for residential
subdivisions are subject to the following sign area, sign height, and sign
number permissions.
      (1)   One freestanding ground sign is permitted for each entry point to
any residential subdivision development. A minimum separation of 100 feet is
required between signs.
      (2)   Residential subdivision entrance signs are permitted a maximum sign
area of 50 square feet per sign and a maximum sign height of 6 feet per sign.
161.10   SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
In all commercial districts, the following signs are permitted subject to the
requirements set forth herein:
1.   All signs and nameplates permitted in the residential districts and
subject to the following:
   A.   Illumination. No illuminated sign shall be of the flashing or
intermittent type, except that advertising devices denoting the time,
temperature, and other similar information shall not be considered a flashing
sign for the purpose of this chapter. Signs which may be in conflict with
public traffic signals shall not be permitted. Illuminated signs shall be
shaded so as not to shine on adjacent residential properties, thereby
constituting a nuisance.
   B.   Height. No sign shall project higher than 30 feet above the established
average grade of the street upon which the sign faces or above the adjoining
ground level, if such ground level is above the street level. If a sign is
connected to a building, it shall not project more than eight feet above the
roof line.
2.   On-site Signs. On-site signs are permitted subject to the following:
   A.   Nameplates. Signs relating only to the name and use of buildings or
premises upon which they are placed.
   B.   Wall Signs. No sign, excluding murals, shall be painted, pasted, or
similarly posted directly on the surface of any wall, nor shall any sign be
permitted to be placed on any wall, fence, or standard facing the side of any
adjoining lot located in a residence district. The sign or signs may front on
the front side, or rear walls or all of the principal building.
   C.   Marquees. Restrictions imposed hereinafter on the projection of signs
across property lines into the public right-of-way shall not apply to signs
located on marquees or canopies, provided that any sign located on a marquee or
canopy shall be affixed flat to the surface thereof, and further, no sign shall
extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of said marquee or canopy,
except that individual free-standing letters may project to a height not to
exceed 60 inches above same. Restrictions imposed herein on the projection of
signs across property lines into the public right-of-way shall not apply to
signs located on an awning provided that any sign located on an awning shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof, shall be non-illuminated and non-flashing,
and shall indicate only the name and address of the establishment on the
premises. Further, no such sign shall extend vertically or horizontally beyond
the limits of said awning.
   D.   Free-Standing Ground Signs.
      (1)   Joint Identification. For an integrated planned business
development in single ownership and management, or under unified control, one
additional sign may be erected not exceeding 250 square feet in area
advertising only the name and location of the integrated shopping center. The
bottom edge of such sign shall be at least five feet above the level of the
ground, and the overall height shall not exceed 30 feet above curb level or
above the adjoining ground level if such ground level is above the street
level.
   E.   Projecting Signs. The sign location and arrangement shall be subject to
approval by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
3.   Off-Site Signs. Off-site signs are permitted subject to the following:
   A.   Billboards. Signs which advertise products, businesses, or public
service activities not related to the occupancy and use of the premises are
prohibited in the C-1 Zoning District and are subject to the following:
      (1)   In any C-3 zone the minimum area for any billboard, except “service
club or religious notice signs” as defined by the I.D.O.T., will be not less
than 32 square feet.
      (2)   Location. No advertising sign shall be erected on the front of any
building and no more than one advertising sign structure shall be permitted to
be erected on a business lot having 50 feet of frontage or less, and no more
than one additional structure shall be permitted for an additional 100 linear
feet of lot frontage, or major fraction thereof.
         a.   In any C-3 zone, where platted lots do not currently exist, and
where platted lots will probably not exist in the future (e.g., in the railroad
right-of-way), the maximum distance between signs within these unplatted areas
shall be not less than 700 feet.
         b.   This provision does not apply to the distance between two or more
“service club or religious notice signs” as defined by the I.D.O.T., or the
distance between these types of signs as referenced above and all other types
of signs.
      (3)   Number. No advertising sign structure shall contain over two signs
per facing.
      (4)   Setback. All advertising signs shall be required to be set back
from the property line a distance of the minimum setback requirement of the
district or to the established building line, whichever is the greater.
      (5)   Maximum Clear Height. The maximum clear height for any billboards
(that clear space between the lowest part of the sign face and the surrounding
natural grade) will be not more than four feet six inches for signs from 32
square feet up to 71 square feet; not more than six feet for signs from 72
square feet up to 143 square feet up to 195 square feet; and not more than 20
feet for signs from 196 square feet up to 250 square feet.
      (6)   Double-Faced. Any billboard, except “service club or religious
notice signs,” as defined by the I.D.O.T., will have not less than two faces.
(Each such sign will be “double-faced” only).
   B.   Automobile Service Stations. The following signs accessory to
automobile service stations are permitted:
      (1)   Racks for the orderly display of cans of engine oil for convenience
in dispensing said oil may be located on or at the ends of pump islands (limit
of two to each island).
      (2)   Two open portable tire racks (not more than seven feet in height,
including signs, and six feet in length), for the purpose of displaying new
tire casings, shall be permitted for each gasoline or tire service station.
      (3)   Items for sale on the premises may be openly displayed within 10
feet of the principal building. Products may be displayed under group island
canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island base.
      (4)   Any sign may be painted on the inside and outside front door face
of a closed tire rack, but shall not be painted on the sides or rear.
   C.   A-Frame Signs. A-frame signs are permitted in any “C-2” zone.
      (1)   One A-frame sign is permitted per establishment, including one for
each tenant in a multi-tenant development. A minimum fifteen foot separation is
required between all A-frame signs.
      (2)   A-frame signs may be placed in a sidewalk or parkway within 200
feet of the lot of the establishment being advertised and must comply with all
provisions of
Chapter 136 of the LeClaire Municipal Code.
      (3)   A-frame signs are limited to six square feet in area per side and
four feet in height.
      (4)   The placement of A-frame signs outdoors is limited to business
hours only. A-frame signs must be stored indoors at all other times.
      (5)   A-frame signs must not be used outdoors when high winds or heavy
rain conditions exist.
      (6)   Illumination of A-frame signs is prohibited.
      (7)   No A-frame sign may have any type of electronic component.
161.11   SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
In all industrial districts the following signs are permitted, subject to the
requirements set forth herein:
1.   All identification, business, and advertising signs permitted in the
commercial districts.
2.   All signs shall adhere to the requirements for signs in the commercial
districts unless otherwise specified below.
3.   Billboards and Free-Standing Ground Signs. Billboards shall not have a
sign area in excess of 250 square feet, except that where only one advertising
sign is erected per facing on a sign structure, such sign area may be doubled
in size but shall not exceed 500 square feet.
   A.   The minimum distance between any two signs located on the same side of
a street or highway, and on the same zoning lot, shall be not less than four
feet for every one square foot of the total area of the two signs.
   B.   No advertising sign shall be permitted to be erected closer than 100
feet to any other structure on the same side of a street or highway, unless
separated by a building, roadway, or structure for signs or billboards which
face the same direction.
   C.   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not
exceed six times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot, except in the
case where there is just one sign and said sign shall not exceed 250 square
feet.
   D.   No advertising sign, the informative contents of which are to be
visible from a park, shall be permitted to be erected within 500 feet of any
public park of more than five acres in area.
161.12   SIGN MAINTENANCE.
1.   Sign Identification. Every sign hereafter registered shall show in a
conspicuous place thereon, which is visible to the inspector and is readable by
the inspector from the ground, the permit number.
2.   Premises Maintenance. All free-standing signs and the premises surrounding
the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary, and
inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish,
and weeds as defined and as otherwise required elsewhere in this Code.
3.   Sign/Structure Maintenance. Every sign shall be kept well painted and or
maintained at all times. Any deterioration, loose, or torn paper or paint shall
be removed and replaced immediately.
4.   Unsafe or Illegal Signs.
   A.   Nuisance. Any sign becoming insecure, in danger of falling, or
otherwise unsafe, or any sign installed, erected, or maintained in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance and may be removed
by the City upon not less than two (2) days’ written notice to the owner of the
sign and to the owner of the land on which the sign is located.
The notice shall require such owners to make the sign safe, remove the sign if
it is prohibited, or to cause it to conform to the provisions of this chapter
if it is not prohibited. Further, said notice shall also include a statement
that the City will exercise its right of removal, as specified below, if the
required actions are not completed within the allotted timeframe.
If the owner of the sign or the property owner fails to act within the
timeframe as required in the notice, the advertising device shall be deemed to
be forfeited and the City may enter upon the land and remove the advertising
device. Such entry, after notice, shall not be deemed a trespass, and the City
may be aided by injunction to abate the nuisance and to insure peaceful entry.
   B.   Privately Owned Signs in Public Places. Privately owned signs located
on or over a public place that are not in compliance with this Code shall be
eliminated and removed. If the sign owner fails to remove the sign after so
ordered by the City, the City may remove the sign.
   C.   Assessment of Costs. All costs, fees, and expenses arising out of an
action brought by the City to insure the peaceful entry and/or removal of any
signs will be assessed against the property owner and act as a lien on the
property and collected in the same manner as regular property taxes.
5.   Removal by Order of City Council. Any sign on or over public property may
be ordered removed by action of the Council when such sign is determined to
cause a nuisance as defined herein. No liability shall be incurred by the City
on account of any such removal order.
161.13   NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
1.   Definition. For the purpose of this section, a nonconforming sign is a
sign which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, or which does
not conform with the City Zoning Regulations.
2.   On-site Nonconforming Sign. All nonconforming signs not otherwise
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, relating to a place of business,
and located on the same premises as such place of business, may be continued
until:
   A.   The nature of the business conducted on the premises changes in such
manner as to occasion a change in the existing sign; or
   B.   The name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified
either in shape, size, or legend.
3.   Off-site Nonconforming Signs. Where an off-site nonconforming sign is
located off the premises of the place of business to which the sign pertains,
and exists at the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, and could
not be built under the terms of such ordinance by reason of restrictions on
sign area, height, its location on the lot, or other requirements, the owner of
the sign shall:
   A.   Place on record, in the office of the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer within one year following the adopting of the ordinance codified by
this chapter, a sworn statement regarding the term of the lease agreement that
was in effect on the effective date of such ordinance, if any, and other
information describing the existing sign.
   B.   If a lease is not in effect, remove the sign within three years from
such effective date.
4.   No Alterations to Sign Permitted. No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or
altered in any way which would increase its nonconformity.
5.   Damaged Nonconforming Signs. Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by
any means to an extent of more than 65 percent of its replacement cost at time
of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
161.14   PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
A public hearing shall be required to be held to receive public input on any
petition to erect a sign that is not in conformance with the requirements of
this chapter. Notice of said meeting shall be published as prescribed by law
and written notice shall be delivered by certified mail to all property owners
of record who own property within 200 feet of any boundary of the property upon
which said sign is proposed to be located.
161.15   PENALTIES.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits,
participates in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of a separate
offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
(Chapter 161 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 162
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES AND MS4) PERMIT PROGRAM
 
                                                        162.08 Inspection
162.01 Illicit Discharge to Stormwater System           Procedures for City
                                                        COSESCO Permits
                                                        162.09 Monitoring
162.02 Illicit Connections Prohibited                   Procedures for City
                                                        COSESCO Permits
                                                        162.10 Post-
162.03 Industrial Discharges                            Construction Stormwater
                                                        Control
162.04 Illicit Discharge Detection, Reporting, and Cost 162.11 Waivers
Recovery
162.05 Suspension of Access to the City’s Storm Sewer 162.12 Fees,
System                                                  Enforcement, and
                                                        Penalties
162.06 Surface Water Drainage, Watercourse Protection,  162.13 Appeals and
Recognition, and Protection of Official Drainage System Requests for Hearings
162.07 Obtaining and Maintaining Construction Site
Erosion and Sediment Control (COSESCO) Permit Required
 
162.01   ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORMWATER SYSTEM.
1.   For purposes of this chapter, a “responsible party” is one or more persons
that control or are in possession of or own property. Responsible parties shall
be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with this chapter and
jointly and severally liable for any illicit discharge from the property
controlled, possessed, or owned. For purposes of this chapter, “property”
includes, but is not limited to, real estate, fixtures, facilities, and
premises of any kind located upon, under, or above the real estate.
2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible party
subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or any other federal,
State, or City permit, statute, chapter, or rule from any obligation imposed by
such permit, statute, ordinance, or rule, if any such obligation is greater
than any obligation imposed by this chapter.
3.   Any discharge into the City’s storm sewer system prohibited by the City’s
MS4 Permit, (all terms, conditions, and requirements of which are hereby
incorporated by reference), shall be deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation
of this chapter. An “illicit discharge” as defined by the EPA’s Phase II
Stormwater Regulations is “any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant
to an NPDES permit and discharges resulting from fire-fighting activities”.
4.   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on any site
not otherwise subject to this chapter and/or any other “pollutants of concern”
entering or allowed to enter a municipal storm sewer that causes a water
quality violation as determined by the DNR shall be deemed an illicit discharge
in violation of this chapter.† 13  In determining what constitutes a water
quality violation for purposes of enforcing this chapter, the City shall base
any decisions on definitive analysis utilizing those published water quality
standards as established by the IDNR. As defined in I.A.C. 567-64.13(2.c.1)
(455B) as amended; “Pollutants of concern” include biochemical oxygen demand
levels, sediment, or a parameter that addresses sediment (total suspended
solids, turbidity, or siltation), pathogens, oil and grease, and any pollutant
that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will
receive a discharge from the MS4.
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: It is acknowledged that this provision essentially subjects any
13 site to regulation which is more than State or federal law may mandate; however,
   the IDNR has indicated that any discharge that constitutes a water quality
   violation is subject to regulation.
162.02   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
1.   For purposes of this chapter, an “illicit connection” to the City’s storm
sewer system is any physical connection or other topographical or other
condition, natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized by
ordinance or written rule of the City, which causes or facilitates, directly or
indirectly, an illicit discharge.
2.   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any illicit
connection is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance and shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
3.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
162.03   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
1.   Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
2.   Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable
to the City prior to discharges to the storm sewer system authorized by said
permit.
162.04   ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION, REPORTING, AND COST RECOVERY.
1.   All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be conducted
by the City, or its designee, hereinbefore and after referred to as the “City.”
2.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences
to persons or property of an illicit discharge, or circumstances which may
cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the City.
3.   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the City any illicit discharges which the responsible party knows or
should have known to have occurred. Failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter is a violation of this code.
   A.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible
party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge, the
responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible
party’s sole cost.
   B.   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
   C.   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
   D.   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone or
facsimile or email to the City immediately but, in any event, within 24 hours
of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the City within
24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
4.   Any person or entity shall also report to the City any illicit discharge
or circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes poses a risk
of an illicit discharge.
5.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous subsections, or otherwise
coming into possession of information indicating an actual or imminent illicit
discharge, the City shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as
reasonably possible, and thereafter shall provide to the responsible party, and
any third-party reporter, a written report of the conditions which may cause or
which have already caused an illicit discharge. The responsible party shall
immediately commence corrective action(s) or remediation and shall complete
such corrective action(s) or remediation within 24 hours.
6.   The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect property subject to
regulation under this chapter as often as is necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter. If a responsible party has security measures that require
identification and clearance before entry to its property or premises, the
responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access by the
City. By way of specification, but not limitation:
   A.   A responsible party shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination, and copying of
records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge, and for
the performance of any additional duties as defined by State and federal law.
   B.   The City shall have the right to set up on any property such devices as
are necessary, in the opinion of the City, to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge.
   C.   The City shall have the right to require any responsible party, at
responsible party’s sole expense, to install monitoring equipment and deliver
monitoring data or reports to the City as the City directs. The sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the responsible party at responsible party’s sole
expense. All devices shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the City and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the responsible
party.
   E.   Any unreasonable delay in allowing the City access to a property is a
violation of this chapter.
7.   If the City has been refused access to any part of the property from where
an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge to a municipal storm sewer or
tributary to a water course is occurring, suspected or imminent, and the City
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the City may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
8.   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred,
any and all costs incurred by the City in the enforcement of this chapter shall
be recovered from the responsible party. The City shall submit an invoice to
the responsible party reflecting the costs incurred by the City for any and all
enforcement activities undertaken under this Code. Failure to pay charges
properly invoiced under this Code within 30 days of billing shall constitute a
violation of this Code, and said charges not timely paid shall constitute a
lien against the property and may be assessed against the property from which
an illicit discharge emanates and collected in the same manner as other
assessments due and owing the City.
162.05   SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
1.   Emergency Suspension. The City may, without prior notice, suspend storm
sewer system access to a property when such emergency suspension is necessary
to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If the responsible party
fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension order, the City shall
take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the illicit
discharge. All costs of such action shall be recovered from the responsible
party for the property identified as the source of the illicit discharge as
referenced in Subsection
162.04(8).
2.   Non-Emergency Suspension. If the City detects or is informed of
circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge, but such illicit
discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of storm sewer
system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce the potential
illicit discharge, the City shall notify the responsible party of the proposed
suspension of storm sewer system access and the time and date of such
suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the property shall be
sufficient notice to all. Timely remediation of the circumstances shall avoid a
violation of this chapter provided that no illicit discharge occurs. In the
alternative, the responsible party may request a meeting with the City for the
purpose of presenting information which the responsible party believes will
show that remediation is unnecessary, and if the City finds such information is
satisfactory, the City may rescind or modify the notice of suspension.
If the City finds such information unsatisfactory, the City shall, issue a
final written order of suspension including the date and time of suspension and
such order may be appealed as provided hereinafter. Any physical action to
reinstate storm sewer system access to property subject to such order prior to
obtaining a court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
An order of suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible party with a
municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any other enforcement
action permitted by statute or ordinance. All costs of such action(s) shall be
recovered from the responsible party for the property identified as the source
of the illicit discharge as referenced in Subsection
162.04(8).
162.06   SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE, WATERCOURSE PROTECTION, RECOGNITION, AND
PROTECTION OF OFFICIAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
1.   The “Official Drainage System” as used herein shall mean any stream,
river, ditch, culvert, pipe, natural or man-made watercourse, or other
stormwater conveyance feature, whether located on private or public property
and constructed and/or maintained by private or public entities, that conveys
storm water from, to, or through more than a single property.
2.   Prohibited Acts. Except as provided for herein and then only under the
authority of a duly issued permit, (if applicable), it shall otherwise be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to:
   A.   Place, deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited any debris, fill,
sand, stone, or other solid materials of any kind or nature, or construction of
any kind into or across any portion or component of the official drainage
system.
   B.   Construct and/or place any ditch, pipe, culvert, or artificial
watercourse of any kind or nature which shall collect and direct the flow of
natural surface waters or drainage, or increase in intensity or quantity the
flow of surface waters or drainage from paved surfaces, structures, roads, or
improvements directly into any portion or component of the official drainage
system.
   C.   Fill, obstruct, dam, divert, or otherwise change or alter the natural
or artificial flow of waters or drainage or the intensity or quantity of flow,
through any portion or component of the official drainage system.
3.   Correction of Existing Conditions. Except as hereinafter provided, all
existing obstructions, dams, diversions, construction of any kind, deposits of
debris, fill, sand, stone, or other solid materials, or other alterations or
diversions of the natural flow of water or the intensity or quantity of flow
through, across, or to any portion or component of the official drainage
system, which:
   A.   Causes the inundation of real property and/or buildings on other
premises, or;
   B.   Constitutes an undue burden upon the official drainage system or
hampers the proper present or future course of development of the official
drainage system, or;
   C.   Presently constitutes or in the reasonably foreseeable future will
constitute a danger or hazard to the well-being, safety, or general welfare of
the residents of the City or any property located therein;
are hereby declared and recognized as a public nuisance and as such shall be
removed or corrected by the owners of the premises upon which said obstruction,
dams, diversion, construction, deposits, or other alterations of the natural
flow of water are situated, within 60 days after written notice to remove or
correct same.
4.   Permitted Acts. The prohibited acts and correction of existing conditions
set forth herein shall have no application to work performed pursuant to the
authority of an agency of the federal, State, or other governmental body.
5.   Water Quality. Every person owning property through which a portion of the
official drainage system is located, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and
maintain that part of the official drainage system within the property below
the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris, grass clippings, or
other organic wastes and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the official drainage
system. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately
owned structures within or adjacent to any portion or component of the official
drainage system, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the official drainage system.
162.07   OBTAINING AND MAINTAINING CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL (COSESCO) PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   Applicability. The following persons are required to obtain and maintain a
City COSESCO Permit:
   A.   All persons are required by law or administrative rule to obtain a
State NPDES General Permit #2 from the IDNR.
   B.   Unless otherwise waived by specific action of the Council, all persons
conducting any “land disturbance activity” for any purpose (other than those
specifically excluded herein) greater than 900 square feet in size on any
parcel of land. Any person required to obtain a City COSESCO permit under this
section shall be required to provide the following as a part of the permit
application:
      (1)   A dimensioned site plan drawing showing the entire site where the
project is to be located, the proposed project itself, the extent and boundary
of the proposed “land disturbing activity,” the location(s), type(s) and amount
(s) of erosion and sedimentation control measures, and any other information
that may be required by the City to determine the necessity and adequacy of the
erosion and sedimentation control measures proposed to be used.
      (2)   A $5,000.00 performance security (see forms permitted in Section
162.07(7) herein), guaranteeing that the proposed erosion control measures as
proposed and approved within the COSESCO permit will be timely constructed and
maintained throughout the length of the project.
      (3)   A certificate of insurance indicating a minimum public liability
limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 and a notation on the certificate that the
City is recognized as a named, additional insured under the policy.
      (4)   An executed standard City “Hold-Harmless, Waiver of Liability, and
Indemnification Agreement”.
      (5)   Fees for this COSESCO permit shall be paid as required and
established by resolution of the Council.
   C.   All persons creating other surface disturbances (not identified
hereinabove), where it can be reasonably forecasted and predicted that sediment
will; 1) leave (or has already left) a site; 2) enter a municipal storm sewer
system; or, 3) create a public nuisance, thereby constituting an illicit
discharge as defined herein and thus making the City subject to enforcement
actions from the IDNR and USEPA. (Agricultural activities, (including “home
gardening”) are not considered “construction site, land-disturbing activities,”
as defined, and are therefore exempt from the requirements of this section.
However, these activities could produce illicit discharges as defined, and as
such could be subject to the “illicit discharge” provisions as contained
herein.)
2.   Applications for City COSESCO Permits shall be made on forms provided by
the City.
3.   A permittee for a City COSESCO Permit shall pay fees as follows:
   A.   A non-refundable application and permit review fee (as established by
resolution of the Council based upon the estimated amount of land to be
disturbed) at the time of application submittal.
   B.   For each inspection required by any provision of this chapter, the
permittee shall pay an inspection fee (as established by resolution of the
Council) within 30 days of the billing and notice of payment for such fee.
Failure of the permittee to pay any inspection fee within said time frame shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and said charges not timely paid shall
constitute a lien against the property and may be assessed against the property
inspected and collected in the same manner as other assessments due and owing
the City.
4.   A permittee in possession of a State NPDES General Permit #2 issued by the
IDNR shall immediately submit to the City full and complete copies of the
materials described below as a basis for the City to determine whether to issue
a City COSESCO Permit:
   A.   Permittee’s plans, specifications and supporting materials previously
submitted to the IDNR in support of permittee’s application for the State NPDES
General Permit #2;
   B.   Permittee’s authorizations issued pursuant to permittee’s State NPDES
General Permit #2; and,
   C.   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance
with this chapter.
5.   Every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for a City
COSESCO Permit:
   A.   Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for SWPPPs
promulgated by the IDNR in connection with the issuance of a State NPDES
General Permit #2; and,
   B.   Shall, if the permittee is required by law to file a Joint Application
Form, Protecting Iowa Waters, Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, comply with all mandatory minimum requirements
pertaining to such applications; and,
   C.   Shall comply with all other applicable State or federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application; and,
   D.   Shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or landscape
architect licensed to practice in the State of Iowa; and,
   E.   Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification by the
person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements of
this chapter.
6.   In addition to the SWPPP requirements stated in Subsection 5 immediately
above which constitute minimum mandatory requirements imposed by the program,
every SWPPP submitted to the City in support of an application for a City
COSESCO Permit shall comply with the Statewide Urban Design and Specifications
(SUDAS) standard design criteria, current edition including, but not limited
to, design, location, and phased implementation of effective, practicable
stormwater pollution prevention measures designed for 25-year storm frequencies
at a minimum, and shall also:
   A.   Limit total off-site annual aggregate sediment yield for exposed areas
to an equivalent amount resulting from sheet and rill erosion equal to an
annual, cumulative soil loss rate not to exceed the standard established from
time to time by the County Soil and Water Conservation District; erosion rates
can exceed soil loss limits as long as sediment yield does not exceed that
expected from allowable erosion rates; and,
   B.   Identify the nature of the construction activity and the potential for
sediment and other pollutant discharges from the site; and
   C.   Calculate the predicted erosion and estimated sediment yield for the
construction site using the USDA Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE
II); and,
   D.   Assure that stockpiles of soil or other materials subject to erosion by
wind or water are covered, vegetated, or otherwise effectively protected from
erosion and sedimentation in accordance with the amount of time the material
will be on site and the manner of its proposed use; no stockpiling is allowed
in the street; and,
   E.   Identify measures and procedures to reasonably minimize site soil
compaction and provide soil quality restoration as specified; and,
   F.   Assure that all temporary erosion and sediment controls shall not be
removed until the City has determined that the site has been permanently
stabilized; and,
   G.   Assure that all disturbed sites be permanently stabilized with 70
percent perennial cover as measured by the USDA line transect method; and,
   H.   Identify methods to prevent sediment damage to adjacent properties and
sensitive environmental areas such as water bodies, plant communities, rare,
threatened, and/or endangered species habitat, wildlife corridors, greenways,
etc.; and,
   I.   Provide for design and construction methods to stabilize steep or long
continuous slopes; and include measures to control the quantity and quality of
stormwater leaving a site before, during, and after construction; and,
   J.   Provide for stabilization of all waterways and outlets; and,
   K.   Protect storm sewer infrastructure from sediment loading/plugging; and,
   L.   Specify precautions to be taken to contain sediment when working in or
crossing water bodies; and,
   M.   Assure stabilization of disturbed areas, including utility construction
areas, as soon as possible; and,
   N.   Protect outlying roads from sediment and mud from construction site
activities, including tracking; and,
   O.   Provide for disposal of collected sediment and floating debris; and,
   P.   Assure that when working near sensitive waters, the specific practices
itemized immediately below are utilized:
      (1)   During construction:
         a.   All exposed soil areas with a slope of 3:1 or steeper, that have
a continuous positive slope to a sensitive water, should have temporary erosion
protection or permanent cover within three days after the area is no longer
actively being worked; all other slopes that have a continuous positive slope
to a sensitive water should have temporary erosion protection or permanent
cover within seven days after the area is no longer actively being worked, and
         b.   Temporary sediment basin requirements should be used for common
drainage locations that serve an area with five or more acres disturbed at one
time; and
      (2)   Buffer Zone. Provide for the maintenance at all times of an
undisturbed buffer zone consisting of not less than 100 linear feet from the
special water (not including tributaries); exceptions from this for areas, such
as water crossings or limited water access, are allowed if the permittee fully
documents in the SWPPP the circumstances and reasons that the buffer
encroachment is necessary; all potential water quality, scenic, and other
environmental impacts of these exceptions should be minimized and documented in
the SWPPP for the project; and
      (3)   Enhanced Temperature Controls. Design the permanent stormwater
management system such that the discharge from the project will minimize any
increase in the temperature.
         a.   minimize new impervious surfaces; and/or,
         b.   other methods that will minimize any increase in the temperature
of the sensitive waters.
7.   Along with the application for a City COSESCO Permit, the permittee shall
post: 1) security for compliance with all requirements imposed by the State
NPDES General Permit #2 and the City COSESCO Permit, as well as necessary
remedial work resulting from violation of any provision of this chapter in an
amount not less than $10,000.00 per gross acre or any fractional portion
thereof or $5,000.00 for each one and two family residential property
improvement as defined in Subsection 162.07(1), whichever is greater. (The
amount required shall be calculated based upon the maximum acreage of soil that
will be simultaneously disturbed and exposed during the project’s
construction.) Said performance security shall remain valid, binding, and in
effect until such time as the permit is formally released and terminated by the
City; and 2) a draft maintenance agreement detailing any and all plans and
guarantees for the future, permanent, and long-term maintenance and repair of
all stormwater controls.
   A.   Acceptable forms of performance security include the following:
      (1)   Performance Bonds.
      (2)   Surety Bonds.
      (3)   Money orders or cashiers’ check.
      (4)   Irrevocable Letter of Credit.
   B.   The application for a City COSESCO Permit shall include the City’s
standard “Hold-Harmless and Waiver of Liability Form” which provides that the
permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless from any and all
claims, damages, or suits arising, directly or indirectly out of any act of
commission or omission by the permittee, or any employee, agent, assign or
contractor or subcontractor of the permittee, in connection with any and all
activities conducted pursuant to the permittee’s State NPDES General Permit #2
and/or City COSESCO Permit.
8.   Whenever any activity covered by the requirements of this chapter also
requires the issuance of any other City permit, site plan approval, or other
such authorization(s), no such other approval(s) or authorization(s) shall be
granted prior to the issuance of the COSESCO Permit.
9.   For so long as a construction site is subject to a State NPDES General
Permit #2 and/or a City COSESCO Permit, the permittee shall provide the City
with current information as follows:
   A.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person on-site
designated by the permittee who is knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and
sediment control and who will oversee compliance with the State NPDES General
Permit #2 and/or the City COSESCO Permit;
   B.   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contractor(s)
and/or subcontractors(s) that will implement each erosion and sediment control
measure identified in the SWPPP.
   C.   The name, address, telephone number, and other contact information of
the property owner and/or responsible party.
   D.   Permittee’s failure to provide current information shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
10.   Original permittees cannot transfer any State NPDES General Permit #2
and/or City COSESCO Permit responsibilities to subsequent parties, (i.e.,
homebuilders, new lot owners, contractors and/or subcontractors, etc.). The
original permittee remains responsible for compliance on any property that has
been sold until such time as the permit(s) are terminated by the City and/or
IDNR. The permittee shall notify in writing and shall provide to the City a
copy of any application to the IDNR for release of any property from a General
Permit #2 pursuant to 567 IAC 64.6(b) or any similar successor provision.
11.   Upon receipt of an application for a City COSESCO Permit, the City shall
either find that the application complies with this chapter and issue a City
COSESCO Permit in accordance with this chapter, or that the application fails
to comply with this chapter, in which case the City shall provide a
comprehensive list identifying non-compliant elements of the application.
12.   Application (on forms provided by the City) for termination of a City
COSESCO Permit may be made no sooner than 30 days after “final stabilization”
is achieved, (as defined by the IDNR in its General Permit #2 to mean, “that
all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and that a
uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of not less than 70 percent
for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization measures have
been employed”).
162.08   INSPECTION PROCEDURES FOR CITY COSESCO PERMITS.
1.   All inspections required under this chapter shall be conducted by the City
or its designee, hereinafter collectively referred to as the “City.”
2.   Permittee shall notify the City when all measures required by permittee’s
SWPPP have been accomplished on-site, whereupon the City shall conduct an
inspection for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter, and
shall within a reasonable time thereafter report to the permittee either that
compliance appears to have been achieved, or that compliance has not been
achieved, in which case the City shall provide a comprehensive list identifying
the conditions of non-compliance. The permittee shall immediately commence
corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of
receiving the City’s comprehensive list. For good cause shown, the City may
extend the deadline for taking corrective action. Failure to take corrective
action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
3.   Construction shall not occur on the site at any time when the City has
identified conditions of non-compliance. Construction activities undertaken by
a permittee prior to resolution of all discrepancies specified in the City’s
comprehensive list shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
4.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences
to the permittee or to third parties for non-compliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
162.09   MONITORING PROCEDURES FOR CITY COSESCO PERMITS.
1.   Upon issuance of a City COSESCO Permit, the permittee has an absolute duty
to notify the City, in writing, of the commencement of land disturbing
activities and to monitor site conditions and to report to the City any change
of circumstances or site conditions which the permittee knows, or should know,
pose a risk of stormwater discharge in a manner inconsistent with permittee’s
SWPPP, State NPDES General Permit #2, and/or City COSESCO Permit.
   A.   Such written report shall be made by the permittee to the City
immediately but in any event within 24 hours of the change of circumstances or
site conditions.
   B.   Failure to make a timely report shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
2.   Any third party may also report to the City site conditions which the
third party reasonably believes poses a risk of stormwater discharge in a
manner inconsistent with permittee’s SWPPP, State NPDES General Permit #2, and/
or City COSESCO Permit.
3.   Upon receiving a written report pursuant to the previous subsections, the
City shall conduct an inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and
thereafter shall provide the permittee with a comprehensive list identifying
the conditions of non-compliance. The permittee shall immediately commence
corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of
receiving the City’s comprehensive list. For good cause shown, the City may
extend the deadline for completing corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, whereupon the City shall immediately commence enforcement actions
specified in Section
162.10 below.
4.   In addition to those inspection(s) made as a result of a report being
filed with the City pursuant to the previous subsections, the City shall
conduct at least one unannounced inspection during the course of construction
to monitor compliance with the State NPDES General Permit #2 and/or the City
COSESCO Permit. If the inspection discloses any significant non-compliance, the
City shall provide the permittee with a comprehensive list identifying the
conditions of non-compliance. The permittee shall immediately commence
corrective action and shall complete such corrective action within 24 hours of
receiving the City’s comprehensive list. For good cause shown, the City may
extend the deadline for completing corrective action. Failure to take
corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, whereupon the City shall immediately commence enforcement actions
specified in Section
162.10 below.
5.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences
to the permittee or to third-parties for non-compliant conditions undetected by
inspection.
162.10   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL.
1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt by reference the minimum
stormwater management guidelines and controls established by SUDAS
(specifically Section 9040, as amended) in order to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public within this jurisdiction.
This section seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
   A.   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from development within the
City limits and fringe area in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases
in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
   B.   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
   C.   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows
from any specific development project site after completion to not exceed the
pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and,
   D.   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through the establishment of appropriate
minimum stormwater management guidelines and controls and to ensure that
controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
2.   Applicability. The provisions and requirements of this section shall be
applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications and other circumstances
as specified in Subsection 162.07(1) unless eligible for an exemption or
granted a waiver by the City under Section
162.11 of this chapter. The provisions of this section also apply to all other
land disturbance activities that are not covered under the above-referenced
Subsection 162.07(1) if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development that meets the minimum applicability criteria of said section even
though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take
place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must be
reviewed by the City to ensure that established water quality standards will be
maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction
runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.
   A.   As noted herein the City hereby adopts by reference the minimum
guidelines and controls as established in the SUDAS Manual that must be met for
development to be approved. These guidelines and controls apply to any
development disturbing more than one acre of land.
   B.   The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
      (1)   Any logging and agricultural activity which is consistent with an
approved soil conservation plan, or a timber management plan prepared or
approved by the State and/or City, as applicable.
      (2)   Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land
provided they are not part of a larger common development plan.
      (3)   Repairs to any stormwater controls deemed necessary by the City.
   C.   When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a
“development” as defined in Subsection 3 of this section (Definitions),
decisions on permitting and appropriate on-site controls shall be governed by
the SUDAS Manual. Final authorization of all development and redevelopment
projects will be determined after a review by City.
   D.   It is intended that the provisions of this section be construed to be
consistent with those provisions of all other sections of
Chapter 162 of this Code.
   E.   The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this Code imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.
3.   Definitions. Terms in this chapter, other than those defined below, shall
have the meanings as set out in the SUDAS Manual.
   A.   “Applicant” means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has
filed an application for a stormwater management permit.
   B.   “Building” means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having
walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property,
and occupying more than 120 square feet of area.
   C.   “Controls” means best management practices (BMPs) established in the
SUDAS Manual that can be used individually, or in combination, to achieve the
guidelines including, but not limited to, infiltration practices, filtration
practices, stormwater detention practices, wetlands, vegetated systems for
stormwater quality management, pavement systems, mechanical systems, and
chemical treatment practices or systems for turbidity removal, and such other
and further BMPs as may be established by SUDAS.
   D.   “Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of property by its
owner for general public use.
   E.   “Developer” means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
   F.   “Development” means any land disturbance activity as defined in
Paragraph J below.
   G.   “Drainage easement” means a legal right granted by a landowner to a
grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
   H.   “Enforcement officer” means that person or persons designated by the
City having responsibility for administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   I.   “Fee in lieu” means a payment of money in place of achieving or
exceeding all or part of the minimum guidelines required by this chapter.
   J.   “Land disturbance activity” means any activity which changes the volume
or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may
include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil,
placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of
vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion
or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
   K.   “Landowner” means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including
those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person
holding proprietary rights in the land.
   L.   “Maintenance agreement” means a legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of
stormwater controls.
   M.   “Stormwater management” means the use of controls that are designed in
accordance with the SUDAS Manual to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates, and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
   N.   “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan” (SWPPP) means a plan that is
designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site
during construction activities.
   O.   “SUDAS Manual” means the current SUDAS publication, by whatever name,
as amended from time to time by SUDAS, that specifies the stormwater guidelines
and stormwater controls deemed by SUDAS to meet the goals of the U.S.EPA’s
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Program (Program) administered by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources (“IDNR”). Guidelines and controls approved
by SUDAS shall be presumed to comply with all State and federal laws and rules,
and the use and proper and effective maintenance of stormwater controls
approved in the SUDAS Manual shall constitute compliance with the provisions of
this Code.
4.   Requirements for Approval of Stormwater Management Concept Plan and
Stormwater Management Final Plan. No application for development will be
accepted unless it includes a stormwater management concept plan detailing, in
concept, how runoff and associated water quality impacts, resulting from the
development, will be controlled or managed.
   A.   The stormwater management concept plan shall:
      (1)   Be prepared by a licensed professional engineer (PE) or landscape
architect; and
      (2)   Indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site
and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices, with clear
citations to the SUDAS Manual; and
      (3)   Include a signed and dated certification (as provided by the City)
under penalty of perjury by the preparer of the stormwater management concept
plan that it complies with all requirements of this chapter and the SUDAS
Manual, meets the submittal requirements outlined in the SUDAS Manual, is
designed to achieve the guidelines established in the SUDAS Manual, and that
the City is entitled to rely upon the certification as due diligence on the
part of the City.
   B.   The stormwater management concept plan shall include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water
resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the stormwater controls
proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of
this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater
controls necessary for the proposed project, and to ensure adequate planning
for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this
goal the following information shall also be included in the stormwater
management concept plan:
      (1)   A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management,
and sediment and erosion controls. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed
land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads, and easements;
the limits of clearing and grading. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
      (2)   Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed controls
are capable of achieving the guidelines for the site in compliance with this
chapter and the specifications of the SUDAS Manual.
      (3)   A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and
a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover,
topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular
attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive controls that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
      (4)   A written description of the required maintenance burden for any
proposed controls.
      (5)   The City may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum
development potential of a site under the existing zoning classification,
regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to
its maximum potential.
      (6)   For development occurring on a previously developed site, an
applicant shall be required to include, within the stormwater management
concept plan, controls for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges
from the site in accordance with this chapter to the maximum extent
practicable.
   C.   The stormwater management concept plan shall be referred for comment to
all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a
stormwater management final plan.
   D.   No building, grading, sediment control, or COSESCO Permit shall be
issued until a satisfactory stormwater management final plan, or a waiver
thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the City after
determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this
chapter.
   E.   Stormwater Management Final Plan Requirements. After review of the
stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed
necessary by the City, a stormwater management final plan must be submitted to
the City for approval.
      (1)   The stormwater management final plan, in addition to the
information included in the stormwater management concept plan, shall:
         a.   Be prepared by a licensed professional engineer (PE) or landscape
architect; and
         b.   Indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site
and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices, with clear
citations to the SUDAS Manual; and
         c.   Include a signed and dated certification (as provided by the
City) under penalty of perjury by the preparer of the stormwater management
concept plan that it complies with all requirements of this chapter and the
SUDAS Manual, meets the submittal requirements outlined in the SUDAS Manual, is
designed to achieve the guidelines established in the SUDAS Manual, and that
the City is entitled to rely upon the certification as due diligence on the
part of City.
      (2)   The stormwater management final plan shall also include:
         a.   A detailed summary of how and why the stormwater management final
plan differs, if at all, from the stormwater management concept plan previously
submitted.
         b.   Contact information including, but not limited to, the name,
address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the
property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property, or
properties affected.
         c.   Topographic Base Map, consisting of a 1” = 200’ topographic base
map of the site which extends a minimum of 400 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including
streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all
existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and
significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown.
         d.   Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and post-development conditions for the design storms specified
in the SUDAS Manual. Such calculations shall include: (i) description of the
design storm frequency, intensity and duration, (ii) time of concentration,
(iii) soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients, (iv) peak runoff rates and
total runoff volumes for each watershed area, (v) infiltration rates, where
applicable, (vi) culvert capacities, (vii) flow velocities, (viii) data on the
increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the
Stormwater Design Manual, and (ix) documentation of sources for all computation
methods and field test results.
         e.   If a stormwater control depends on the hydrologic properties of
soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be submitted. The
soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil sites shall be determined
based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil
types present at the location of the control measure.
         f.   A “maintenance and repair plan” for all stormwater controls
including detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
efficient function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a
stormwater control that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or
training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the
effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or
additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan.
         g.   A detailed landscaping plan for management of vegetation at the
site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the
maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to
ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared
by a registered landscape architect.
         h.   Proof of permanent recorded maintenance easements that will
ensure access to all stormwater controls at the site for the purpose of
inspection and repair. These easements will be recorded with the stormwater
management final plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to
the property.
         i.   Proof of a recorded maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent owners of the land served by stormwater controls to ensure
maintenance and repair in accordance with the specifications of this chapter.
         j.   Copies of all existing SWPPS (as required by the City’s COSESCO
ordinance) current as of the date of submission of the stormwater management
final plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site
stormwater controls.
         k.   Proof that the applicant has acquired all other applicable
environmental permits for the site, or that no other such permits are required,
prior to submission of the stormwater management final plan to the City.
   F.   Installation Performance Security or Bond. The City shall require the
submittal of an installation performance security or bond prior to the issuance
of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater controls are installed by
the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management final plan.
      (1)   The amount of the installation performance security or bond shall
be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater controls approved
under the permit, plus 25 percent. The installation performance security or
bond shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified
in the stormwater management final plan.
      (2)   The installation performance security or bond shall be released in
full only upon submission of “as built plans” of all stormwater controls
specified in the storm water management final plan and written certification by
a professional engineer that the stormwater controls have been installed in
accordance with the approved stormwater management final plan and other
applicable provisions of this ordinance. The City will make a final inspection
of stormwater controls to ensure compliance with the approved stormwater
management final plan and the provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a
partial pro-rata release of the installation performance security or bond based
on the completion of various development stages may be made at the discretion
of City.
   G.   Maintenance Performance Security or Bond. The City shall also require
the submittal of a maintenance performance security or bond prior to the
issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater controls are
maintained in an effective state for a minimum of two years after the City’s
acceptance of said controls.
      (1)   This maintenance performance security or bond may be released by
the City upon a showing satisfactory to the City that:
         a.   The permit holder has assigned to another bona-fide financially
responsible legal entity, such as a homeowners’ or similar organization
organized under State law, responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater
controls in an effective state for the balance of the initial two-year period
after assignment; and
         b.   Said assignee-legal-entity has fully accepted such responsibility
in a written document that qualifies for recording and has been recorded in the
County Recorder’s office under State law; and
         c.   Said assignee-legal-entity posts a substitute maintenance
performance security or bond subject to release at the end of the initial two-
year period upon a further showing by the assignee-legal-entity that the
stormwater controls are, in the City’s sole judgment, still reasonably
effective.
   H.   Notice of Construction Commencement. The applicant must notify the City
in advance, in writing, before the commencement of construction on any
stormwater plan covered by this chapter. Regular inspections of construction of
the stormwater controls shall be conducted by the City.
      (1)   All inspections shall be documented, and written reports prepared
that contain the following information:
         a.   The date and location of the inspection; and
         b.   Whether construction is in compliance with the approved
stormwater management concept plan; and
         c.   Variations, if any, from the approved stormwater management
concept plan.
      (2)   If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No
added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the City.
      (3)    After construction is completed, applicants are required to submit
actual “as-built” drawings satisfactory to the City for any stormwater controls
located on-site. The drawings must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater controls and must be certified by a professional engineer or
landscape architect. A final inspection by the City is required before the
release of any performance securities can occur.
   I.   Landscaping and Stabilization Requirements. Landscaping and
stabilization shall be accomplished to prevent a violation of this chapter or
impairment of controls.
      (1)   In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be
submitted with the final as-built drawings describing the vegetative
stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction
is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized
after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of
vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that
adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a
registered landscape architect and must be approved prior to receiving a
permit.
   J.   Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater Controls. The applicant or owner
of every site, or an assignee qualified pursuant to Paragraph G above, shall be
responsible for maintaining as-built stormwater controls in an effective state
as determined in the sole judgment of the City for not less than 25 years from
and after completion of construction.
   K.   Maintenance and Repair Easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit
for development involving any stormwater control, the applicant or owner of the
site must execute a maintenance and repair easement agreement that shall be
binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater control. The
agreement shall provide for access to the control and the land it serves at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the City, or the City’s designee,
and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the
control is maintained in proper working condition to meet the guidelines
established in the SUDAS Manual. The easement agreement shall be recorded by
the City at the expense of the permit holder or property owners.
   L.   Maintenance Covenants. Maintenance of all stormwater controls shall be
ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be
approved by the City and recorded prior to the stormwater management final plan
approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and
how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater
controls. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to
ensure proper performance of the controls between scheduled cleanouts.
      (1)   The City, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may, but is not
required to accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater control to
include the City responsibility for maintenance and repair, provided that the
maintenance and repair of such element will not impose an undue burden on other
City taxpayers who enjoy little if any benefit from the control, the control
meets all the requirements of this chapter, and the dedication includes
adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise,
for inspection and regular maintenance.
      (2)   Requirements for Maintenance Covenants. All stormwater controls
must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and
repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include, but are not limited
to, removal of silt, litter, and other debris from all catch basins, inlets,
and drainage pipes, grass cutting, and vegetation removal, and necessary
replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance or repair needs detected
must be corrected by the developer or entity responsible under a written
maintenance agreement under Section
162.06 in a timely manner, as determined by City, and the inspection and
maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater controls.
   M.   Inspection of Stormwater Controls. Inspection programs may be
established on any reasonable basis including but not limited to: event
initiated (all rainfalls of greater than one-half inch), routine inspections;
random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as
higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants;
inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than
usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants, or with discharges of a type
which are more likely than the typical discharge, to cause violations of State
or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES Stormwater Permit;
and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or
safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in stormwater controls, and evaluating the
condition of stormwater controls.
   N.   Right-of-Entry for Inspection. When any new stormwater control is
installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between
private property and a public stormwater management facility, sanitary sewer or
combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the City the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the City has a
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Code is occurring or has
occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or
correction of any violation of this code.
   O.   Records of Installation and Maintenance and Repair Activities. Parties
responsible for the operation and maintenance of stormwater controls shall make
records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs and shall retain
the records for at least 25 years. These records shall be made available to the
City during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon
request.
   P.   Failure to Maintain Stormwater Controls. If a responsible party fails
or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant or any
provision of this chapter, the City, after providing written notice and
allowing for a maximum 30-day correction time frame from the date of the
notice, may correct a violation by performing all necessary work to place the
control in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater control
is deemed to be an immediate threat or danger to public safety or public
health, the City may take immediate actions to place the control in proper
working condition. Any and all costs incurred by the City in the enforcement of
this section shall be recovered from the responsible party. The City shall
submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting the costs incurred by the
City for any and all enforcement activities undertaken under this code. Failure
to pay charges properly invoiced under this Code within 30 days of billing
shall constitute a violation of this Code and said charges not timely paid
shall constitute a lien against the property and may be assessed against the
property and collected in the same manner as other assessments due and owing
the City.
162.11   WAIVERS.
Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this
chapter, unless a written request is filed with the City to waive the
implementation of controls, in whole or in part, and such waiver is granted by
the City.
1.   A partial waiver of controls as required by this chapter may be granted
provided that at least one of the following conditions is established by the
applicant based on the presentation of authoritative written evidence
satisfactory to the City:
   A.   The proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the
objectives of this chapter.
   B.   Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater
have been established in a stormwater management final plan that has been
approved by the City and fully implemented.
   C.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The
off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is, in the City’s
sole judgment, a responsible entity legally obligated to monitor the
performance of and maintain the efficiency of stormwater controls in accordance
with a written and recorded maintenance agreement.
2.   In instances where one of the above conditions is established, the
applicant must further establish by authoritative written evidence satisfactory
to the City that the partial waiver will not result in any of the following
impacts to downstream waterways:
   A.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures; or
   B.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat; or
   C.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
   D.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, or property.
3.   If the City finds that a general waiver is appropriate because
implementation of no on-site stormwater controls is feasible due to the natural
or existing physical characteristics of a site, or that one of the conditions
specified in Subsection 1 above cannot be established to a certainty, or that
any one or more of the impacts to downstream waterways specified in Subsection
2 above cannot be entirely averted, the applicant shall execute a binding
written agreement to accomplish one or more of the following mitigation
measures selected by City:
   A.   The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an
easement to be dedicated for preservation and or reconstruction of native
ecosystems of lands strategically located in the watershed consistent with the
purposes of this chapter, of a sufficient quantity to enable the City or others
to achieve the guidelines with respect to a number of cubic feet of annual
stormwater equivalent to the estimated number of cubic feet of annual
stormwater that will not achieve the guidelines as a consequence of the waiver.
   B.   The creation of one or more stormwater controls on previously developed
properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater controls, having
a capacity to achieve the guidelines with respect to a number of cubic feet of
annual stormwater equivalent to the estimated number of cubic feet of annual
stormwater that will not achieve the guidelines as a consequence of the waiver.
   C.   Monetary contributions (Fee-in-Lieu) to fund stormwater management
activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation
studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macro invertebrates,
stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic
studies, monitoring of stormwater controls, and stream corridor stabilization
practices). The monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a
fee schedule (unless the developer and the City agree on a greater alternate
contribution) established by the City based on the estimated cost savings to
the developer resulting from the waiver and the estimated future costs to the
City to achieve the guidelines with respect to a number of cubic feet of annual
stormwater equivalent to the estimated number of cubic feet of annual
stormwater that will not achieve the guidelines as a consequence of the waiver.
All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital
improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the
issuance of any building permit for the development.
   D.   Dedication of land or granting of an easement by the applicant of a
value equivalent to the cost to the City of the construction of an off-site
stormwater management facility sufficient to achieve the guidelines with
respect to a number of cubic feet of annual stormwater equivalent to the
estimated number of cubic feet of annual stormwater that will not achieve the
guidelines as a consequence of the waiver. The agreement shall be entered into
by the applicant and the City prior to the recording of plats or, if no
recorded plat is required, prior to the issuance of any permit.
162.12   FEES, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES.
1.   Abatement Fees and Costs. The Council shall review and establish, by
resolution, the fees and other costs associated with the City’s abatement of
any violation of any provision of this chapter as referenced herein.
2.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
including an action for injunctive relief, by imposition of a civil penalty
pursuant to Section
1.14 of this Code, through the abatement of the violation by the City, through
the issuance of a “Stop Work Order,” and/or a lawsuit filed in District Court
for the County.
3.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa,
pursuant to the City’s municipal infraction ordinance,
Chapter 3, as amended.
4.   Restoration of Lands. Any violator may be required to restore affected
land to its prior, undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within 30 days after written notice, the City may take the necessary
corrective action(s). The City shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the costs incurred by the City for any and all corrective action(s)
undertaken under this Code. Failure to pay charges properly invoiced under this
code within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of this Code and
said charges not timely paid shall constitute a lien against the property and
may be assessed against the property from which an illicit discharge emanates
and collected in the same manner as other assessments due and owing the City.
5.   Holds on Occupancy Permits. Occupancy permits shall not be granted, and
performance security shall not be released until all stormwater controls have
been inspected and approved by City.
162.13   APPEALS AND REQUESTS FOR HEARINGS.
1.   Administrative decisions and enforcement actions rendered and conducted by
City staff or contractors authorized to administer and enforce the provisions
of this chapter may be appealed by the permittee, developer, and/or responsible
party to the Council pursuant to the following rules of procedure:
   A.   The appeal and request for hearing must be filed in writing with the
City within five business days of the date of the decision or enforcement
action.
   B.   The written appeal and request for hearing shall specify in detail the
action appealed from, the errors allegedly made by the City giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the permittee
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the permittee intends to call, copies of all documents the permittee
intends to introduce at the hearing, and the specific relief requested.
   C.   The City shall specify in writing the reasons for the enforcement
action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the City intends to
introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all witnesses
the City intends to call, and copies of all documents the City intends to
introduce at the hearing.
   D.   The City shall notify the permittee by ordinary mail, and shall give
public notice in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa, of the date,
time, and place for the regular or special meeting of the Council at which the
hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
not less than four nor more than 20 days after the filing of the appeal. The
rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard of proof to be applied, shall
be the same as provided by Chapter 17A of the Code of Iowa. The permittee may
be represented by counsel at the permittee’s expense. The City may be
represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney designated by the Council at
City expense.
2.   The decision of the Council shall be rendered in writing and may be
appealed to the Iowa District Court.
CHAPTER 163
STANDARD PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
 
163.01 Purpose     163.03 Adoption of Specifications
163.02 Definitions 163.04 Amendments
 
163.01   PURPOSE.
In order to ensure the consistent high quality of materials and workmanship in
all public construction projects, the City deems it in the public interest to
establish and publish Standard Construction Specifications which shall apply to
and govern the construction of all public improvements in public rights-of-way
within the City.
163.02   DEFINITIONS.
[Reserved for future use.]
163.03   ADOPTION OF SPECIFICATIONS.
The City adopts, by reference, the following minimum standards for public
improvements constructed within the City’s jurisdictional area: The Iowa
Statewide Urban Design and Specifications – 2024 Edition – (SUDAS) manuals
shall be the adopted City Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications.
SUDAS shall be the minimum standards; due to unusual or extenuating
circumstances, the City may require that projects conform to additional
standards or to greater than minimum standards. A copy of the specifications
shall remain on file at the office of the Clerk and shall be available for
inspection and copying. All contractors and suppliers shall be charged with
knowledge of its contents.
163.04   AMENDMENTS.
The City Engineer may, from time to time, propose additions or changes to the
specifications in the form of amendments. All such amendments shall be
presented to the Council for examination and approval. The Council may approve
and adopt such amendments by resolution. Following adoption by resolution, the
amendments shall be placed in the publication on file with the City Clerk and
shall have the full force and effect of law as of the date the amendments are
filed.
CHAPTER 164
EMERGENCY KEY “LOCK BOX” REQUIREMENTS
 
164.01 Specified Structures    164.04 Subject to Penalties
164.02 Access to the Structure 164.05 Voluntary Participation
164.03 Rules and Regulations   164.06 Detailed Specifications and Requirements
 
164.01   SPECIFIED STRUCTURES.
The following “specified structures” shall be equipped with a key lock box at
or near the main entrance or such other approved location as required and
approved by the Fire Chief:
1.   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system
or automatic suppression system, or such structures that are secured in a
manner that restricts access during an emergency.
2.   Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units.
3.   Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
4.   Gates and/or barriers that are secured in a manner that restrict access
during an emergency.
5.   All newly constructed, under construction, or not yet occupied structures
that are subject to this chapter shall have the key lock box installed and
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
6.   All specified structures that do not have an occupancy permit on the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to have a key lock box
installed and operational as specified herein. Any other specified structures
in existence, with a valid occupancy permit, will not be required to
participate, but are strongly encouraged to do so voluntarily. Any specified
structure that is exempted will be required to conform at such time when the
property ownership changes, and prior to, or as a condition of, the issuance of
a building permit for any renovation which expands the “footprint” (external
dimensions) of the structure, or which increases the then current assessed
valuation of the structure by more than 10 percent.
7.   The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented and the location of the lock box on the specified structures within
the City, and shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
164.02   ACCESS TO THE STRUCTURE.
The owner or operator of any specified structure required to have a key lock
box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access
to the structure and shall notify the Fire Chief if any locks are changed so
that the lock boxes can be opened, and the new keys placed inside.
164.03   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement such supplemental rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, for the use
of the lock box system.
164.04   SUBJECT TO PENALTIES.
Any person who owns or operates a specified structure subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties and other lawful remedies set
forth in this Code for any violation of this chapter.
164.05   VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner occupied one- and two-
family dwellings, but property owners are encouraged to participate voluntarily
utilizing a residential lock box system.
164.06   DETAILED SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
Detailed specifications and requirements:
1.   Alert decals shall be displayed, in the form and in those locations as
approved by the Fire Chief, to alert the Fire Department of the presence of a
lock box on the property.
2.   In occupancies storing or dispensing hazardous materials, the Fire Chief
may require that a hazardous materials cabinet be installed to store MSDS and
other information as required.
3.   Properties that are accessed through a gate, cross arm, or any other
similar barrier that impedes ingress, by means of a key, swipe card, or code,
shall be equipped with a key switch at a readily available location approved by
the Fire Chief.
4.   When a property is protected by a locked fence or gate, it shall be
equipped with a security padlock using the same lock system as designated by
the Fire Chief. The property owner shall maintain the security padlock in a
useable condition at all times and shall make sure that it is readily
accessible at all times.
5.   When a construction site is secured by a locked fence or gate, the
contractor shall maintain a security padlock at all times during the
construction phase. The security padlock will be obtained by placing a security
deposit with the Clerk in an amount set to cover replacement of the security
padlock should it become lost or damaged. Once a deposit has been made, the
Fire Chief will deliver it to the site and designate the location and explain
the use of the security padlock to the contractor or their designee.
6.   When a property is protected by an automatic sprinkler and or standpipe
system, and the Fire Department connection is exposed to possible vandalism,
the Fire Chief may require that a locked security cap be installed.
7.   The Fire Chief may designate that each key lock box shall contain at a
minimum, the following required life-safety items:
   A.   Labeled keys to locked points of ingress, whether interior or exterior
of such buildings.
   B.   Labeled keys to any locked rooms.
   C.   Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas not covered in the sections
above.
   D.   A list of emergency contact people and phone numbers.
   E.   Floor plans of the rooms within the building may also be required to be
placed in the box and/or to be sent to the Fire Departments for pre-plan use,
showing locations of all various utility shut-off devices.
   F.   Hazardous materials MSDS information, as required.
CHAPTER 165
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
165.01 Definitions                       165.08 General Floodplain (Overlay)
                                         District (GF)
165.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of  165.09 Reserved
Fact, and Purpose
165.03 General Provisions                165.10 Appointment and Duties of Board
                                         of Adjustment
165.04 Administration                    165.11 Nonconforming Uses
165.05 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) 165.12 Penalties for Violation
Districts
165.06 Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)  165.13 Amendments
165.07 Floodway Fringe (Overlay)
District (FF)
 
165.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel of
the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood.”)
3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would reach
at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
5.   “Board of Appeals” means the City Council of the City.
6.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including (but not limited to) buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
7.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed
area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Subsection
165.07(2)(D)(1) of this chapter.
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage.
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation.
   D.   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in this section.
8.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
9.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
10.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
11.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
12.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
13.   “Five hundred (500)-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has
a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or
which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
14.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
15.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
16.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps. The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
17.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
as a result of a flood.
18.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
19.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
20.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot.
21.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area
outside the floodway.
22.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
23.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
      (1)   An approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
      (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
24.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of
enclosed area below lowest floor in Subsection 165.01(6) are met.
25.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
26.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for filling,
grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
27.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted
by the community.
28.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
29.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis.
   B.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection.
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck.
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
30.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not
trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
   A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles, and replacing siding.
   B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops, and similar finish work.
   C.   Basement sealing.
   D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.
   E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
31.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
32.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
33.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including (but not limited to) buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities,
and/or other similar uses.
34.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in
the estimated cost of repair. Substantial damage also means flood-related
damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the
average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
35.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
      (1)   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
      (2)   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added
to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25 percent.
36.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulations.
37.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
165.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
2.   Findings of Fact.
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
   B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
      (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
      (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
   C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Paragraph 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
   A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so
that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
   B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
   C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
   D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
   E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
165.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway
Fringe, and General Floodplain Districts, as established in this section.
2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) for Scott County and Incorporated Areas, City of LeClaire, Panel(s)
19163C0382G, 0384G, 0401G, 0402G, 0403G, and 0404G dated March 23, 2021, which
were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Scott County, are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The
Scott County Flood Insurance Study is hereby adopted by reference and is made a
part of this chapter for the purpose of administering floodplain management
regulations. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the
Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
3.   USGS Floodplain Benchmarks References. The following benchmarks, (as
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929, NGVD), are used as
references for making floodplain determinations:
   A.   RM #1: Elevation: 581.35 (NGVD) Location: A railroad spike in a power
pole located approximately 50 feet west of the I.C. & E. Railroad track,
approximately 200 feet downstream of Oak Street.
   B.   RM #2: Elevation: 581.79 (NGVD) Location: A monument stamped "14 R-1,
12-1743" set flush with the ground located 101 feet upstream from Wisconsin
Street, riverward of the downstream rear corner of the building located at 107
North Cody Road, 33 feet west of the I.C. & E. Railroad tracks.
   C.   RM #3: Elevation: 579.04 (NGVD) Location: A cut square on the southwest
comer of the downstream headwall on a culvert under Canal Shore Drive SW.,
about 50 feet east of a private drive located at 813 Canal Shore Drive S.W.
   D.   RM #4: Elevation: 588.48 (NGVD) Location: A railroad spike in a power
pole approximately one foot above the ground located approximately 50 feet west
of the intersection of the I.C. & E. Railroad tracks and an abandoned private
roadway, approximately 25 feet northwest of the corner of the house located at
2423 S. Cody Road.
   E.   RM 5#: Elevation: 585.01 (NGVD) Location: A cut cross on the southwest
corner of the downstream headwall of the culvert for Sycamore Creek under U.S.
67.
   F.   RM #6: Elevation: 578.63 (NGVD) Location: PK nail on the concrete
abutment of the Canal Shore Drive S.W. Bridge over Sycamore Creek.
   G.   RM #8: Elevation: 671.78 (NGVD) Location: A cut cross on the centerline
of the downstream headwall of the culvert for Sycamore Creek under Interstate
80.
   H.   RM #9: Elevation: 689.96 (NGVD) Location: Two nails, 18 inches above
the ground in a 30-inch oak tree located 50 feet south of the centerline of
Wisconsin Street, 30 feet east of Sycamore Creek.
   I.   RM #10: Elevation: 574.00 (NGVD) Location: A USGS brass and concrete
monument located in an eight-inch diameter ductile iron pipe on the Mississippi
River Bank approximately 26 feet downstream of the river gauge station in the
vicinity of Dodge Street extended.
4.   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
5.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered, without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
6.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
7.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
8.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or on any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
9.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
165.04   ADMINISTRATION.
1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Administrator.
   A.   The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to
implement and administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be
referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
   B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include (but not necessarily be limited to) the following:
      (1)   Review all Floodplain Development Permit Applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
      (2)   Review Floodplain Development Applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
      (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
         a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures; or
         b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures
have been floodproofed.
      (4)   Notify adjacent communities, counties, and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
      (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
      (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
      (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment
of potential conflict.
      (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps
when:
         a.   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District results
in any of the following:
            i.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
            ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
         b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
         c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
      (10   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of
this chapter.
      (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
   A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development
(any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving,
storage of materials and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations),
including the placement of factory-built homes.
   B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished by
the Floodplain Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
      (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
      (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
      (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
      (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
      (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structure or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
      (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
      (8)   Such other information as the Floodplain Administrator deems
reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this
chapter.
   C.   Action on Permit Application. The Floodplain Administrator shall,
within a reasonable time, determine whether the proposed floodplain development
meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove
the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing,
of the specific reasons therefor. The Floodplain Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
   D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
structure floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
165.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
1.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW) - those areas identified as Floodway on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
2.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF) - those areas identified as Zone
AE on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map but excluding those areas identified
as Floodway.
3.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF) - those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Board of Adjustment.
165.06   FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).
1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway District.
2.   Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a permitted
use shall meet the following standards.
   A.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would
result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
   B.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
      (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   C.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel
or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
   D.   Structures, buildings, recreational vehicles, and sanitary and utility
systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District, and shall be constructed or aligned to present the
minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
   E.   Structures, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
   F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District
within the time available after flood warning.
   G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
   I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
165.07   FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF).
1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway Fringe District shall
be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance
(or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
2.   Performance Standards. All development must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
Where base flood elevation data has not been provided on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
compute such data. Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no development
may increase the base flood elevation more than one foot. The applicant will be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make such determination.
   A.   All development shall:
      (1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
      (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   B.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods
used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures
located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding
ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply
where the Floodplain Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning
time for the protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning
time, consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
   C.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of
Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   D.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
         a.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
low damage potential storage. Where the distance between the floor and ceiling
of the fully enclosed area below the lowest floor is five feet or more, the
applicant shall be required to sign and record with the County Recorder a Non-
Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area remains compliant
with the criteria outlined in this subsection.
      (2)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      (3)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or, in the case of non-residential
structures, optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base
flood elevation.
      (4)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
   E.   Factory-Built Homes.
      (1)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (2)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by the State
Building Code.
   F.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      (1)   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      (2)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      (3)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      (4)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   G.   Storage of Equipment and Materials. Storage of equipment and materials
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
      (1)   Not subject to major flood damage and anchored to prevent movement
due to flood waters; or
      (2)   Readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
   H.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
shall approve structural flood control works.
   I.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.
   J.   Subdivision. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
   K.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
      (1)   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental
to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
         a.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of
the structure located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
         b.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
         c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         e.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
         f.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Paragraph D(1) of this subsection.
      (2)   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
   L.   Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
requirements of Paragraph E of this subsection regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days, and
      (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Paragraph E of this subsection regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-
built homes.
   M.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried
in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent
rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   N.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially improved
maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the 500-year
flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed
to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the two-tenths percent
annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the two-tenths percent
chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator. Where a two-tenths percent chance flood elevation data has not
been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be
responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient
technical information to make such determinations.
165.08   GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (GF).
1.   Permitted Uses.
   A.   All development within the General Floodplain District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the General Floodplain District.
   B.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-built
homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine:
      (1)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
      (2)   The base flood elevation.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
   C.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required for
the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
      (1)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less than
two square miles, and
      (2)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel modification
that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2b) Iowa
Administrative Code.
2.   Performance Standards.
   A.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as
determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (Section
165.06).
   B.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
(Section
165.07).
165.09   RESERVED.
165.10   APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1.   The Board of Adjustment, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall hear
and decide:
   A.   Appeals; and
   B.   Requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall
take any other action which is required of the Board.
2.   Appeals. Where it is alleged that there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board and with the official from
whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the
appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board
all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
3.   Variance. The Board may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
   A.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
   B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
   C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection
for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Floodplain Administrator
that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
   E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
4.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board.
   A.   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or a request for
a variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due
notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of
a professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
   B.   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or
variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so
long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in
writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
In granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in
this section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe
such conditions as contained in Subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
      (1)   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
         a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
         b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
         c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
         d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
         e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the City.
         f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
         g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
         h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development
and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
         i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area.
         j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
         k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
         l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
         m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
      (2)   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions
may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         a.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
         b.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
         c.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
         d.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
         e.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the
flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated
with the regulatory flood. The Board shall require that the applicant submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
5.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board.
165.11   NONCONFORMING USES.
1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
   B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
2.   Except as provided in Subsection 1(B) of this section, any use which has
been permitted as a variance shall be considered a conforming use.
165.12   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day such violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained prevent the City
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
violation.
165.13   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 167
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            NAME OF AREA
439           June 17, 1991      T.I.F.District #1
440           June 17, 1991      T.I.F.District #2
449           May 4, 1992        Expansion of T.I.F.District #2 – Amendment #1
453           July 27,1992       Expansion of T.I.F.District #1 – Amendment #1
616           June 19, 2003      T.I.F.District #3
629           May 17, 2004       Expansion of T.I.F.District #1
644           August 1,2005      Expansion of T.I.F.District #1
723           October 4, 2010    Expansion of T.I.F.District #1
746           June 18, 2012      Expansion of T.I.F.District #1
827           September 19, 2022 LeClaire Urban Renewal Area No. 1
828           September 19, 2022 Rodgers 1st Addition Urban Renewal Area
 
CHAPTER 168
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
291           December 5, 1983  Urban Revitalization
400           September 6, 1988 Urban Revitalization Area Amendment
408           October 17, 1988  Program Extension
433           December 17, 1990 Program Extension
501           December 06, 1995 Program Extension
580           December 05, 2000 Program Extension
597           July 16, 2002     Program Extension
816           November 15, 2021 Program Extension
 
CHAPTER 170
ZONING REGULATIONS
170.01 Title                            170.35 Planning and Zoning Commission
170.02 Purpose                          170.36 City Council
170.03 General Description              170.37 Amendments
170.04 Private Easements, Covenants,    170.38 Zoning Certificates and
Agreements, and Prior Ordinances        Occupancy Permits
170.05 Authority                        170.39 General Provisions
170.06 Required Review                  170.40 Miscellaneous Lot Provisions
170.07 Definitions                      170.41 Use or Reduction of Required
                                        Yards
170.08 Nonconforming Buildings,         170.42 Conversion of Dwellings
Structures, and Uses
170.09 Fees                             170.43 Screening and Fencing
170.10 Penalties                        170.44 Vision Clearances at Corners
170.11 Establishment of Districts       170.45 Affect on Essential Services
170.12 Zoning District Map              170.46 Validity of Existing Building
                                        Permits
170.13 Zoning Map Editor’s Note       170.47 Outdoor Lighting
170.14 Rules of Interpretation of       170.48 Height Exceptions and
District Boundaries                     Modifications
170.15 Annexed Territory                170.49 Yard Exceptions and
                                        Modifications
170.16 General Agricultural District    170.50 Zero Lot Line Zoning
(A-1)
170.17 Rural Residential District (RR)  170.51 Detached Accessory Buildings,
                                        Structures, or Uses
170.18 Single-Family Residential        170.52 Off-Street Parking Areas and
District (R-1)                          Loading Spaces and Special Parking
                                        Provisions
170.19 One- and Two-Family Residential  170.53 Signs
District (R-2)
170.20 Multi-Family Residential         170.54 Assignment of Building Addresses
District (R-3)
170.21 Mobile Home Park District (R-M)  170.55 Buffers, Greenways, and Open
                                        Spaces
170.22 Neighborhood Commercial District 170.56 Campgrounds
(C-1)
170.23 Central Business District (C-2)  170.57 Site Plans Required for
                                        Undeveloped Parcels
170.24 Highway-Oriented Commercial      170.58 Harboring and Maintaining
Service District (C-3)                  Livestock
170.25 Light Industrial District (I-1)  170.59 Wireless Communication
                                        Facilities
170.26 Heavy Industrial District (I-2)  170.60 Garage Sales
170.27 Overlay Flood District (FD)      170.61 Landscaping
170.28 Overlay Planned Development      170.62 Adult Entertainment Land Uses
District (PDD)
170.29 Overlay Greenway District (GD)   170.63 Solar Energy Systems
170.30 Infill Development Overlay       170.64 Small Wind Energy System
District (IDOD)
170.31 Marina Overlay District (MOD)    170.65 Geothermal Energy
170.32 Organization                     170.66 Retaining Walls
170.23 Building and Zoning Enforcement  170.67 Short-Term Rental
Officer
170.34 Board of Adjustment
 
170.01   TITLE.
Chapter 170 will be known as and may be cited as the “Zoning Code” of the City.
170.02   PURPOSE.
The various use districts which are created and outlined in this chapter and
sections of this Code are adopted for the purpose among others of:
1.   Carrying out the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the City;
2.   Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare;
3.   Helping to achieve greater efficiency and economy of land development by
promoting the grouping of those activities which have similar needs and are
compatible;
4.   To accommodate change while insuring the continuation of the City’s
historical character, identity, diversity, and authenticity;
5.   Encouraging such distribution of population, classification of land use,
and distribution of land development that will tend to facilitate adequate and
economic provision of transportation, communication, water supply, drainage,
sanitation, education, recreation, and other public requirements;
6.   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer and bodies as provided herein;
7.   Classifying, regulating, and limiting the height, area, bulk, and use of
land, buildings, and premises hereafter to be erected.
170.03   GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
This Code classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures
within the corporate limits of the City as herein set forth. The regulations
contained here are necessary to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
inhabitants by dividing the City into zoning districts and regulating therein
the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number
of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open
spaces, the location of buildings, and the density of population. Further, in
interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they will be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare. The Planning and Zoning Commission has given consideration to
the future probable use of land in the territory affected by this Code, and has
prepared a Comprehensive Development Plan showing the future development of
this area which has served as a guide in the preparation of this Code.
170.04   PRIVATE EASEMENTS, COVENANTS, AGREEMENTS, AND PRIOR ORDINANCES.
It is not the intention of this Code to interfere with, evade, or annul any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that, where
this Code imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or
upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces or greater lot
area per family than are required or imposed by such easements, covenants, or
agreements between parties, the provisions of this Code will control. The
provisions of this Code will control and supersede the provisions of any
ordinances, rules, or regulations previously adopted relating to the use of
buildings and premises in all matters which are provided for in this Code,
whether specifically or by implication, except for prior ordinances which
specify a particular dimension for a front yard or which authorize the location
and construction of a public utility installation, which prior ordinances will
remain in full force and effect.
170.05   AUTHORITY.
This Code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.
170.06   REQUIRED REVIEW.
This Code will be reviewed at least once every 10 years in its entirety by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and will be revised if necessary.
170.07   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this Code and in order to carry out the provisions
contained herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be interpreted as
defined herein. The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel.” The phrase
“used for” will include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended
for,” “maintained for,” and “occupied for.” The following words, terms, and
phrases are hereby defined as follows and will be interpreted as such
throughout these regulations unless otherwise modified herein. Terms not herein
defined will have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
1.   Words beginning with “A.”
   A.   “Accessory building, structure or use” means a building, structure, or
use which is secondary or subordinate to the principal building or use on the
same or immediately adjacent lot which does not alter or change the character
of the premises. Examples of accessory uses, buildings or structures are
private garages, storage sheds, playhouses, swimming pools, large satellite
antennas, parking lots, animal exercise areas, driveways, fences, walls,
hedges, trees, retaining walls, mailboxes, etc., and structures or uses of a
like nature. (Also see Section
170.51)
   B.   “Adult” means persons who have attained the age of 18 years.
   C.   “Adult amusement or entertainment” means an amusement or entertainment
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, including, but not limited to, topless or
bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or
similar entertainment which are not subject to State and local liquor laws or
regulations.
   D.   “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin- operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   E.   “Adult bookstore, video store, or gift shop” means a commercial
establishment operated for the sale of, rental of, exchange of, or for any form
of compensation, books, magazines, periodicals, or other forms of printed
matter, video cassettes or other video reproductions, slides, photographs,
films, motion pictures, or other visual representations, and other instruments,
goods, items, and other paraphernalia, distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas as defined below. Adult bookstores,
video stores, or gift shops do not include businesses which sell, rent, or
exchange such items as listed above as a minor sidelight or adjunct to the
general purpose and sales intent of the business. A commercial establishment
may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for
sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering
for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment, so
long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or commercial
activity of the establishment.
   F.   “Adult entertainment facility” means any building in which:
      (1)   Entertainers routinely remove all or portions of their clothing as
a part of their performance, regardless of whether the business has a license
to sell alcohol; or,
      (2)   Entertainers allow patrons to observe specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas involving such entertainers.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, an entertainer shall be a person
who either works as an employee of the business, is an agent of the business,
or an independent contractor who has been hired or is allowed by the business
to perform for the apparent pleasure or gratification of the patron.
      (4)   Examples of adult entertainment facilities would include, but would
not be limited to, such facilities as gentlemen’s clubs, strip bars, full-
nudity juice bars, and nude modeling clubs.
   G.   “Adult hotel or motel” means a building with accommodations used for
the adult hotel or motel. A building with accommodations used for the temporary
occupancy of one or more individuals and is an establishment wherein a
substantial and significant portion of the materials presented are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined herein, for observation by the individuals therein.
   H.   “Adult movie theater” means an enclosed building used for presenting
motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or other visual media,
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas as defined
below, for observation by persons therein. For purposes of this section, the
size and description of the viewing room shall not effect characterization of
the building as a theater, however, nothing in this section shall be deemed to
regulate the viewing habits of persons in the privacy of their homes.
   I.   “Adult use” means an establishment consisting of, including, or having
the characteristics of a sexually-oriented business, such as an adult bookstore
or video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, or nude model studio.
   J.   “Alley” means a traffic-way, dedicated to public use, which affords
only a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street.
   K.   “Alternative tower structure” means man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   L.   “Amendment” means a change in the wording, context, or substance of
this Zoning Code, or an addition, deletion, or change in the district
boundaries or classifications upon the Official Zoning Map.
   M.   “Antenna” means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted
on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals, or
other communication signals.
   N.   “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple or two-family
dwelling, or where one or more living units are established above non-
residential uses, intended, or designed for use as a residence by a single
family.
   O.   “Apartment house” see “dwelling, multiple-family.”
   P.   “Applicant” means the owner or duly designated representative of land
proposed to be subdivided, or for which a special use permit, conditional use
permit, temporary use permit, zoning amendment, variance, appeal, building
permit, or certificate of occupancy and other similar administrative permits
have been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner or their
legal representative in writing.
   Q.   “Attached” means a foundation, wall, or roof of a building or structure
which is connected to and supported by the foundation, wall, or roof of another
building or structure.
   R.   “Automobile repair - major” means general repair, rebuilding of or
reconditioning of engines of any type, motor vehicles, trucks, buses, or
trailers. Collision service, including, bodywork, frame, or fender
straightening, or repair, overall painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailer,
or painting booth.
   S.   “Automobile repair - minor” means minor repairs, incidental body and
fender work, touch-up painting and upholstering, replacement of minor parts and
general tune-up service to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one
and one-half tons capacity.
   T.   “Automobile service station (gas station, etc.)” means any building,
land area, or other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; minor or light servicing and repair of
automobiles; and including as an accessory use, the sale and installation of
lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar vehicle accessories. Does not include
major automobile repair, i.e., anything not defined in automobile repair -
minor.
2.   Words beginning with “B.”
   A.   “Balcony” means a platform on the outside of a building, enclosed by
walls or balustrades, and supported by columns or console brackets. The
platform projects from the wall of a building, usually above the ground floor.
Balconies are typically small and are not used as social spaces or for
entertainment purposes.
   B.   “Bar” means a State-licensed commercial establishment which primarily
sells and serves alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, typically by the
drink.
   C.   “Base zoning district” means a district established by this Zoning Code
which prescribes basic regulations governing land use and site development
standards.
   D.   “Basement” means a story having part but not more than 50 percent of
its height below the average grade of the adjoining ground (as distinguished
from a “cellar”), and/or a story which has its floor or lowest level below
ground level (sub-grade) on all sides. A basement will be counted as a story
for the purpose of height measurements and determinations only if subdivided
into rooms and used for dwelling purposes.
(Paragraph D – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   E.   “Bed and breakfast establishment” means a hotel or motel, which is of
some historical significance, is occupied and managed by the owner, which
provides separate toilet and lavatory facilities for the occupant and every
three guest rooms.
      (1)   Bed and breakfast hotel: A hotel or motel with 10 to 19 guests
rooms.
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn: A hotel which has three to nine guest rooms,
which employs only the owner and their family and one additional person.
   F.   “Billboard” means a type of sign having 72 square feet or more of
display surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or
supported by a building or structure.
   G.   “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or other physical barriers.
   H.   “Boarding house” means a dwelling other than a hotel where for
compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals, lodging, or
both are provided for three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons on a weekly
or monthly basis. Three lodging rooms accommodating not more than two persons
per room shall be equivalent to one apartment when determining lot area
requirements.
   I.   “Board of Adjustment” means the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City
as established in Section
170.34 of this Code.
   J.   “Brew pub” means a combination, restaurant-brewery, establishment where
25 percent or more of the beer that is brewed on the premises is sold and
consumed on-site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale and consumption in the
restaurant and bar. The beer is often dispensed directly from the brewery’s
storage tanks. Any and all sales of finished products are regulated by State
statute.
   K.   “Buffer zone, buffer strip, or buffer yard” means a strip of landscaped
area, (which may be variable in width), established along lot lines to
separate, partially obstruct the view between lots, and to protect one type of
land use from another incompatible use. The strip may include fences, screen
plantings, or earthen mounds, or other allowable means to insulate and buffer
the adjoining properties from noise, traffic, visual, and other such nuisances.
(Also see Section
170.55)
   L.   “Building” means any structure, having a roof supported by columns or
walls, designed, or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of
people, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, including mobile homes. Any
structure with interior area not normally accessible for human use will not be
considered as a building. When separated by common walls without openings
through such walls, each portion of such a building will be considered a
separate structure.
   M.   “Building area” means the maximum horizontal projected area of the
principal and accessory buildings, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed
porches not exceeding one story in height, or architectural appurtenances
projecting not more than two feet.
   N.   “Building code” means the various adopted codes of the City which
regulate the construction of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and
other codes adopted by the City which pertain to building construction.
   O.   “Building, detached accessory” means any building having no structural
or other material connection with the principal building on a lot or on an
adjoining lot.
   P.   “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average
finished grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck
line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridges
for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.
   Q.   “Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer” means the City Administrator,
whose office is vested in the principal administrative and enforcement duties
associated with this Zoning Code.
   R.   “Bulk storage plant” means that portion of any property where hazardous
or flammable liquids or gases are received by pipeline, tank cars, or tank
vehicles, and are stored in bulk above the ground for the purpose of
distributing such liquids or gases, where the aggregate capacity of all storage
on the property exceeds 12,000 gallons of such liquids or 4,000 cubic feet of
such gases.
   S.   “Business” means the engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or services, the maintenance or operation
of offices, or recreational and amusement enterprises for profit.
3.   Words beginning with “C.”
   A.   “Cabin” means a seasonal or temporary single-family dwelling not used
as a permanent family residence during an entire year. This does not include a
tent, trailer, recreational vehicle, or mobile home.
   B.   “Campground” means any lot, site, field, or tract of land used or
designed to accommodate two or more recreational vehicles or tents, tent
trailers, or cabins or other camping outfits, which are temporarily harbored
either free of charge or for revenue purposes.
   C.   “Car wash” means a building, or portion thereof, containing facilities
for washing more than two automobiles; using production line methods with a
chair conveyer, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or
providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the complete or partial hand-
washing of such automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
   D.   “Carport” means a roofed structure providing space for the parking of
motor vehicles that may be enclosed on not more than three sides.
   E.   “Cellar” means a story having 50 percent or more of its height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground. A cellar will be counted as a story,
for measurement, only if used for dwelling purposes.
   F.   “Cemetery” means any land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated
for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such
cemetery.
   G.   “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible
extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or
periodically flowing water.
   H.   “Channel flow” means that water which is flowing within the limits of a
defined channel.
   I.   “Child care center or day care center or nursery school” means any
place, home, or institution which receives seven or more children under the age
of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for care, supervision, or guidance
apart from their natural parents, legal guardian, or custodians, for periods of
two hours or more and less than 24 hours per day per child on a regular basis
in a place other than the child's home, but does not include:
      (1)   An instructional program administered by a public or nonpublic
school system;
      (2)   A church related instructional program of not more than one day per
week;
      (3)   Short-term classes held between school terms, when received for
regular periods of time for compensation. Included within this definition is a
preschool and licensed center as defined in this Code.
Any facility providing child day care to seven or more children is required to
be a licensed center by State mandate.
   J.   “Church” means a building for public worship or religious practice.
   K.   “City engineer” means the person or firm designated to act in that
capacity in the review of engineering data as outlined herein where the service
of a City Engineer is specifically mentioned.
   L.   “Clinic or medical health center” means an establishment where
patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination or
treatment by a group comprised of (two or more) physicians or other licensed
health care practitioners practicing together, on an out-patient basis. This
definition does not include veterinarian clinics.
   M.   “Closed loop ground source heat pump system” means a system that
circulates a heat transfer fluid, typically food-grade antifreeze, through
pipes or coils buried beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom in a
body of water.
   N.   “Club or lodge” means buildings and facilities owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render
a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
   O.   “Cluster development” means a development technique which permits homes
to be grouped closely, leaving much more usable open space. Included only as a
part of the Planned Development District (P.D.D.) provisions. Cluster
development results in fewer streets, shorter utility lines, the protection of
environmentally sensitive areas, and a wider variety of development patterns.
   P.   “Commercial enterprise” see “Business.”
   Q.   “Commercial feedlot/confinement operation” means the feeding,
farrowing, and raising of feeder and dairy cattle, swine, sheep, and poultry in
a confined area where grazing is not possible, and where at least half of the
livestock and poultry feed is not grown on the premises. To be defined as
“commercial” such operation must be owned or controlled by a partnership or
corporation not living on the site. This definition is not meant to include
family farms that have been incorporated for business purposes.
   R.   “Common space” means any land unoccupied by structures, buildings,
streets, rights-of-way, and automobile parking lots and designed and intended
for the use or enjoyment of residents of a Planned Development District
(P.D.D.). Common open space may contain structures for recreational use. No
area within 30 feet of any building or structure, except a structure used for
recreational use, will be included as common open space. (See Section
170.28)
   S.   “Comprehensive plan” means the plan, or any portion thereof adopted by
the City to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the
City. The Comprehensive Plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and
programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges,
public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial, or
industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
   T.   “Conditional use” means a use allowed by the district regulations, that
would not be appropriate generally throughout the zoning district without
restrictions, but which, if controlled as to number, size, area, location,
relationship to the neighborhood or other minimal protective characteristics
would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare and
which is permitted upon findings of the Board of Adjustment.
   U.   “Contractor’s storage or job trailer” means any vehicular, portable
structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a field office or to store
materials and equipment used in conjunction with related activities at a
construction or job site. Any such trailer must be plainly and visibly labeled
with the contractor's name, address, phone number, logo, etc. No more than two
such trailers will be allowed on any one construction site at one time unless
otherwise approved in writing by the Council. Such trailers and their location
may be allowed only upon the approval and notification of the City
Administrator or the Council. No mobile home will be used as a contractor’s
“storage” or “job” trailer. All such trailers will be removed no later than
seven days after completion of the construction activity.
   V.   “Contractor’s storage yard” means any permanently surfaced, permanently
fenced, opaquely screened area used for the open, unsheltered, storage of a
contractor’s construction equipment and materials which are used in and
directly related to the contractor’s principal business. (This term is not to
be construed as meaning or allowing the exterior storage or processing of any
of those items or materials referenced in the definition outlined under “Home
occupation.”)
   W.   “Convenience store” means any retail establishment offering for sale
food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the
same and having a gross floor area of less than 6,500 square feet with no
automobile repairs taking place on the premises.
   X.   “Corner” means the point of intersection of any two street right-of-way
lines, street, and alley right-of-way lines, or two alley right-of-way lines.
(For the purpose of measuring distances, the distance along the appropriate
right-of-way line will be used.)
   Y.   “Court” means an open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same
lot with a building, which is totally or partially enclosed by a building or
buildings and is completely open to the sky.
4.   Words beginning with “D.”
   A.   “Deciduous overstory tree” means a shade-producing woody plant having a
mature height and spread of at least 30 feet with one well-defined trunk and
having no branches at or near the base.
   B.   “Deciduous shrubs” means woody plants that range from three to 15 feet
tall at maturity and often are multi-stemmed with low branching.
   C.   “Deciduous understory tree” means a woody plant at least 15 feet tall
at maturity with one or more well-defined trunks.
   D.   “Deck” means a flat surface capable of supporting weight, similar to a
floor, but usually constructed outdoors, often elevated from the ground,
supported by a frame, posts, and footings secured in the ground, and typically
connected to a building.
   E.   “Density” means the numerical value obtained by dividing the gross area
of the tract of land upon which the dwelling units are located by the total
dwelling units in a development.
   F.   “Developer” means any person, corporation, partnership, or entity that
is responsible for any undertaking that requires a building or zoning permit,
conditions use permit or sign permit.
   G.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including (but not limited to) building or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   H.   “Development plan” means a drawing, including a legal or site
description of the real estate involved, which shows the location and size of
the following, both existing and proposed:
      (1)   All buildings, structures, and yards;
      (2)   Location and dimension of building lines and easements, widths and
lengths of all entrances and exits to and from said real estate;
      (3)   Location of all adjacent or adjoining streets, service facilities,
and other improvements, such as planting areas.
   I.   “Disability” means as defined by the Americans with Disability Act
(ADA), a person who has:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities;
      (2)   A record of such an impairment; or
      (3)   Is regarded as having such impairment.
   J.   “District or zoning district” means a section or sections of the City
within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the
height and area of building and premises are uniform.
   K.   “Drive-in restaurant or refreshment stand” means any place or premises
principally used for the sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshment, or
beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may
serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on
or off the premises. The total seating area located within the enclosed portion
of the premises, if provided, will be less than 50 percent of the total floor
area.
   L.   “Drive-up window” means a window facility located in either a
restaurant, a carryout restaurant, or a drive-in restaurant where consumers can
place orders and have food dispensed to them without leaving their car by
dealing directly with restaurant personnel located entirely within the building
and where the design of said operation is such that upon receiving foodstuffs,
the consumers will leave the premises prior to consuming the food.
   M.   “Driveway” means a private road providing access to vehicles and
pedestrians to the principal building or use.
   N.   “Duplex” is a small type of multifamily building with two connected
dwellings that have separate entrances on a single property. Each dwelling is
considered a duplex apartment.
(Paragraph N – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   O.   “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof, which is designed for
and used primarily as a place of residential occupancy for one or more human
beings but does not include hotels or motels or bed and breakfast
establishments.
   P.   “Dwelling, attached single-family or group, row, or townhouse” means a
residential building, originally constructed for said purpose, containing three
or more adjoining, owner-occupied dwelling units, each of which is located on a
platted lot or legally described lot, and each of which is joined to another
dwelling unit by at least one un-pierced party wall(s).
   Q.   “Dwelling, detached” means a building which is surrounded on all sides
by open space on the same lot.
   R.   “Dwelling, farm” means a building designed for and occupied exclusively
by one family whose principal source of income is derived from the farm on
which the building is located.
   S.   “Dwelling, mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or
so manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
   T.   “Dwelling, multi-family” means a building containing three or more
independent dwelling units, originally constructed for said purpose; and not
including converted dwellings.
   U.   “Dwelling, semi-detached” means a building which is joined to another
dwelling by a garage, carport, recreation structure, or other nonresidential
facility.
   V.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a detached residential dwelling unit,
including a manufactured housing unit which is erected or installed on a site-
built, permanent foundation and is not designed to be moved once so installed,
and which is designed and manufactured to comply with all building codes
applicable to site-built housing, containing accommodations for and occupied by
one family only, other than a mobile home, and which is entirely surrounded by
open space on the same lot.
   W.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building, including a manufactured
housing unit which is erected or installed on a site-built, permanent
foundation and is not designed to be moved once so installed, and which is
designed and manufactured to comply with all building codes applicable to site-
built housing, containing accommodations for and designed exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently from each other, and which is
entirely surrounded by open space.
   X.   “Dwelling unit” means a dwelling which consists of one or more rooms,
or a portion of a dwelling arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping
establishment, used for the occupancy of one family with separate toilets and
facilities for cooking, living, and sleeping purposes. Each dwelling unit shall
have a floor area of at least 1,200 square feet, (unless otherwise noted
herein), a minimum width of 22 feet for at least 75 percent of its narrowest
dimension, be placed on a permanent foundation, have a perimeter foundation of
masonry construction (load or non-load bearing), and be taxed as real property.
   Y.   “Dwelling unit, accessory” is a smaller, independent residential
dwelling unit located on the same lot as a stand-alone single-family home and
may be attached or detached. The building shall not exceed one thousand square
feet or fifty percent of the size of the single-family residence, whichever is
larger.
(Paragraph Y – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
5.   Words beginning with “E.”
   A.   “Easement” means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of
land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.
   B.   “Educational institution” means public, private, or parochial school,
charitable or non-profit junior college, college or university, other than
trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with
or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants, and
other incidental facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
   C.   “Efficiency unit” means a dwelling unit consisting of one principal
room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove
directly off the principal room.
   D.   “Elder family home” means a private household owned and occupied by a
responsible party not related within the third degree of consanguinity to the
person providing room and board, the majority of whom are 60 years of age or
older, who require some assistance, encouragement, or social stimulation for
adequate self-care or to maintain physical or mental health or personal safety.
Some assistance shall mean the care of physical property, personal care for one
activity of daily living, or intermittent temporary personal care for up to
three activities of daily living for no more than one month duration.
   E.   “Essential services” means the erection, alteration, or maintenance, by
public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead electrical, gas, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, cable, supply or disposal systems, including poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith; reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare.
   F.   “Evergreen/conifer shrub” means a woody plant having green needle-like
foliage throughout the year and ranging from three to 15 feet tall at maturity
and often are multi-stemmed with low branching.
   G.   “Evergreen/conifer tree” means an upright one-bearing plant having
green needle-like foliage throughout the year and at least 15 feet at maturity.
6.   Words beginning with “F.”
   A.   “Family” means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption, or a group of not more than three persons (excluding
servants) not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, but not including sororities,
fraternities, or other similar organizations.
   B.   “Family home” means a community based residential home which is
licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa,
as amended, or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, to provide room and board, personal care, rehabilitation
services, and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than
eight developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
However, family home does not mean an individual foster care family home
licensed under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
   C.   “Farm” means an area not less than 40 acres in size, which is used for
the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees, and
grain, and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the
usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep, and swine.
The term “farming” includes the operating of such an area for one or more of
the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for
treating and storing produce, provided however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses will be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and
provided further that farming does not include the extraction of minerals or
the operation of commercial feed lots for livestock.
   D.   “Farm homestead” means the dwelling occupied by the farm owner, tenant
operator, or family of the farm owner or tenant.
   E.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use,
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this Code, factory-built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include recreational
vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and
not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   F.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   G.   “Fence” means any structure, other than a building, which is an
artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials
erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
   H.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   I.   “Flood elevation” means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   J.   “Flood hazard area” means the land within a community subject to the
base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map
as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
   K.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   L.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps. The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   M.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   N.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
   O.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   P.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot.
   Q.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area
outside the floodway.
   R.   “Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area of a
building will include the basement floor area when more than one-half of the
basement height is above the established average grade at the building,
enclosed off-street parking space, elevator shafts, and stairwells at each
floor, floorspace used for mechanical equipment, (except equipment, open or
enclosed, located on the roof), penthouses, attic space having headroom or
seven feet, 10 inches or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed
porches, and floor area devoted to accessory uses. The floor area of structures
devoted to bulk storage of materials, including but not limited to, grain
elevators and petroleum storage tanks, will be determined on the basis of
height of such structures in feet; 10 feet in height will be deemed to be equal
to one floor (if a structure measures more than five feet over such floor
equivalent, it will be construed to have an additional floor). (See also
Section
170.52(1))
   S.   “Floor area ratio” means a numerical value obtained by dividing the
ground floor area within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such
lot. The floor area ratio as designated for each district, when multiplied by
the lot area in square feet will determine the maximum permissible floor area
for the building or buildings on the lot.
   T.   “Food truck or food cart, public vending, or public vendors” means a
vehicle, usually a van, truck, towed trailer, or pushcart, from which food,
beverages, and merchandise are sold. Typical locations are job sites; places of
assembly, such as colleges, industries, or sports activities; and special
events.
   U.   “Foster family home” means a family home which provides full-time
family care to foster children unrelated to them.
   V.   “Frontage” means all the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets or highways (crossing or terminating) measured along the
line of a street or highway, or if the street is dead-ended, abutting on one
side between an intersecting street or highway. Frontage will not include
property more than 400 feet distant on either side of a lot.
7.   Words beginning with “G.”
   A.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building designed or used for the
storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the
building to which it is accessory, and which does not exceed 864 square feet in
area. A garage designed to have one or two motor vehicles for each family
housed in an apartment will be classified as a private garage.
   B.   “Garage, public” means building or portion thereof, other than a
private garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles for remuneration, hire, or sale.
   C.   “Garage sale” means all general sales, open to the public, conducted
from or on a residential premise in any residential zone, for the purpose of
disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales
entitled garage, lawn, yard, attic, porch, room, backyard, patio, flea market,
rummage, or moving sale. This definition shall not include a situation where no
more than five specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of
such sale specifically names those items to be sold. This term may also include
multi-family garage sales on one residential site.
   D.   “Garage, storage” means any building or premises, including a mini-
storage garage, used for storing motor-driven vehicles (other than commercial
vehicles), recreational vehicles and trailers, boats, furniture, or other
miscellaneous personal property, excluding such things as automobile fuels and
oils or other hazardous or volatile substances, pursuant to previous
arrangements.
   E.   “Geothermal energy” means renewable energy generated from the interior
of the earth and used to produce energy for heating buildings or serving
building commercial or industrial processes. Ground source heat pump systems
shall be deemed an accessory structure, permissible in all zoning districts.
   F.   “Grade” means the average level of the finished surface of the ground
measured five feet from a structure’s foundation.
   G.   “Greenway” means a corridor of open space connecting natural areas,
cultural and historic sites, parks, neighborhoods, and communities. These
usually linear corridors can be located along waterways, streets, railroads,
utility easements, ravines, bluffs, or any feature providing connecting open
space.
   H.   “Greenway, active” means a greenway providing a wide range of
opportunities for human use through recreation and multi-purpose trail
development. Such linear parks or open space may provide hiking, bicycling,
horseback riding, canoeing, snowmobiling, cross country skiing, fishing,
boating, etc.
   I.   “Greenway, passive” means a greenway providing a limited range of
opportunities for human use by restricting public access. The function or value
of such linear parks or open space emphasizes land and water conservation and
protection of the natural environment for the primary purposes of stormwater
and floodplain management, wetland preservation, erosion control, natural
filtration, migration of wildlife, and preservation of vegetation.
   J.   “Ground floor area” means the square foot area of a building within its
largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor
level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, and exterior
stairways.
   K.   “Ground source heat pump system” means a system that uses the
relatively constant temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide
heating in the winter and cooling in the summer. System components include
closed loops of pipe, coils, or plates; a fluid that absorbs and transfers
heat; and a heat pump unit that processes heat for use or disperses heat for
cooling; and an air distributions system. The energy must be used on-site.
   L.   “Group home for the disabled” means a dwelling shared by four or more
disabled persons, as defined in this section, including resident staff, who
live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like
environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation
in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the
resident to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum
potential. “Disabled” shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to
a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the
home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other
individuals. This term shall not include alcoholism or drug treatment centers,
work release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing
facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration.
8.   Words beginning with “H.”
   A.   “Half-story” means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof,
the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of such story. However, any partial story used
for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker and his family,
shall be deemed a full story.
(Paragraph A – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   B.   “Halfway house or group home” means a temporary residential living
arrangement for up to five persons, excluding staff, who are receiving therapy,
counseling, and/or care from support staff who are present at all times
residents are present, for the following purposes:
      (1)   To help them re-enter society while housed under supervision while
under constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited
to, pre-release, work release, and probationary programs.
      (2)   To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that
require specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal
independence;
      (3)   To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of
domestic abuse and/or neglect; or
      (4)   To provide adult congregate living arrangements without nursing
care.
   C.   “Hardship” means a legal justification for a variance. Entitlement to a
variance may result when an unnecessary hardship exists which is not created by
the party seeking the variance and which is caused by unique physical
circumstances of the property for which the variance is sought. Additional
criteria for variance are discussed in Section
170.34(6).
   D.   “Health club” means a non-medical service establishment intended to
maintain or improve the physical condition of paying customers. A health club
may contain exercise and game equipment and facilities, steam baths, saunas,
hot tubs, or similar equipment and facilities.
   E.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or,
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either: an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   F.   “Home occupation” means a business, profession, or trade or other
activity conducted for economic gain by one or more occupants of a residential
dwelling that is secondary and subordinate to the principal use of the dwelling
as a residence and does not alter the residential character of the property. A
“No-Impact Home Occupation” means a home occupation for which all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The total number of on-site employees and customers/clients does
not exceed the City occupancy limit for the residential property.
      (2)   The business activities are characterized by all of the following:
         a.   The activities are limited to the sale of lawful goods and
services.
         b.   The activities do not generate on-street parking or a substantial
increase in traffic through the residential area.
         c.   The activities occur inside the residential dwelling or in the
yard of the residential property.
         d.   The activities are not visible from an adjacent property or
street.
      (3)   Exceptions: Child care homes, defined and regulated under Chapter
237A of the State Code of Iowa, shall be considered a No-Impact Home Occupation
and may exceed the customer/client limitations.
      (4)   If, in the determination of the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the above conditions are not being met or that the home occupation
creates a disturbance or becomes a nuisance to the general neighborhood in some
other manner, the home occupation will be treated as a nuisance under
Chapter 50 of this Code and will no longer be classified as a No-Impact Home
Occupation.
   Home occupations do not include activities engaged in as a hobby or
temporary uses such as garage, yard, or estate sales. The following occupations
and activities are prohibited from being operated as home occupations:
      (1)   Adult entertainment establishments.
      (2)   On-premises sale and consumption of alcohol.
      (3)   Businesses which involve outside storage, such as material,
equipment, and vehicles, without screening.
      (4)   Activities which change the character and appearance thereof as a
residential building or internal structural alterations that would create
permanent modifications not typically found in a residential structure.
      (5)   Any related activity that creates traffic hazards or nuisances in
the public right of way or creates a substantial increase in traffic.
      (6)   Use or storage of toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible,
corrosive, etiologic, radioactive, poisonous, or other hazardous materials on
the premises, unless of a type or quantity used for normal household purposes.
      (7)   Activities that are noxious, offensive, or hazardous by reason of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or by creation of outdoor storage, noise,
odor, refuse, heat, vibration, smoke, radiation, or any other objectionable
emissions, or by interference with televisions or radio reception.
      (8)   Employees, clients/customers, or activity that would be visible to
adjacent neighbors between the hours of 9 p.m. and 8 a.m.
(Paragraph F – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   G.   “Hospital” means an institution providing health services primarily for
human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including
related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training
facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral
part of the facilities.
   H.   “Hotel” means a building in which lodging, and food service are
provided and offered to the public at large for compensation and in which
ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or
office, supervised by a person in charge at all hours, and which is open to
transient guests, in contradistinction to a motel, boarding house, or multi-
family dwelling.
9.   Words beginning with “I.”
   A.   “Improved surface” means a continuous parking surface such as concrete
or other alternative materials that are shown to be impervious, yet as durable
as concrete pavement.
   B.   “Infill” means the act of encouraging, planning for, or approving
development of new housing or other uses on scattered vacant sites in a built-
up area.
   C.   “Infill development” means development that takes place on vacant or
underutilized parcels within an area that is already characterized by urban
development and has access to urban services.
   D.   “Institution or civic, recreational, etc.” means a building occupied by
a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use.
10.   Words beginning with “J.”
   A.   “Junkyard” means any place at which personal property is or may be
salvaged for reuse, resale, reduction, or similar disposition and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted; including, but not
limited to, used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, lumber,
millwork, brick, and similar property except animal matter; and used motor
vehicles, machinery, or equipment which is used, owned, or possessed for the
purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.
11.   Words beginning with “K.”
   A.   “Kennel, commercial” means any place of business where dogs, or other
small animals, six months or older, are sold, bred, raised, or kept for the
purpose of resale, training, teaching, or grooming and which business is done
commercially and for profit, provided, however, this Code will not apply to any
kennel where not more than two dogs, or other small animals, six months or
older, and their litters are kept during any licensing year, provided that the
kennel is State or federally licensed.
   B.   “Kennel, private” means a non-commercial kennel at a private residence
where four or less dogs, or other small animals, are kept for the hobby of the
householder, as opposed to a commercial kennel.
12.   Words beginning with “L.”
   A.   “Landscaped area” means that area within the boundaries of a given lot
consisting primarily of plant material including, but not limited to, grass,
trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, ground cover, and other organic plant materials.
Inorganic materials such as brick, stone, or aggregate may be used within
landscaped areas, provided that such material comprises no more than 35 percent
of the required landscaped area. Flat concrete or asphalt, other than walkways
five feet or less in width, shall be prohibited within a required landscaped
area.
   B.   “Land use and zoning plat” means a drawing or map made to a measurable
scale upon which is presented a description and definition of the way in which
the design requirements of the planned development are to be met and intended
for recording with the County Recorder.
   C.   “Large solar energy system” means an on-site multiple unit solar energy
system that is incidental and subordinate to a principal use or structure
serving the needs of agricultural, commercial, and industrial zoning districts.
   D.   “Laundromat” means an establishment providing home-type washing,
drying, or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
   E.   “Licensed center” means a childcare center issued a full or provisional
license by the State Department of Human Services under the provisions of
Chapter 237A of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
   F.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine, or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emos; far dear (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or fowl excluding urban chickens. (See
Section
170.58)
(Paragraph F – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   G.   “Loading and unloading space” means that off-street area required for
the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, which in
this Code is held to be a 12 feet x 45 feet loading space with a 14-foot height
clearance, paved with a permanent surface. (See Section
170.52(2))
   H.   “Lodge” means the meeting place of a branch of an organization,
especially a fraternal organization.
   I.   “Long-term care facility or nursing home, convalescent home, rest home,
home of the aged” means a facility for the transitional residency of not less
than three elderly, infirm, chronically ill, incurably afflicted, or disabled
persons, where for compensation, these persons progress from independent living
in single-family living units to congregate apartment living where residents
share common meals and culminating in a full health and continuing care nursing
home facility. This term does not include clinics, hospitals, and similar
institutions devoted to the diagnosis, treatment, and care of the sick or
injured.
   J.   “Lot” means a parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a building
and its accessory buildings or related use, together with such yards, parking,
or open spaces within the lot lines as may be required by these regulations and
having its principal frontage on a street or upon an approved private drive. A
lot may also consist of a combination of recognized lots of record.
   K.   “Lot area” means the total horizontal plane area included within lot
lines.
   L.   “Lot depth” means the depth of a lot which will be considered to be the
mean horizontal distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting
foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rear-most points of the
side lot lines in the rear.
   M.   “Lot frontage” means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot
abutting on a street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
   N.   “Lot ground level” means the average level of the ground at the corners
of the exterior walls of the principal building on the lot.
   O.   “Lot line, front” means, in the case of an interior lot, the line
separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double
frontage lot, the line(s) separating said lot from the street(s). If a lot
abuts three (3) or more public streets, the lot shall have a front lot line
only on the two (2) public streets with the highest roadway classifications.
(Paragraph O – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   P.   “Lot line, rear” means the lot boundary opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it will be an
imaginary line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line not less than
10 feet long and wholly within the lot.
   Q.   “Lot line, side” means any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot
line.
   R.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision, recorded
with the County Recorder. For lots not part of a recorded subdivision, a lot of
record shall be a lot whose deed is recorded with the County Recorder prior to
the adoption date of the City’s first subdivision regulation ordinance.† 14
   S.   “Lot width” means the width of a lot which will be considered to be the
distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each
side of the lot. Where side lot lines are not continuously parallel or at right
angles to the abutting street, the average of the rear and front widths will be
used.
   T.   “Lot, corner” means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides
abutting for their full length on a street, provided the interior angle at the
intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.
   U.   “Lot coverage” means the percentage of the lot area covered by the
building area. (See “Floor Area Ratio”)
   V.   “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having a frontage on two
nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. The yard opposite
the direction the front of the house is facing may have an accessory building
or structure located there, but the buildings or structures must still meet the
front setback requirements for that district. (See Illustration C)
   W.   “Lot, interior” means any lot other than a corner lot or through lot
with only one frontage street. (See Illustration C)
   X.   “Lot, reversed corner” means a corner lot at right angles or
approximately right angles to the general pattern of the area, the street side
lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the
first lot to the rear. The rear of the corner lot is adjacent to the side of
the lot to the rear, whether across an alley or not.
   Y.   “Lot, reversed interior” means an interior lot, the front lot line of
which is formed by a street, which street also forms the side lot line of an
abutting corner lot. The corner lot is considered abutting even though
separated from the interior lot line by an alley.
   Z.   “Lot, through” means any lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets. (See Illustration C)
   AA.   “Lot, zoning” means a parcel of land of sufficient size to meet the
minimum requirements of this Code concerning use, coverage, width, area, yards,
and other open space and having frontage on an improved public street.
   BB.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building, including a basement, except when all of the following criteria are
met:
      (1)   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section
170.27; and
      (2)   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry walled, etc.)
and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking,
or storage; and
      (3)   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area located at least one foot
above the base flood elevation; and
      (4)   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined herein.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies Subparagraphs 1-4 above, the
lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not
satisfy the criteria above.
13.   Words beginning with “M.”
   A.   “Manufactured or modular home” means a factory-built structure built
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, that is required by federal law to
display a seal from the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and was constructed on or after June 15, 1976.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1[3])
   B.   “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of
business where massages are administered for any form of consideration or
gratuity including, but not limited to, therapeutic massage facilities, massage
parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths, but excluding chiropractic
clinics.
   C.   “Microbrewery” means a small, independent, and traditional craft
brewery where beer is manufactured for the purpose of sale, barter, exchange,
or transportation, with limited capacity production facilities producing not
more than 15,000 barrels of beer per year and where 75 percent or more of its
beer is sold off-site. On-premise drinking areas may be established for limited
tasting and beer sales by the glass. Any and all sales of finished products are
regulated by State statute.
   D.   “Micro-distillery” means a small craft or artisan, limited capacity
production facility licensed only as a Class “A” native distillery where there
is a produced not more than 50,000 “proof gallons” (a method of measuring
alcohol content on a level comparison between different liquors of different
proof) per calendar year of alcohol or spirits are distilled or wine is
fermented, including the blending and bottling or other handling and
preparation of alcoholic liquor or wine in any form. Sales of finished products
are regulated by State statute.
   E.   “Minimum street landscaping” means the minimum landscaped area which
must be provided in a street yard, expressed as a percent of the total area
contained within that street yard.
   F.   “Mini-warehousing” means a building or group of buildings containing
separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes available for
lease or rent for varying periods of time.
   G.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
   H.   "Mobile home park" means a site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available. The
term "mobile home park" shall not be construed to include manufactured or
mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other structures temporarily maintained by
any individual, educational institution, or company on their own premises and
used exclusively to house their own labor or students. (Also see Section
170.21)
(Code of Iowa, Section 435.1(6))
   H.   “Motel” means a building or a detached building, usually not more than
two stories in height, used as temporary dwelling units containing a bedroom,
bathroom, and closet space, with each unit having convenient access to a
parking space for the use of the unit's occupants. The units, with the
exception of the apartment of the manager or caretaker, are devoted to the use
of automobile transients and no cooking facilities are offered. The site of the
motel usually has direct and convenient access to an interstate, highway,
arterial street, or other major thoroughfares.
   I.   “Motor vehicle sales” means the commercial displaying, advertising, or
actual sale of motor vehicles by any person, licensed motor vehicle dealer,
salesperson, dealership, or other associated persons or agents connected
therewith. (The private displaying or advertising of not more than one motor
vehicle per zoning lot, at any one time, on private property, intended solely
for the private sale between two individuals does not constitute a “motor
vehicle sales” condition as contemplated herein.)
14.   Words beginning with “N.”
   A.   “Native distilled spirits” means spirits fermented, distilled, or for a
period of two years, barrel matured on the licensed premises of the native
distillery where fermented, distilled, or matured. Native distilled spirits
also includes blended or mixed spirits comprised solely of spirits fermented,
distilled, or, for a period of two years, barrel matured at a native
distillery.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.3[34])
   B.   “Native Distillery” means a business with an operating still which
produces and manufactures native distilled spirits.
   C.   “Neighborhood park” means an area that may be used for either active or
passive recreation, dedicated to the City and developed integrally with,
associated with, and intended to be used by and primarily benefiting a
particular subdivision or defined area not farther than one-quarter mile from
its location and which is developed in accordance with Section
170.38 of the City’s subdivision ordinance.
   D.   “Nonconforming building” means a building or structure or portion
thereof lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Code or amendment
thereto, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that
does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
(See Section
170.08)
   E.   “Nonconforming use” means a use which lawfully occupies a building or
land at the time of adoption of this code, or amendment thereto, and which does
not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
(See Section
170.08)
15.   Words beginning with “O.”
   A.   “100-year flood” (See definition of “base flood.”)
   B.   “Open fences” means fences which have openings between the material of
which the fence is constructed representing more than 70 percent of the total
surface area of the fence.
   C.   “Open space” see Section
170.55.
   D.   “Outdoor advertising business” means one which provides outdoor
displays or display space on a lease or rental basis only.
   E.   “Overlay district” means a zoning district which is combined
simultaneously with another zoning classification to give special regulation to
designated areas of the City. Development within overlay districts must conform
to the requirements of the underlying district as well as the overlaying
district(s) with the most restrictive requirements applying.
16.   Words beginning with “P.”
   A.   “Park” means any public or private area designed, constructed, and
utilized for the public’s pursuit of recreation and enjoyment.
   B.   “Parking area, public” means an open area, other than a street or alley
designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more than four motor
vehicles when available for public use, whether free or for compensation, or as
an accommodation for clients or customers, paved with a permanent surface.
   C.   “Parking space” means a permanently surfaced area, of brick, asphalt,
or concrete, other than on a street or alley, either enclosed or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one automobile, but not less than nine feet wide by
19 feet long, and not less than 171 square feet, exclusive of permanently
surfaced access drives, driveways, or aisles, connecting the parking space(s)
with the street or alley, which permits satisfactory ingress and egress of an
automobile. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be not less than that
required by the Iowa Administrative Code. (See Section
170.52)
   D.   “Parkway” means that area located between the property line(s) and the
curb line or street driving surface edge when a curb does not exist.
   E.   “Performance standard” means a criterion established to control noise,
odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or
glare or heat generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The more
frequently used performance criteria include:
      (1)   Closed cup flash point is the lowest temperature at which a
combustible liquid, under prescribed conditions, will give off a flammable
vapor which will burn moderately.
      (2)   Decibel is a unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of
sound. Sound level. Meters which are employed to measure the intensity measure
“decibels.”
      (3)   Earth borne vibration is the periodic displacement, measured in
inches, of earth.
      (4)   Foot candle is a unit of illumination. Technically, the
illumination at all points one foot distant from a uniform point source of one
candlepower.
      (5)   Free burning implies a rate of combustion described by a material
which burns actively, and easily supports combustion.
      (6)   Frequency signifies the number of oscillations per second in a
sound wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
      (7)   Impact noise is a short-duration sound which is incapable of being
accurately measured on a sound level meter.
      (8)   Impulsive noise is a sound which is no longer than two seconds in
duration, followed by no less than a two second rest.
      (9)   Intense burning implies a rate of combustion described by a
material that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
      (10)   Moderate burning implies a rate of combustion described by a
material which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.
      (11)   Noxious matter is a material which is capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental
effects upon the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
      (12)   Octave band is a prescribed interval of sound frequencies which
permits classifying sound according to its pitch.
      (13)   Odor threshold is the lowest concentration of odorous substance in
the air that will produce a response in the normal human nose.
      (14)   Particulate matter is dust, smoke, or any other form of airborne
pollution in the form of minute separate particles.
      (15)   Ringelmann Chart is one which is described in the U.S. Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 6888, or its successor, and on which are illustrated
graduated shades of grey for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke.
      (16)   Slow burning or incombustible implies materials which do not in
themselves constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material
which will not ignite, nor actively support combustion during an exposure for
five minutes to a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit, will be designated
“incombustible.”
      (17)   Smoke is small gas-borne particles other than water that form a
visible plume in the air.
      (18)   Sound level of an operation or use is the intensity of sound,
measured in decibels, produced by such operation or use.
      (19)   Toxic matter is those materials which are capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small
amounts.
   F.   “Permanently attached” means the permanent, “all-weather,” structural
attachment of a building or structure or any portion thereof, requiring the use
of a permanent foundation, and full, frost-depth footings to the principal
building or structure.
   G.   “Permanent foundation” means a site-built or site-assembled system of
stabilizing devices for a structure. It must be capable of transferring design
dead loads and live loads required by federal regulations and other design
loads unique to local home sites, wind, seismic, soil, and water table
conditions that may be imposed on the structure. The bottom of the foundation
shall be constructed to a depth of not less than 42 inches below grade and
constructed of materials approved by the 2015 Edition of the I.B.C.
   H.   “Personal property” means any property which is owned, utilized, and
maintained by an individual, or members of their residence, and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
   I.   “Pet shop” means any business established for the purpose of buying,
selling, exchanging, or offering for sale any dog, cat, rabbit, rodent, non-
human primate, fish, or other vertebrate animal.
   J.   “Place” means an open, unoccupied, officially designated space other
than a street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of
access to abutting property.
   K.   “Planned Development District” (P.D.D.) means a tract of land which is
developed as a unit under single ownership or unified control, which includes
two or more principal buildings or uses, and is processed under the planned
development procedure of this Code.
   L.   “Planning and Zoning Commission” means the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City.
   M.   “Porch” means a covered shelter that projects from the front or rear
entrance of a house or building. The structure is external to the walls of the
building, but it may be enclosed by certain types of frames including walls,
columns, or screens, extending from the main structure.
   N.   “Preschool” means a child care center which provides to children ages
three through five, for periods of time not exceeding three hours per day,
programs designed to help the children to develop intellectual skills, social
skills, and motor skills, and to extend their interest and understanding of the
world about them.
   O.   “Principal building” means a building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated or which does not
have a use which is secondary or subordinate to the main or principal use of
the lot. Where an accessory building is attached to the principal building in a
substantial (permanently attached) manner, such an accessory building will be
counted as a part of the principal building.
   P.   “Private school” means a private pre-primary, primary, grade, high, or
preparatory school or academy.
   Q.   “Professional office in residence” means an office in the dwelling of a
member of a recognized profession, such as doctors, dentists, lawyers,
architects, engineers, clergymen, artists, musicians, designers, teachers, and
others who through training are qualified to perform services of a professional
nature; provided that the professional service is performed by a member or
members of the family residing on the premises; that such use is secondary to
the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the
exterior character thereof; that not more than one non-resident employee is
employed on the premises; not more than 25 percent of the gross floor area is
devoted to such use; and, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no
signs are used other than a name plate not more than two square feet in area,
or no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in part for any other purpose than that of a dwelling. For purposes of
interpretation of this Code, when questions arise, “recognized professions”
will be defined by the latest edition of the U.S. Census Bureau, Census of
Population Report.
   R.   “Professional office center” means an architectural and functional
grouping of professional offices and appropriate associated and accessory uses
which is the central feature of a site plan composed of building area, parking
area, landscaped reservation and plantation, and other land features
appropriate for its use as a professional office enterprise, designed to serve
residential neighborhoods, which will conform to the standards and requirements
of this Code.
   S.   “Property owner” means the owner of real estate if there is one of
record, otherwise the record holder of legal title to real estate as shown on
the records of the County Assessor’s Office.
   T.   “Public vendor or food truck, food cart, or public vending” means a
vehicle, usually a van, truck, towed trailer, or pushcart, from which food,
beverages, and merchandise are sold. Typical locations are job sites; places of
assembly, such as colleges, industries, or sports activities; and special
events.
17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
18.   Words beginning with “R.”
   A.   “Recreational mobile home park” means a seasonal mobile home park or
other mobile home park in which the length of stay is limited to not more than
14 consecutive days.
   B.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular unit bearing current license
and/or registration, not exceeding 42 feet in overall length, 102 inches in
width, or 14 feet in overall height, which includes, but is not limited to, the
following specific vehicle types:
      (1)   “Boat trailer” means a vehicular structure, without its own motive
power, designed to transport a boat for recreation and vacation use and which
is licensed and registered for highway use.
      (2)   “Camper trailer” means a folding or collapsible vehicular
structure, without its own power, designed as a temporary living quarters for
travel, camping, recreation, and vacation uses; and is licensed and registered
for highway use.
      (3)   “Horse trailer” means a vehicular structure, without its own motive
power, designed primarily for the transportation of horses and which, in
combination with the towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for highway
use.
      (4)   “Motor home” means a vehicular unit built on or as a part of a
self-propelled motor vehicle chassis primarily designed to provide temporary
living quarters for travel, camping, recreation, and vacation use; and is
licensed and registered for highway use. This category will include converted
bus campers.
      (5)   “Recreational boat” means a vessel, whether propelled by wind,
oars, or mechanical devices, and which is designed primarily for recreation or
vacation use. A recreation vessel, when mounted upon a boat trailer, will be
considered one unit.
      (6)   “Specialty vehicles” means another type of recreational vehicle
including, but not limited to, such type of vehicles as golf carts,
snowmobiles, jet skis, ATVs, UTVs, go-carts, mopeds, dirt bikes, etc.
      (7)   “Travel trailer” means a rigid structure, without its own motive
power, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation, and
vacation use; and which is licensed and registered for highway use.
      (8)   “Truck camper” means a portable structure, without its own motive
power, designed to be transported on a power vehicle as a temporary dwelling
for travel, camping, recreation, and vacation use; and which, in combination
with the carrying vehicle, is licensed, and registered for highway use.
      (9)   “Utility trailer” means a vehicular structure, without its own
motive power, designed and or used for the transportation of all manner of
motor vehicles, goods, or materials and licensed and which registered for
highway use.
If the recreational vehicle is equipped with liquified gas containers, they
will meet the current standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the
Federal Department of Transportation standards.
   C.   “Recycling center” means a site where commercial, domestic, or yard
wastes are sorted, packed, baled, composted, or processed for reuse.
   D.   “Residential mobile home park” means a home park designed, established,
and maintained for permanent, year-round residency by mobile homes.
   E.   “Restaurant” means a business where the dispensing and the consumption
at indoor tables of edible foodstuff or beverages is the principal business
operation; including a cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch room, tea room, and dining
room, but not including a bar, cocktail lounge, or tavern. The total seating
area located within the enclosed portion of the premises will be more than 50
percent of the total floor area. Incidental carryout services are allowed, but
will not include fast food or precooked food operations or drive-up windows
except where authorized by the Board of Adjustment as a special use permit.
   F.   “Restaurant, carryout” means a business whose principal operation is
dispensing of foodstuff and beverages, not including a bar, cocktail lounge, or
tavern, when the foodstuff and beverages is regularly or can customarily be
packaged for transporting the beverage or foodstuff off the premises from where
the food was purchased.
   G.   “Retaining wall” means an accessory structure that retains (holds back)
any material (usually earth) and prevents it from sliding or eroding away.
   H.   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a road, walk-way, crosswalk, railroad, or other such use. Every
right-of-way established under this Code and shown on a final plat is separate
and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not
included within the dimension or areas of such lots or parcels.
   I.   “Roadside stand” means a temporary structure, unenclosed, and so
designed and constructed that the structure is easily portable and can be
readily moved. Roadside stands are typically used for the sale of farm
products, primarily produced on the premises.
   J.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street which has, or is to be
improved, and is, or will be, available for vehicular traffic.
19.   Words beginning with “S.”
   A.   “Sanitary landfill” means a site where solid waste is disposed of by
utilizing the principles of engineering to confine the solid waste to the
smallest practical volume and to cover it with a layer of earth so that no
nuisance or hazard to the public health is created.
   B.   “Satellite dish antenna” means a device incorporating a reflective
surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a
shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. (Also see
Chapter 160)
   C.   “Screening” means the method by which a view of one site from another
adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden through the use of fence,
walls, or landscaping.
   D.   “Seasonal mobile home park” means a mobile home park designed,
established, and maintained for residency by mobile homes, only during the time
period from April 1 to November 1.
   E.   “Septic tank” means a water-tight structure into which sewage is
discharged for settling and for solids digestion designed to function on an
individual lot basis.
   F.   “Setback line” means that line denoting the distance required to obtain
the minimum front, side, and rear yards, measured from the property line to the
outside of the structures' exterior foundation, between which line and the
property line no building or structure of any kind may be erected.
   G.   “Sewerage system, central” means a type which is approved by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources and the County Health Department as properly
designed to serve one or more subdivisions. (A septic tank is not a central
sewerage system.)
   H.   “Shopping center” means a complex of three or more commercial retail or
office establishments which are serviced by common parking, driveway, and,
often-times, utility facilities on the same property or immediately adjacent
properties.
   I.   “Short-term rental” means any individually or collectively owned
single-family house or dwelling unit; any unit or group of units in a
condominium, cooperative, or timeshare; or an owner-occupied residential home
that is offered for a fee for 30 days or less. A short-term rental does not
include a unit that is used for any retail, restaurant, banquet space, event
center, or other similar use. A short-term rental property shall be classified
as a residential land use for zoning purposes. (Reference Section 414.1.1[e] of
the Code of Iowa). The use does not include a rental between parties to the
sale of that residential dwelling unit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.1[1][e])
      (1)   “Bed and breakfast home” means a private residence, having some
historical or architectural significance, that provides lodging and meals for
guests, in which the host or hostess resides, and in which no more than two
guest families are lodged at the same time and which, while it may advertise
and accept reservations, does not hold itself out to the public to be a
restaurant, hotel or motel, does not require reservations and serves food only
to overnight guests. The owner shall occupy and manage the facility. Separate
toilet and lavatory facilities shall be provided for exclusive use by the
guests.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 137B.2[1])
      (2)   “Vacation rental” means the renting out for remuneration of a
furnished apartment, house, dwelling, or other residential space, on a
temporary basis for a period of less than 30 calendar days, counting portion of
days as full days, to tourists as an alternative to a hotel, motel, or bed and
breakfast establishment.
Short-term rental properties shall be modified as necessary to comply with the
current Chapter 170 and shall be subject to the State’s lodging and tax
regulations. Shorth-term rental properties shall be conducted like a home
occupation, but unlike other homes occupation standards, short-term rental
properties shall not require a special use permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 141.1[1][e])
   J.   “Sign” means every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark,
plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter
which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information
when the same is placed out-of-doors in view of the general public. For the
purpose of determining number of signs, a sign will be considered to be a
single display surface or display device containing elements organized,
related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random
manner without organized relationship to elements or where there is reasonable
doubt as to the relationship of elements, each element will be considered to be
a single sign. (See
Chapter 161)
   K.   “Sign, digital” means changeable electronic variable message signs
(CEVMS) that have changeable messages or displays and meet requirements related
to duration of messages, transition times, lighting, and brightness.
   L.   “Sign, display surface area” means the net geometric area enclosed by
the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters,
characters, delineation, trim, and border; provided, however, display surface
area will not include the structural supports for free-standing signs provided
further that only one face of a double-faced sign as defined will be considered
in determining the display surface area.
   M.   “Sign, on-site” means a sign relating in its subject matter to the
premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or
activities on the premises.
   N.   “Sign, off-site” means any sign other than on-site sign.
   O.   “Small solar energy system” means an on-site solar energy system that
is incidental and subordinate to a principal use /or structure serving the
needs of all residential, agricultural, and neighborhood commercial zoning
districts.
   P.   “Small wind energy system” means an assembly of components which
converts the kinetic energy in wind into a usable electrical, mechanical, or
thermal energy, consisting of a single wind turbine and associated control
equipment.
   Q.   “Solar collector” means a device or combination of devices, structure,
or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical, or electrical energy. The location of a solar collector must
comply with local building and setback regulations, and is to be set back not
less than five feet from the property line, and not less than 10 feet above the
ground.
   R.   “Solar farm” means an on-site multiple unit solar energy system,
independent of a principal use and/or structure, serving the needs of
agricultural and industrial zoning districts.
   S.   “Solid waste disposal site” means a site where commercial, industrial,
and domestic wastes are buried (sanitary landfill) or incinerated, or converted
into energy for a waste-to-energy facility in accordance with State and local
disposal regulations and standards.
   T.   “Solid waste transfer station” means any site where commercial,
domestic, or yard wastes are temporarily collected, sorted, and compacted prior
to transporting to a solid waste disposal site or recycling center.
   U.   “Special exception or special use” means a use that would not be
appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but
which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the
neighborhood would promote the health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may not be
permitted in zoning districts as special exceptions unless specific provisions
for such special exceptions are made herein.
   V.   “Specific anatomical areas” means the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genital, pubic
region, buttocks, and female breast below the point immediately above the top
of the areola; and,
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   W.   “Specific sexual activities” means displays of the following:
      (1)   Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including
genital-genital, anal-genital, or oral-genital, whether between human beings or
a human being and an animal.
      (2)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restricted on the
part of one so clothed.
      (3)   Masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals including any
explicit, close-up representation of a human genital organ.
      (4)   Physical contact or simulated contact with unclothed pubic areas or
buttocks of a human male or female, or the breasts of a female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in
the act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification.
      (5)   An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are
employed to overcome the will of or to acquire the consent of a person to
perform sexual activities and the effects or results of the violence or drugs
are shown.
   X.   “Stable, private” means a building or structure with four enclosed
walls used or intended to be used for housing horses belonging to the owner of
the property only, for non-commercial purposes.
   Y.   “Stable, public and riding academy” means a building or structure used
or intended to be used for the housing only of horses on a fee basis. Riding
instruction may be given in connection with the public stable or riding
academy.
   Z.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   AA.   “Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface
of the floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
(Paragraph AA – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   BB.   “Story, half” see “half story.”
   CC.   “Street” means a general term used to describe a right-of-way, both
public and private, which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian
movement, and may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties
adjacent to it, and which may also provide space for the location of utilities
(both above and below ground).
   DD.   “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of
land and a contiguous street.
   EE.   “Street yard” means a contiguous landscaped area along the street
right-of-way. The landscaped area shall be of a depth not less than that
established in Section
170.55(2) and measured from each street right-of-way line extending
perpendicularly into the yard. The maximum depth of this area for purposes of
this section shall not be more than twice the depth of the area at any other
point.
   FF.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground,
attached to the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground including, but not limited to, buildings, billboards and other similar
advertising signs, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage
tanks, hot tubs, whirlpools, swimming pools, and other similar uses.
   GG.   “Structural alterations” means any changes, other than normal
maintenance, made to a supporting member of a structure such as a bearing wall,
column, beam, girder, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
   HH.   “Subdivision” means a division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into
two or more lots, building plots or sites, or other subdivisions of land for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sales, transfer for building
development, right-of-way dedication, or other use; provided, however, this
definition of a subdivision does not include divisions of land into 40 acres or
more in size parcels of land for agricultural purposes.
   II.   “Substantial completion” means that point in the installation or
construction of structures or improvements where more than 90 percent of the
total, proposed work is fully completed and said structures or improvements can
be used for their intended purpose(s).
   JJ.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
   KK.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed valuation of the
structure either:
         a.   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
         b.   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
      (2)   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community† 15  shall
be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   LL.   “Synagogue” means a building used for religious practice, particularly
a Jewish congregation.
20.   Words beginning with “T.”
   A.   “Temple” means a building used for religious practice. Temple is the
name given to houses of worship of reform and some conservative Jewish
congregations, for Mormon sacred ordinances, and occasionally for local lodges
of various fraternal orders.
   B.   “Temporary use” means impermanent uses of an occasional nature.
Temporary uses involve the use of permanent structures and portable signs. Uses
of a seasonal nature that recur periodically on a regular basis on the same
site and reoccupy the same permanent structure shall not be considered
temporary uses.
   C.   “Theater” means an establishment used to observe films and other visual
material which is not an adult motion picture theater.
   D.   “Tiny home” means a structure intended as a household that includes
basic functional areas that support normal daily routines, such as cooking,
sleeping, and toiletry, but is also smaller than traditional single-family
homes, i.e., less than 1,000 square feet. They are designed and built to look
like a conventional building structure, and meet all aspects of Building Code.
Tiny homes differ from mobile homes in that they are not designed to be
transported with automotive power and have a permanent foundation.
   E.   “Tourist home” means a building in which one, but not more than five,
guestrooms are used to provide or offer overnight accommodations to transient
guests for compensation.
   F.   “Tower” means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio, and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed
towers, or mono-pole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes
the structure and any support thereto.
   G.   “Trade or business school” means a secretarial, business school or
college when not publicly owned or not owned or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious, charitable, or nonprofit organization; or a school
conducted as a commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing,
barbering or hair dressing, drafting, or for teaching industrial or technical
arts.
   H.   “Travel trailer” see “recreational vehicle.”
   I.   “Travel trailer park” means any area licensed and used or offered for
use, in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of occupied
travel trailers, pick-up campers, converted buses, motor homes, tent trailers,
tents, or similar devices used for temporary or portable housing. Unoccupied
mobile homes, travel trailers, and similar devices may be stored in the park,
but only in an area marked for storage. No repair, maintenance, sales, or
servicing of such devices are allowed in the park.
21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   A.   “Underlying zone” means one of the regular zoning districts listed in
this chapter which provides basic guidelines for an overlay district which may
alter in some manner the guidelines of the regular zoning district.
   B.   “Unified control” means the combination of two or more tracts of land
wherein each owner has agreed that their tract of land will be developed as
part of a planned unit development and will be subject to the control
applicable to the planned unit development.
   C.   “Use” means the employment or occupation of a building, structure, or
land for a person's service, benefit, or enjoyment.
22.   Words beginning with “V.”
   A.   “Variance” means a modification of the specific requirements of this
Zoning Code which will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing
to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this Zoning Code would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
   B.   “Vehicular use area” means all areas subject to vehicular traffic
including, but not limited to, access-ways, driveways, loading areas, service
areas, and parking stalls for all types of vehicles. This definition shall not
apply to covered parking structures, underground parking lots, or public
streets.
   C.   “Veranda” means a roofed, open-air gallery or porch, attached to the
outside of a building. A veranda is often partly enclosed by a railing and
frequently extends across the front and sides of the structure.
   D.   “Veterinarian” means one who, by their professional qualifications and
licensing, is qualified and authorized to treat diseases and injuries to
animals.
   E.   “Vision clearance on corner lot” means that triangular space at the
street corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision
between the heights of three and one-half feet and 12 feet above grade
established on the lot corner, determined by a diagonal line connecting two
points measured 35 feet equal distance from the property corner.
23.   Words beginning with “W.”
   A.   “Warehouse” means a structure or room for the storage of merchandise or
commodities.
   B.   “Wind-powered turbine” means a device that converts kinetic energy from
wind into electrical power. The land area around the turbine may be used for
agricultural or other low intensity use purposes assuming the accessory uses in
the immediate area are not incongruous to the turbine’s purpose.
24.   Words beginning with “X.”
25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
   A.   “Yard” means a required open space at grade unoccupied and unobstructed
by any structure or portion of a structure; provided, however, that fences,
walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and
furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height and visibility
requirements. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a
side yard, depth of a front yard or rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line and the main building wall will be used.
   B.   “Yard, front” means an open space extending the full width of the lot
between a building and the front lot (or easement) line(s), unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   C.   “Yard, rear” means an open space extending the full width of a lot
between a building and the rear lot line(s), unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified. For purposes of designating
the rear yard on corner lots, the rear yard shall be the yard opposite the
address of the property with the other yard being designated as a side yard.
   D.   “Yard, side” means an open space extending from the front yard to the
rear yard between a building and the side lot line(s), unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
   A.   “Zero lot line” means a development technique which permits the
principal building to be sited on one or more lot lines. The intent is to allow
more open area on the lot; and where several buildings are built close
together, to lower the installation expense of utilities. Such technique is
only permitted through the platting and site plan review processes.
   B.   “Zoning administrator” means the person or persons authorized and
empowered by the City to administer and enforce the requirements of this Zoning
Code.
   C.   “Zoning district, change of” means the legislative act of removing one
or more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing them in another
zoning district on the zoning map of the City.
 
Notes
14 † EDITOR’S NOTE: The City of LeClaire’s first subdivision regulations were
   adopted with Ordinance No. 69, on August 16, 1961.
15 † EDITOR’S NOTE: The City of LeClaire’s first floodplain regulations were adopted
   on August 15, 1980.
170.08   NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES.
1.   General. A conforming building, structure, or use that becomes
nonconforming as a result of any change in this Code, including any changes to
the applicable zoning ordinances, may be continued, maintained, and repaired,
except as otherwise provided for in this section. Nothing in this Zoning Code
will prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any
building or structure declared unsafe by the City.
2.   Alteration or Enlargement of Buildings and Structures. A nonconforming
building or structure will not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless
said building or structure, including additions and enlargements, are made to
conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located;
provided, however, that if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but
nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street parking space, said building
or structure may be enlarged or added to provided that the enlargement or
addition complies with the yard and height and off-street parking requirements
of the district in which said building or structure is located. No
nonconforming building or structure will be moved, in whole or in part, to
another location on the lot unless every portion of said building or structure
is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
3.   Destruction of Nonconforming Building or Structure. Any nonconforming
building or structure which has been or may be damaged by fire, flood,
explosions, earthquake, war, riot, or any other act of God, may be
reconstructed and used as before if it is reconstructed within one year of such
calamity, unless damaged more than 50 percent of its fair market value, as
determined by the Board of Adjustment, at the time of such damage, in which
case reconstruction may be implemented only in accordance with the provisions
of this Zoning Code.
4.   Building Vacancy. A building or structure or portion thereof, which is
nonconforming as to use, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains
unoccupied for a continuous period of six months or more will not thereafter be
occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district
in which it is located. Further no such vacant building, structure, or portion
thereof, whether conforming or not as to use, shall be used for any purpose
other than that which it was originally intended for and shall only be used for
purposes allowed within the particular zoning district within which it is
located. (i.e., vacated single-family residential structures may not be used
for storage purposes, etc.)
5.   Change in Use. A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure
will not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming
building or structure or changed except to a conforming use. If discontinued or
changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure, or
portion thereof will be in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which such building or structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant
nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the
building or structure was designed or intended if occupied within a period of
six months or less after the effective date of this Zoning Code, or otherwise
it will be used in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it
is located. The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to
a use of the same or a more restricted district classification; but where the
use of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more
restricted district classification, it thereafter will not be changed to a use
of a less restricted district classification.
6.   Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land, where the
aggregate value of all permanent buildings or structures is less than $500.00,
existing at the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code, may be continued for
a period of not more than five years therefrom, provided that:
   A.   Said nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor will it
occupy more area than was in use on the effective date of this Zoning Code.
   B.   If said nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a
period of six months or more, or changed, any future use of such land, or
change in use, will be in conformity with the provisions of the district in
which said land is located.
170.09   FEES.
Any application submitted for an amendment, variance, special exception,
appeal, or other form of petitioned public hearing governed by this Zoning Code
will be accompanied by a fee as determined by resolution of the Council.
170.10   PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement
of any provision of this Zoning Code, commits a municipal infraction and as
such will be subject to the penalties and remedies specified in
Chapter 3. In the event that any building, structure, or use is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered repaired, converted, or maintained; or any
building, structure, or land is used in violation of this Zoning Code, the
Council, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunctive
relief or any proper action or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent
such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, or use; to restrain, correct, or abate such violation;
to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land; or to prevent
any act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises in violation of
this Zoning Code. Any building erected, raised, or converted, or land or
premises used in violation of any provisions of this Zoning Code or the
requirements thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and as such,
in addition to the remedy provided above, may be abated in such manner as
nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under this Code. Further, any
person, firm or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor of such who seeks
an after-the-fact remedy to an infraction of this code through the use of any
administrative process allowed herein shall be charged double the listed
application fees.
170.11   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
For the purposes of this Zoning Code, the City is hereby divided into the
following 11 regular zoning districts and five overlay districts:
1.   Zoning Districts.
   A.   General Agricultural District (A-1)
   B.   Rural Residential District (RR)
   C.   Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
   D.   One- and Two-Family Residential District (R-2)
   E.   Multi-Family Residential District (R-3)
   F.   Mobile Home Park District (R-M)
   G.   Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1)
   H.   Central Business District (C-2)
   I.   Highway-Oriented Commercial Service District (C-3)
   J.   Light Industrial District (I-1)
   K.   Heavy Industrial District (I-2)
2.   Overlay Districts.
   A.   Overlay Flood District (FD)
   B.   Overlay Planned Development District (PDD)
   C.   Overlay Greenway District (GD)
   D.   Infill Development Overlay District (IDOD)
   E.   Marina Overlay District (MOD)
170.12   ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Code
are set forth on the map entitled “Zoning Districts” which is herein and hereby
made a part of this Code by reference. Said map, together with everything shown
thereon and all amendments thereto, will be as much a part of this Code and
have the same force and effect as though fully set forth and described herein,
the original of said map which is properly attested and is on file with the
Clerk. The Overlay Flood District (FD) and the Overlay Greenway District (GD)
may not necessarily be located upon the Official Zoning Map due to the
confusion created, but will be located as specified in Sections
170.27 and
170.29. Developments completed under the Overlay Planned Development (PDD)
zoning district will be designated by zone labels of the regular zoning
districts preceded by the letter “P,” (i.e., P/C-3). The letter “P” may be used
upon individual lots which are developed and controlled by the overlay zoning
within a larger area having a regular district classification which is the same
as the underlying zoning.
170.13   ZONING MAP EDITOR’S NOTE.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 836 entitled Zoning Ordinance of LeClaire, Iowa, adopted July
10, 2023, and amendments thereto are contained in the Appendix of this Code
of Ordinances and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances
have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map of the City and have not
been codified herein, but are specifically saved from repeal and are in full
force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED           ORDINANCE ADOPTED
842       July 1, 2024
846       September 3, 2024
848       January 6, 2025
849       January 6, 2025
 
170.14   RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing the regulations
applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has been given to
existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each district, the
most desirable use for which the land in each district may be adapted, and the
conservation of property values throughout the City. Unless otherwise specified
or where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of any of the
aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules will apply:
1.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets,
highways, or alleys will be construed to follow the center lines of such
streets, highways, or alleys.
2.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following platted lot lines
or other property lines will be construed to be said boundary lines.
3.   Boundaries shown as following or approximately following railroad lines
will be construed to lie midway between the main tracks of such railroad lines.
4.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines will be construed to follow
such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, will be
construed as moving with the actual shore line.
5.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams or other bodies of water will be construed to follow such center lines
taken at a mean low water mark.
6.   All areas within the corporate limits of the City which are under water
and are not shown as included within any district will be subject to all of the
regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water area. If the
water area adjoins two or more districts, the boundaries of each district will
be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet
another district or until they meet the City corporate limits, whichever occurs
first.
7.   Boundaries shown as following or closely following the City limits will be
construed as following such limits.
8.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
Subsections 1 through 7 above will be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map will be determined by dimensions, by the
scale of the map.
9.   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership on
the effective date of this Zoning Code or amendment, the regulations of this
Zoning Code for either portion of such lot may, at the owner's discretion,
apply to the entire area of the lot or 25 feet beyond the zoning district
boundary line, whichever is the lesser distance.
10.   Where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a reasonable doubt as
to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of the more
restrictive district will govern the entire parcel in question, unless
otherwise determined by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section
170.34(9)).
11.   Whenever any street, alley, or other public easement is vacated, the
district classification of the property to which the vacated portions of land
accrue will become the classification of the vacated land. (See City Attorney's
opinion letter dated June 17, 1991.)
12.   See Section
170.27 for interpreting Floodplain Map boundaries.
13.   See Section
170.29 for interpreting Greenway District Boundaries.
170.15   ANNEXED TERRITORY.
Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City will be classified
automatically as being in an “A-1” General Agricultural District until such
classification shall have been changed by amendment of this Zoning Code as
provided for hereinafter. Within 30 days following the completion of any
annexation, the Planning and Zoning Commission will proceed to make a
recommendation(s) to the Council as to the appropriate zoning classification
designation(s) for the annexed area(s).
170.16   GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (A-1).
1.   General Description. This district is intended to provide areas in which
agriculture and related uses are encouraged as the principal uses of the land.
The district encourages the agricultural use of lands which are best suited for
that purpose, while also allowing urban and rural uses which are compatible
with the agricultural uses and will not prematurely terminate the agricultural
uses. The district prohibits residential and urban densities that might cause
health problems until they can be serviced by community utilities and
facilities. It is essential that open areas be maintained for future urbanized
development of the community. It is assumed that most agricultural uses in the
City are of an interim nature and will be terminated when the property is ready
for urban-type development. Properties in this classification will eventually
be reclassified to more appropriate urban-type zoning districts. All newly
annexed areas will fall within this district classification until amended as
provided for in Section
170.32.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a General Agricultural
District (A-1) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Agricultural Uses, such as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Farming, horticulture, forestry, crop and tree farming, truck
farming, gardening, dairy farming, harboring, and maintaining livestock,
domestic animal and poultry breeding and raising, together with the operation
of any machinery, vehicles, or accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses.
      (2)   Green house or nursery.
      (3)   Research farm.
   B.   Residential Uses:
      (1)   Farm homestead which is occupied by the farm owner or tenant
operator, and allowing the family to reside on the premises.
   C.   Public, quasi-public, and governmental buildings, and facilities such
as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Church, temple, synagogue, or mosque.
      (2)   Country club.
      (3)   Public utility service facilities such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, and
telecommunication facilities.
      (4)   Meeting hall and office for agricultural, horticultural, rural, and
public conservation agencies.
      (5)   Parish house and convent.
      (6)   Public and Private School. Pending the issuance of a regular
certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not
to exceed six months from its date during the completion of any addition or
during partial occupancy of the premises. Reasons in writing for refusal to
issue an occupancy permit must be forwarded to the applicant no later than
three days after the request for an occupancy permit.
      (7)   Community center building.
      (8)   Recreational area, camps, and campgrounds.
      (9)   Transportation pipeline and utility easement and right-of-way.
   D.   Commercial Uses.
      (1)   Commercial dog kennel or veterinary establishment located not
closer than 500 feet to any residentially zoned district boundary or an
existing dwelling, other than the dwelling of the owner or lessee of the site.
      (2)   Golf course with or without a driving range.
      (3)   Boarding stable, riding stable, and academy, located not closer
than 500 feet to any residentially zoned district boundary or an existing
dwelling, other than the dwelling of the owner or lessee of the site.
      (4)   Signs and billboards erected pursuant to
Chapter 161.
   E.   Cemetery.
   F.   Grain storage, when necessary to the pursuit of agriculture.
   G.   Planned Development District (PDD)
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained Section
170.34(8):
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as “permitted uses” in
this district.
   B.   Airport, public or private, in conformance with Federal Aviation Agency
standards.
   C.   Animal feed preparation, grinding, mixing, and storage, provided that
such facilities are not less than 1,000 feet from a residentially zoned
district boundary.
   D.   Commercial feedlot or confinement operation.
   E.   Convalescent and long-term care facility.
   F.   Fertilizer and seed sales - including bulk storage and mixing, provided
that such facilities are not less than 1,000 feet from a residentially zoned
district boundary.
   G.   Hospital, clinic, and sanitarium.
   H.   Mining, the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel, topsoil, and other
aggregates, including equipment, buildings, and structures for screening,
crushing, mixing, washing, and storing provided that:
      (1)   No open pit or shaft will be less than 200 feet from any public
road.
      (2)   All buildings and structures will be located not less than 200 feet
from any property line.
      (3)   The borders of the property will be fenced with a solid fence or
wall at least six feet in height when the property is adjacent to any district
other than an industrial district.
      (4)   A plan of development for the reclamation of the land will be
provided as part of the application for special exception. The plan of
development will be accompanied by a written agreement between the owner or
their agent and the City, and a performance bond guaranteeing the reclamation
of the land as set forth in the development plan.
   I.   Park or playground.
   J.   College or university.
   K.   Roadside stand for vegetable and produce sale for products grown on the
premises.
   L.   Radio and television studio, station, and transmission tower.
   M.   Sale barn.
   N.   Sanitary landfill, public or private, provided that such facilities are
not less than 1,000 feet from a residentially zoned district boundary.
   O.   Single-family detached dwelling.
   P.   Home occupations.
(Paragraph P – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
4.   Height Regulations. No building or structure will exceed 40 feet in height
and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal building
as verified by a State licensed professional engineer, except as otherwise
provided for in Section
170.48(1).
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. A separate ground area of not less than five acres will be
designed, provided, and continuously maintained for each structure or land
containing a permitted use.
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width   400 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth   50 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Width   50 feet.
      (4)   Rear Yard Depth   50 feet.
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 0.2 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of the PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed two-tenths.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family, detached dwelling and any
other structure occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes will
contain at least 900 square feet of floor area if one story, or 1,200 square
feet of floor area if two stories.
9.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body of
any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75 percent
of the distance of the major dimension (length).
170.17   RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR).
1.   General Description. This district is intended to provide for single-
family residential development on lot sizes adequate to allow individual wells
and sewage disposal systems and to create an environment of rural-type homes on
larger lots than required in the urban-type residential areas. The permitted
uses, lot areas, setbacks, and other requirements are designed to encourage a
quality residential area in a rural setting. All commercial activities,
including home occupations, are prohibited.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Rural Residential
District (RR) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Residential Uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling.
      (2)   Planned Development District.
   B.   Public, quasi-public, governmental buildings, and facilities such as,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Country club.
   C.   Public utility service facilities such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, and
telecommunication facilities.
      (1)   Parish house and convent, in conjunction with schools.
      (2)   Public and private school.
      (3)   Public library, in conjunction with schools.
      (4)   Public park, public playground, public golf course, and public
community center building.
      (5)   Hospital.
      (6)   Long-term care facility, assisted living facilities.
      (7)   Medical clinics.
   D.   Agricultural uses such as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Gardening, general farming, and the harboring and maintaining of
livestock. (See Section
170.58)
      (2)   Nursery, retail sales are prohibited.
   E.   Planned Development District (PDD).
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Similar and compatible uses to those allowed as “permitted uses” in
this district.
   B.   Campgrounds.
   C.   Churches and other places of worship, provided the property for said
use fronts on a primary or secondary thoroughfare so designed in the
comprehensive plan.
   D.   Commercial golf course and accessory driving range.
   E.   Modular (manufactured) home, providing that the provisions of Section
170.17(9) are complied with.
   F.   Home occupations.
(Paragraph F – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
4.   Height Regulations. No building or structure will exceed 40 feet in height
and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal building
as verified by a State licensed professional engineer, except as otherwise
provided. (See Section
170.48(1)).
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. Each lot will have a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet.
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width:   100 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth:   40 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Width:   Six feet minimum with the sum of both side yard
widths not less than 20 feet.
      (4)   Rear Yard Depth:   40 feet.
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 2.9 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of the PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed three-tenths.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family, detached dwelling and any
other structure occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes will
contain at least 900 square feet of floor area if one story, or 1,200 square
feet of floor area if two stories.
9.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body of
any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75 percent
of the distance of the major dimension (length).
170.18   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
1.   General Description. This is the most restrictive residential district.
The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related
recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to
provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are
intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not
appropriate to a residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness,
order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and
open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of
the proper functional relationship of the different uses.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Single-Family
Residential District (R-1) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Single-family detached, site-built dwelling.
   B.   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated use.
   C.   Planned Development District (PDD).
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Church, temple, synagogue, or mosque.
   B.   Childcare center.
   C.   Home occupation.
   D.   Municipal administrative or public service building or properties,
except storage yards, warehouses, or garages connected therewith.
   E.   Park, playground, or community center.
   F.   Public library and similar public culture uses.
   G.   Public school or school offering general educational courses the same
as ordinarily given in public schools.
   H.   Modular (manufactured) home, providing the provisions of Sections
1170.18(8) and
170.18(9) are complied with.
   I.   Public utility service facilities such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, and
telecommunication facilities.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 35 feet
in height and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal
building as verified by a State licensed professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements. Lot area and yard requirements
vary depending upon provisions made for neighborhood parks. For a lot to
qualify as part of an area with parks, a minimum of 600 square feet per lot
must be developed as a neighborhood park or parks and this area must be
contiguous to or within a reasonable distance, (not greater than one-quarter
mile away), of the lots so developed or the equivalent dollar value of 600
square feet per lot may be used to fund, improve, or enhance other park areas
so designated by the City.
   A.   Lot Area.
 
                          With Parks        Without Parks
Minimum Lot Area Required 9,000 square feet 10,000 square feet
 
B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements.
 
                         With Parks Without Parks
Lot Width                85 feet    100 feet
Front Yard Depth         30 feet    30 feet
Side Yard Minimum Width1 6 feet     6 feet
Sum Side Yard Widths1    15 feet    15 feet
Rear Yard Depth          30 feet    30 feet
1These are minimum sums and, where no alley is located to the rear of the lot
and an attached garage is not constructed, a side yard of at least 12 feet
will be provided on one side of the principal structure.
 
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 5.8 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of a PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed four-tenths.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family detached dwelling and any
other structure occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes will
contain at least 1,200 square feet of floor area if one story, or 1,400 square
feet of floor area if two stories.
9.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between
any buildings will be 10 feet for single- and two-family dwellings, or
combinations thereof, and 30 feet for multi-family dwellings, or combinations
thereof, in this zoning district.
10.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body
of any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75
percent of the distance of the major dimension (length).
170.19   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
1.   General Description. This is a residential district to provide for a
slightly higher population density but with basic regulations similar to the
Single-Family District. The principal use of land is for single- and two-family
dwellings and related recreational, religious, and educational facilities
normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area.
Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by
providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related
facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of
the different uses.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a One- and Two-Family
Residential District (R-2) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the Single-Family Residential District (R-1).
   B.   Two-family dwellings.
   C.   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated uses.
   D.   Planned Development District (PDD).
(Subsection 2 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Any use permitted on review in the Single-Family Residential District.
   B.   Single-family attached dwellings, containing up to eight attached
dwellings.
   C.   Parking area(s) accessory to a use in an adjoining, less restricted
district, when abutting or directly across an alley or street.
   D.   Public utility service facilities such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, and
telecommunication facilities.
(Subsection 3 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 35 feet
in height and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal
building as verified by a State licensed professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements (Including Zero Lot Line
Requirements). Lot area and yard requirements vary depending upon provisions
made for neighborhood parks. For a lot to qualify as part of an area with
parks, a minimum of 800 square feet per lot must be developed as a neighborhood
park or parks and this area must be contiguous to or within a reasonable
distance, (not greater than one-quarter mile away), of lots so developed or the
equivalent dollar value of 800 square feet per lot may be used to fund,
improve, or enhance other park areas so designated by the City.
   A.   Lot Area. The following minimum lot area requirements will apply:
 
              Single-Family Minimum Minimum Per Family Two Family Minimum Lot
              Lot Areas                                Area
With Parks    8,000 sq. ft.         5,000 sq. ft.      10,000 sq. ft.
Without Parks 9,300 sq. ft.         6,000 sq. ft.      12,000 sq. ft.
 
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot widths and
yard requirements will apply:
 With Parks                          Without Parks
 1-Family Dwelling 2-Family Dwelling 1-Family Dwelling 2-Family Dwelling
                 With Parks                 Without Parks
                 1-Family 2-Family Dwelling 1-Family Dwelling 2-Family Dwelling
                 Dwelling
Lot Width        75 feet  85 feet           85 feet           100 feet
Front Yard Depth 25 feet  25 feet           25 feet           25 feet
Side Yard        5 feet   5 feet            5 feet            5 feet
Minimum Width
Sum of Side Yard 12 feet  12 feet           12 feet           12 feet
Widths*
Rear Yard Depth  30 feet  30 feet           30 feet           30 feet
*These are minimum sums and, where no alley is located to the rear of the lot
and an attached garage is not constructed, a minimum side yard of at least 12
feet will be provided on one side of the principal structure.
 
   C.   Zero Lot Line Zoning. See Section
170.50 of this Code for provisions relating to zero lot line zoning which is
permissible under this zoning classification and the Multi-Family Residential
District.
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 10.89 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of a PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed four-tenths.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family detached dwelling and any
other structure occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes will
contain at least 1,200 square feet of floor area if one story, or 1,400 square
feet of floor area if two stories, and each two-family dwelling or permitted
townhouse will contain at least 1,000 feet of floor area for each dwelling
unit.
9.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between
any buildings will be 10 feet for single- and two-family dwellings, or
combinations thereof, and 30 feet for multi-family dwellings, or combinations
thereof, in this zoning district.
10.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body
of any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75
percent of the distance of the major dimension (length).
170.20   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3).
1.   General Description. This district is composed of certain medium-density
residential areas representing a compatible commingling of single-family, two-
family, single-family attached, and multi-family dwellings, including certain
open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. It is
the intent of this district to provide for an environment of medium-density
dwellings plus certain additional uses such as schools, parks, churches, and
certain public facilities which serve the residents living in the district.
Large apartments, with corresponding proportions of open space, also may be
developed under prescribed standards of density and open space. In addition to
large areas allocated for this district, it has useful application as a buffer
or transition zone along major streets and bordering commercial development.
Single-family attached dwellings shall only be constructed on parcels
containing two or more acres and shall contain no more than 12 dwelling units
per building.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Multi-Family
Residential District (R-3) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the One- and Two-Family Residential District.
   B.   Dwellings for any number of families.
   C.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
   D.   Boarding houses.
   E.   Single-Family attached dwellings.
   F.   Short-term rentals.
   G.   Planned Development District (PDD).
   H.   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated uses.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Any use permitted on review in the One- and Two-Family Residential
District.
   B.   Hospitals, sanitariums, and long-term care facilities.
   C.   Institutions of a religious, educational, or philanthropic nature.
   D.   Physicians’ and dentists’ offices and private clinics for human care;
professional offices, architects, engineers, and lawyers; barber and beauty
shops; offices devoted to real estate, insurance, management, and similar
enterprises when not displaying or handling merchandise on the premises. The
buildings permitted under this paragraph will be of a design and location
compatible with the permitted residential uses.
   E.   Public and private schools for academic instruction, including
dormitories.
   F.   Public utility service facilities such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, telecommunication
facilities.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 40 feet
in height and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal
building as verified by a State licensed professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements. Lot area and yard requirements
vary depending upon provisions made for neighborhood parks. For a lot to
qualify as part of an area with parks, a minimum of 1,000 square feet per lot
must be developed as a neighborhood park or parks and this area must be
contiguous to or within a reasonable distance, (not greater than one-quarter
mile away), of the lots so developed or the equivalent dollar value of 1,000
square feet per lot may be used to fund, improve, or enhance other park areas
so designated by the City. The specific provisions of this Section
170.20(5) pertaining to the development of single-family attached dwellings
shall supersede other conflicting provisions in this and other ordinances.
   A.   Lot Area. The following minimum lot area requirements will apply:
 With Parks Without Parks
             With Parks         Without Parks
Single-Family
Per Dwelling 7,000 square feet  7,800 square feet
Per Lot      7,000 square feet  7,800 square feet
Two-Family
Per Dwelling 4,000 square feet  5,000 square feet
Per Lot      8,000 square feet  10,000 square feet
Multi-Family
Per Dwelling 2,500 square feet  3,000 square feet
Per Lot      10,000 square feet 12,000 square feet
Single-Family Attached
Per Dwelling 864 square feet    1,000 square feet
Per Lot      864 square feet    1,000 square feet
 
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will apply:
 
                  Single-         Two-     Single-         Multiple-
With Parks        Family Dwelling Family   Family Attached Family Dwelling
                                  Dwelling
Lot Width         75 feet         85 feet  24 feet         100 feet
Front Yard Depth  25 feet         25 feet  20 feet         25 feet
Side Yard Minimum 5 feet          5 feet   0 feet          5 feet
Width
Sum of Side Yard  12 feet         12 feet  0 feet          12 feet
Widths*
Rear Yard Depth   30 feet         30 feet  25 feet         30 feet
*These are minimum sums and, where no alley is located to the rear of the
lot and an attached garage is not constructed, a minimum side yard of at
least 12 feet will be provided on one side of the principal structure.
This provision does not apply to single-family attached dwelling
structures.
 
 
Without Parks     Single-Family Two-Family Single-Family Multiple-Family
                  Dwelling      Dwelling   Attached      Dwelling
Lot Width         85 feet       100 feet   24 feet       110 feet
Front Yard Depth  25 feet       25 feet    20 feet       25 feet
Side Yard Minimum 5 feet        5 feet     0 feet        5 feet
Width
Sum of Side Yard  12 feet       12 feet    0 feet        12 feet
Widths*
Rear Yard Depth   30 feet       30 feet    25 feet       30 feet
*These are minimum sums and, where no alley is located to the rear of
the lot and an attached garage is not constructed, a minimum side yard
of at least 12 feet will be provided on one side of the principal
structure. This provision does not apply to single-family attached
dwelling structures.
 
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 21.78 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of a PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.7 or 1.0 for Single-Family Attached dwellings.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family detached dwelling will
contain at least 1,200 square feet of floor area if one story, or 1,400 square
feet of floor area if two stories; each two-family and single-family attached
dwelling will contain at least 720 square feet of floor area for each dwelling
unit; and each multi-family dwelling will contain at least 600 square feet of
floor area for each dwelling unit.
9.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between
any buildings will be 10 feet for single- and two-family dwellings, or
combinations thereof, and 30 feet for multi-family dwellings or single-family
attached, or combinations thereof, in this zoning district.
10.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body
of any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75
percent of the distance of the major dimension (length).
170.21   MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (R-M).
1.   General Description. The purpose of this article is to provide certain
minimum standards for the location of mobile homes in mobile home parks to the
mutual advantage of mobile home occupants and the City at large. New districts
may be zoned when petitioned or as needed. This specialized district is,
therefore, not pre-located, and is to be considered as a specially located
district dependent on the developing surrounding land-use patterns. It is to be
treated as a residential dwelling development of greater density than other
residential districts.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Mobile Home Park
District (R-M) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Mobile home park, constructed, maintained, and operated, in accordance
with this Code as specified herein, Chapter 435 of the Code of Iowa, and
Section 661, Chapter 16, Division VI of the Iowa Administrative Code.
   B.   Common facilities, including restrooms, recreational facilities,
laundry facilities, snack bar, playgrounds, etc., operated by the mobile home
park for use of all permanent and temporary residents of the mobile home park.
   C.   One indirectly lighted sign may be erected facing each public street
upon which the mobile home park fronts, showing the name of the mobile home
park and other information pertinent thereto; provided that such sign will not
have an area of more than 32 square feet.
   D.   Accessory uses or buildings which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated uses.
3.   Height Regulations. No principal building will exceed 15 feet in height.
4.   Mobile Home Park Area, Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements. The
following minimum park area, lot area, lot width, and yard requirements will
apply:
   A.   Minimum Total Mobile Home Park Area. The minimum total Mobile Home Park
area for any designated mobile home park will be not less than four acres.
   B.   Lot Area. The minimum mobile home lot area will be not less than 4,000
square feet.
   C.   Lot Width. The minimum lot width for any mobile home lot will be not
less than 40 feet and where abutting any other residentially zoned district
will be not less than 50 feet.
   D.   Yard Requirements. Generally, all lots will be so designed that the
mobile homes are oriented to the right side of the lot when the mobile home is
viewed from a point in front of the hitch of the mobile home. Further
conditions include:
      (1)   Front Yard Depth. The front yard depth will be not less than 15
feet.
      (2)   Side Yard Widths. Side yard requirements will be based on the
specified location of wheel ramps. Each lot will be developed for double-wide
mobile homes having a width of not less 22 feet. In no case will the right side
yard be less than five feet and any side yard on any lot abutting another
residentially zoned district will be not less than 15 feet.
5.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 10.89 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of a PDD.
6.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.4.
7.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. Mobile homes will be located on each
lot so that there will be at least a 20-foot clear separation between each
mobile home, including any permanently enclosed appendage, and any driveway,
walkway, or mobile home at the rear of the mobile home. Further, one additional
building suitable for storage as opposed to habitation may be built on a mobile
home lot, provided that such building has a floor area not more than 120 square
feet, and provided that such building is located to align with the rear of a
mobile home and is not closer than 12 feet to any mobile home or other such
storage building.
8.   Other Requirements. Other lot requirements and conditions for mobile home
parks include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Generally.
      (1)   A patio of not less than 180 square feet, (for example 9’x20’), and
a four-foot sidewalk will be provided for each mobile home lot and will be
located immediately adjacent to the left-hand side of the mobile home. Patios
and sidewalks will be constructed of Portland cement concrete, with a minimum
thickness of four inches.
      (2)   No enclosed porch, deck, canopy, or other addition will be built
onto any mobile home in any mobile home park.
      (3)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in the rezoning
amendment action or the subdivision development and review process, two-wheel
ramps constructed of six-inch-thick Portland cement concrete will be provided
for each lot. Each ramp will be not less than two feet in width by not less
than 54 feet in length.
   B.   Off-Street Parking. Two off-street parking spaces, as defined, per
mobile home lot will be provided.
9.   Plan Required. Each petition for a change to the Mobile Home Park District
submitted to the City will be accompanied by a mobile home park plat prepared
in accordance with the provisions this chapter, except as otherwise provided
for herein below, Chapter 435 of the Code of Iowa, and Section 661, Chapter 16,
of the Iowa Administrative Code.
   A.   Planned Development District. When a mobile home park is developed as a
part of a planned development district within an approved Mobile Home Park
District, the specific provisions of platting and orientation of the mobile
homes to each other and to the streets and other public services may be varied
to provide an aesthetically pleasing layout. However, overall density standards
will be maintained.
   B.   Subdivision Requirements. The provisions of this chapter will apply
except as specifically provided for in Section 170.21(9)(C).
   C.   Exceptions to Subdivision Requirements.
      (1)   Streets and Sidewalks. Streets required to provide through-service
will be located at the rear of lots in a mobile home park. All other streets
will be developed in such a manner as to discourage through-traffic. Sidewalks
will be required only on streets providing through-traffic service.
      (2)   Blocks. The width of blocks will be not less than 200 feet.
      (3)   Easements. Easements along rear lot lines will be as provided in
other sections. Easements alongside lot lines will be confined to the left lot
line and will be not less than 10 feet in width.
      (4)   Utilities. All utility connection facilities will be conveniently
located on the right side of the lot line of each mobile home lot.
      (5)   Common Facilities and Parking Areas. A parking area, equivalent in
size to one parking space per lot, suitable for storage of boats, travel
trailers, extra automobiles, and other equipment not allowed on individual lots
will be provided as well as common park facilities as outlined herein.
   D.   Requirements of Mobile Home Parks. Items noted in this section are
related specifically to and are unique to mobile home parks.
      (1)   Metering Water and Sewer Service. Water and sewer service will be
metered by means of meters for individual lots constructed in freeze-protected
pits, or otherwise as built to City specifications, or by means of a common
service to the entire park with rates established by the City, at the
discretion of the City.
      (2)   Gas Service. May be provided by means of natural gas provided by a
franchised gas utility or by means of liquefied petroleum (LP) gas provided in
500-gallon containers owned by the mobile home park.
      (3)   Connection and Freeze Protection. The connection and freeze
protection of water, sewer, and gas services will be the responsibility of the
mobile home park and will be in compliance with established building codes.
      (4)   Skirting. All mobile homes will be skirted i.e., will have the
entire underneath portion of the mobile home enclosed so as to prevent animals
from intruding beneath the home, provide for improved insulation, and improve
the appearance of the mobile home.
      (5)   Landscaping. Landscaping of all lots will consist of sod or
suitable seeding with grass and a minimum of two live trees of not less than
six feet in height as a part of the initial development. Two or more shrubs or
other plantings per lot will be used to delineate rear lot lines and/or promote
a pleasing appearance to the park as a whole.
      (6)   Fences. Fences are prohibited on lots occupied by mobile homes.
      (7)   Solid Waste. The City’s solid waste regulations, policies, and
procedures will apply in mobile home parks.
      (8)   Pre-Existing Mobile Home Parks. Any mobile home park established
and operating before the effective date of this Zoning Code, or one which, by
virtue of annexation, will come under the provisions of this Zoning Code will
be required to substantially meet the requirements of this Zoning Code within a
period of three years following the official date of annexation. This will be
accomplished by means of the owner submitting preliminary and final plats for
the site(s) involved. Permits or applications of any nature will not be issued
after the three-year period without an approved final plat.
      (9)   Travel Trailers. Specific lots in a mobile home park may be
designated for use by travel trailers, if so designated during the platting
process, and provided that the following provisions of this section are met:
         a.   A minimum of 1,000 square feet will be required for each travel
trailer, exclusive of streets and off-site driveways but including one parking
space.
         b.   Each site will have a minimum of a 50-ampere electric service and
water and sewer hookups. Each individual travel trailer lot will be metered for
water, sewer, and electricity.
         c.   Travel trailer sites will be conveniently located in proximity to
common facilities.
         d.   Permanent surfacing will be provided for the portions of each
site used for entrance or egress of the travel trailer and parking for one car.
The pad for the travel trailer will be not less than 12 feet wide and 30 feet
long.
         e.   No travel trailer will occupy a space in any mobile home park in
the City for more than 14 consecutive days nor more than 30 days in any
calendar year.
         f.   Tents are prohibited and allowed only as otherwise provided for
herein.
      (10)   Park Owner Responsibilities. The owner will place on file with the
Clerk, copies of all regulations and covenants in effect for the mobile home
park. Such regulations will provide for the health, safety, and well-being of
park residents insofar as is possible and will at a minimum require that:
         a.   No trash or unsightly items will be allowed on any mobile home
lot.
         b.   Grass will be regularly mowed, and trees and shrubs will be
maintained.
         c.   The storage of boats, travel trailers, and other equipment on
mobile home sites is prohibited.
         d.   The owner will enforce all rules in effect. Failure to do so will
be a violation of this Code.
      (11)   Residents Responsibilities. All permanent residents of mobile
homes will arrange for utility services, including established deposits for
same, unless otherwise provided for herein. Residents will abide by park
regulations as established. Regulations become a part of the associated zoning
amendment proceedings and may be changed or modified only by action of the
Board of Adjustment.
170.22   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1).
1.   General Description. This commercial district is for the conduct of retail
trade and personal service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the
convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops
and stores may be an integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with
residential, religious, recreational, and educational uses, more restrictive
requirements for light, air, open space, and off-street parking are made than
are provided in other commercial districts.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Neighborhood
Commercial District (C-1) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the Multi-Family Residential District (R-3) and
any use permitted on review in the Multi-Family Residential District (R-3),
except that all residential dwellings will be located in multiple use buildings
above the ground floor and will be secondary to the business use of the
premises.
   B.   Antique shop.
   C.   Art and school supply store.
   D.   Attorney’s and law offices.
   E.   Bank, savings and loans, and other financial institutions, including
drive-up facilities.
   F.   Barber shop.
   G.   Beauty parlor.
   H.   Book or stationary store.
   I.   Camera shop.
   J.   Candy store and confectionery store.
   K.   Childcare center and preschool.
   L.   Chiropractor’s office.
   M.   Community center.
   N.   Currency exchange.
   O.   Dairy products or ice cream store.
   P.   Dental office or drug store.
   Q.   Dry cleaner, but not a central plant servicing more than one retail
outlet.
   R.   Dry goods store.
   S.   Florist shop.
   T.   Food store, grocery store, meat market, bakery, (in which manufacturing
of goods is limited to goods sold on the premises only), and delicatessen.
   U.   Gift shop.
   V.   Insurance office/agency.
   W.   Jewelry store.
   X.   Laundry and dry cleaners, self-service only.
   Y.   Municipal administrative or public service office.
   Z.   Music and dancing studio.
   AA.   Off-street parking facility for public and quasi-public office
buildings.
   BB.   Optometrist sales and services.
   CC.   Package liquor sales.
   DD.   Photographer or artist studio.
   EE.   Planned Development District.
   FF.   Post office.
   GG.   Professional and business office.
   HH.   Public library and similar public culture uses.
   II.   Public and quasi-public office buildings.
   JJ.   Real estate office.
   KK.   Restaurant, excluding drive-in restaurant.
   LL.   Self-service laundry or dry cleaning.
   MM.   Shoe repair shop and shoe store.
   NN.   Sporting goods store.
   OO.   Tailor shop and dressmaker.
   PP.   Toy store.
   QQ.   Variety store.
   RR.   Clothing and apparel store.
   SS.   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the above
uses.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Automobile service station, for the sale of gas, lubricants, coolants,
minor accessories, and pre-packaged food goods only, and the performance of
incidental services such as tire changing, battery charging, and accessory
installation.
   B.   Drive-in banking facility (ATM).
   C.   Private club or lodge.
   D.   Any other use determined by the Board of Adjustment upon review to be
of the same general character as the foregoing permitted uses.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure or portion thereof
will exceed a height of 40 feet and no accessory structure will exceed the
elevation of the principal building as verified by a State licensed
professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. None required, except that the minimum lot area requirements
for structures containing dwelling units are the same as those in the Multi-
Family Residential District (R-3). (See Section
170.20(5)).
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width:   None.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth:   25 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Widths:   None, except where adjoining a residential
district, then same as the least width required in that residential district.
      (4)   Rear Yard Depth:   10 feet, except where adjoining an residential
district, then same as required in that district.
6.   Special Provisions.
   A.   Scope of Operations. All business establishments will be retail trade
or service establishments dealing directly with consumers, and all goods
produced on the premises will be sold on the premises where produced.
   B.   Enclosure of Operations. All business, servicing, (including solid
waste collection and storage), or processing will be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings or structures, except:
      (1)   Off-street parking or loading.
      (2)   Accessory uses when permitted by a special exception.
   C.   Screening. Where a commercial use abuts or is across the street from a
residentially zoned district, adequate screening shall be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section
170.35.
   D.   Parking Provisions. Parking spaces and areas will be provided in
accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.52. In addition, the parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a
permitted use will be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half tons
capacity, except for pick-up and delivery services.
   E.   Performance Standards. All activities will conform with the performance
standards established for the Light Industrial District (I-1).
   F.   Sign Requirements. Any sign erected will be done so in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in
Chapter 161.
   G.   Residential Uses. Any and all activities associated with allowable,
conforming, residential uses, (including accessory buildings and structures),
in this district will conform with those residential requirements as outlined
in the Multi-Family Residential District.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 1.0.
170.23   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2).
1.   General Description. This commercial district is designed to protect and
improve the Central Business District for the performance of its function,
which is to provide the primary center for commercial, financial, professional,
governmental, and cultural activities for the residents of the City.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the Central Business
District (C-2) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1).
   B.   Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping.
   C.   Appliance store.
   D.   Art gallery, art school.
   E.   Artist and industrial designer.
   F.   Automobile accessories store.
   G.   Automobile service station, (which may include not more than one
attached car wash bay).
   H.   Bait shop.
   I.   Bar, cocktail lounge, or tavern.
   J.   Better Business Bureau.
   K.   Bicycle sales, rental, and repair.
   L.   Billiard/pool hall.
   M.   Blueprinting shop.
   N.   Brewpub.
   O.   Bus passenger station.
   P.   Business machines store.
   Q.   Business and management consultant.
   R.   Business office.
   S.   Chamber of Commerce office.
   T.   Charitable organization.
   U.   China and glassware store.
   V.   Civic association.
   W.   Clothing rental agency.
   X.   Convenience store, (may be combined with other permissible uses in this
district)
   Y.   Credit agency.
   Z.   Department store.
   AA.   Detective agency.
   BB.   Drapery store.
   CC.   Employment agency.
   DD.   Engineering and architectural service.
   EE.   Fitness centers, health clubs.
   FF.   Floor coverings, including rugs and carpets.
   GG.   Furniture sales store.
   HH.   General minor repair and fix-it shop.
   II.   Gift Shop.
   JJ.   Gunsmithing and gun sales.
   KK.   Hardware store.
   LL.   Hobby shop.
   MM.   Hospital.
   NN.   Indoor skating rink.
   OO.   Interior decorating shop.
   PP.   Investment company.
   QQ.   Labor union and organization.
   RR.   Laboratories: medical, dental, commercial testing
   SS.   Landscape architect.
   TT.   Leather good and luggage store.
   UU.   Linoleum and tile store.
   VV.   Locksmith.
   WW.   Machine shop/pattern shop.
   XX.   Meeting halls and banquet facilities.
   YY.   Merchandising machines, sales of products.
   ZZ.   Merchants association.
   AAA.   Micro-distillery
   BBB.   Microbrewery.
   CCC.   Mortuary/funeral parlor
   DDD.   Museum
   EEE.   Music store.
   FFF.   News syndicate.
   GGG.   Newspaper office.
   HHH.   Newsstands.
   III.   Notions store.
   JJJ.   Office supplies store.
   KKK.   Paint and wallpaper store.
   LLL.   Pet shop.
   MMM.   Picture framing.
   NNN.   Political organization.
   OOO.   Printeries, publishing, engraving, or lithographing
   PPP.   Private club or lodge.
   QQQ.   Professional consultant.
   RRR.   Professional membership association.
   SSS.   Public vendors.
   TTT.   Radio and T.V. sales.
   UUU.   Record shop.
   VVV.   School and college.
   WWW.   Scientific research agency.
   XXX.   Security and commodity broker.
   YYY.   Social and fraternal association.
   ZZZ.   Swimming pool.
   AAAA.   Taxidermist.
   BBBB.   Theater, indoor only.
   CCCC.   Tobacco shop.
   DDDD.   Trade association.
   EEEE.   Transit and transportation facility.
   FFFF.   Travel agency.
   GGGG.   Veterinary clinic, animal hospital, and outside kennels in
connection therewith.
   HHHH.   Vocational school.
   IIII.   Woodworking and related-type shops.
   JJJJ.   Accessory uses or buildings customarily incidental to any of the
same general character as the foregoing permitted uses.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Any other use determined by the Board of Adjustment upon review to be
of the same general character as the foregoing principal permitted uses.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 75 feet
in height and no accessory structure will exceed 40 feet in height or the
elevation of the principal building as verified by a State licensed
professional engineer, whichever is less.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. None required, except that the minimum lot area requirements
for structures containing dwelling units are the same as those in the Multi-
Family Residential District (R-3) (See Section
170.20(5)).
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width:   None.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth:   None.
      (3)   Side Yard Widths:   None, except where adjoining a residential
district, then same as the least width required in that residential district.
      (4)   Rear Yard Depth:   None, except where adjoining a residential
district, then 10 feet is required.
6.   Special Provisions.
   A.   Scope of Operations. All business establishments will be retail trade
or service establishments dealing directly with consumers, and all goods
produced on the premises will be sold on the premises where produced.
   B.   Enclosure of Operations. All business, servicing, (including solid
waste collection and storage), or processing will be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings or structures, except:
      (1)   Off-street parking or loading.
      (2)   Accessory uses
   C.   Screening. Where a commercial use abuts or is across the street from a
residentially-zoned district, adequate screening shall be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission in accord with Section
170.43.
   D.   Parking Provisions. Parking spaces/areas will be provided, in
accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.52.
   E.   Performance Standards. All activities will conform with the performance
standards established for the Light Industrial District (I-1).
   F.   Sign Requirements. Any sign erected will be done so in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.53.
   G.   Residential Uses. Any and all activities associated with allowable,
conforming, residential uses, (including accessory buildings and structures),
in this district will conform with those residential requirements as outlined
in the Multi-Family Residential District.
   H.   Multiple principal uses and uses permitted by special exceptions are
allowed in a single building within this district.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.4.
170.24   HIGHWAY-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL SERVICE DISTRICT (C-3).
1.   General Description. This commercial district has been designated to
provide area for all types of retailing and service uses; certain wholesale and
warehousing uses; some limited industrial activities that are normally
associated with commercial uses and are non-objectionable in nature; automotive
service-type uses and automobile associated uses to serve the transient
interstate-highway traffic and tourist-related trades, such as drive-ins, etc.;
larger office buildings, complexes, and office parks; international
headquarters locations, research and high-tech complexes; large public
gathering activities and uses with high traffic volumes; and open space
recreational activities; to name just a few of the many potential uses for
these areas. This district is normally located along the interstate-highway and
major arterial and collector streets, capable of handling large volumes of
traffic. The parcels of land should be adequately sized and properly located to
allow for larger setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and egress, larger
parking areas needed to service the intended uses, and to promote a quality and
park-like atmosphere whereby the natural aesthetic value of these areas are
utilized and enhanced by appropriate development. The use of a Planned
Development District concept is desirable and preferable in these areas to
insure the desired results.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the Highway-Oriented
Commercial Service District (C-3) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any commercial or business use only, (no residential uses), as
permitted in the Central Business District.
   B.   Amusement parks and establishments, including: amusement rides, games,
arcades, miniature golf course, practice golf range, pool halls, dance halls,
swimming pools, skating rinks, archery ranges, shooting galleries, and similar
amusement facilities.
   C.   Auction rooms.
   D.   Adult use establishment.
   E.   Automobile diagnostic center.
   F.   Automobile driving instruction station.
   G.   Automobile laundries. (Car Wash).
   H.   Automobile rental.
   I.   Automobile repair shop.
   J.   Automobile sales and rentals.
   K.   Automobile undercoating service.
   L.   Boat sales.
   M.   Bottled gas dealer.
   N.   Bottling works.
   O.   Building services and supplies, including processed building materials.
   P.   Cartage, express and parcel delivery establishment.
   Q.   Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.
   R.   Commercial kennels.
   S.   Commercial marinas, docks, and related services.
   T.   Commercial swimming pool.
   U.   Contractor’s office or completely enclosed workshop/garage, with no
exterior storage of equipment or materials.
   V.   Disinfecting and exterminating service.
   W.   Drive-in restaurant.
   X.   Equipment rental and leasing service.
   Y.   Exhibition centers containing exhibition halls and meeting and outdoor
display areas, (retail sales space, restaurants with lounge, recreational
activities, etc.)
   Z.   Fairgrounds, including cattle and livestock exposition.
   AA.   Farm implement sales.
   BB.   Frozen food locker.
   CC.   Fuels and fuel oil dealer.
   DD.   Furniture repair, reupholster, and cleaning.
   EE.   Garages for storage, repair, and servicing of motor vehicles,
including body repair, painting, and engine rebuilding, where no outside
storage or work occurs.
   FF.   Garden supply store.
   GG.   Go-cart raceway and amusement rides.
   HH.   Golf course and country club.
   II.   Hotels.
   JJ.   Ice dealer and storage and distribution.
   KK.   Industrial launderer.
   LL.   International headquarters.
   MM.   Lawn mower repair shop.
   NN.   Locksmith shop.
   OO.   Machinery sales.
   PP.   Monument sales.
   QQ.   Motels.
   RR.   Camper and mobile home sales.
   SS.   Motorcycle service and repair.
   TT.   Packing and crating establishment.
   UU.   Paint contractor.
   VV.   Park, private.
   WW.   Planned commercial development, including such facilities as shopping
centers, malls, plazas, hotel/motel/restaurant complexes, office parks, etc.,
only under the provisions of the PDD process.
   XX.   Produce market.
   YY.   Public utility service facilities.
   ZZ.   Recreational gaming facilities.
   AAA.   Repair service – machinery and equipment.
   BBB.   Restaurants.
   CCC.   Retail feed and seed sales, but not bulk storage.
   DDD.   Riding stable.
   EEE.   Septic tank cleaning service.
   FFF.   Sewer cleaning and rodding service.
   GGG.   Sign contractor.
   HHH.   Signs and billboards.
   III.   Swimming pool sales and service.
   JJJ.   Tennis club.
   KKK.   Tire re-treading and repair shop.
   LLL.   Towing service.
   MMM.   Trampoline center.
   NNN.   Water softener service.
   OOO.   Welding shop.
   PPP.   Window cleaning firm.
   QQQ.   Wholesale and warehouse uses such as, but not limited to: direct
selling establishment, where products are stored and distributed; other
wholesale and warehouse establishments; wholesale bakery; wholesale nursery;
wholesale meat cutting and processing, but not including meatpacking.
   RRR.   Industrial type uses such as, but not limited to, assembly firm,
without fabrication, of completely fabricated parts; dairy products
manufacturer; printing, publishing, and lithography establishment.
   SSS.   Accessory uses, buildings, or other structures and devices
customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use,
provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership, on the same
parcel, and do not include structures or features inconsistent with the
permitted use.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Campgrounds.
   B.   Contractor’s storage yard.
   C.   Model home and garage displays.
   D.   Theater, drive-in.
   E.   Stadium and auditorium.
   F.   Truck service station or truck terminal.
   G.   Outdoor storage facilities, not including junk yards.
   H.   Warehousing uses.
   I.   Any other use determined by the Board of Adjustment upon review to be
of the same general character as the foregoing permitted uses.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 100
feet in height and no accessory structure will exceed 40 feet in height or the
elevation of the principal building as verified by a State licensed
professional engineer, whichever is less.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. None required. The minimum lot width, setbacks, on-site
parking requirements, floor area ratio, building codes, maximum lot coverages,
etc., will ultimately determine minimum lot areas.
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot and yard
width requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width:   150 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth:   50 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Width:   None, except where adjoining a residential
district, then the same or the least width required in that residential
district.
      (4)   Rear Yard Depth:   10 feet, except where adjoining a residential
district, then the same as required in that district.
6.   Special Provisions.
   A.   Enclosure of Operations. All business, servicing, (including solid
waste collection and storage), or processing will be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings or structures, except:
      (1)   Off-street parking or loading.
      (2)   Accessory uses when allowed by a special exception.
   B.   Screening. Where a commercial use abuts or is across the street from a
residentially-zoned district, adequate screening will be provided in accord
with Section
170.43.
   C.   Parking Provisions. Parking spaces and areas will be provided, in
accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.52.
   D.   Performance Standards. All activities will conform with the performance
standards established for the Light Industrial District (I-1).
   E.   Sign Requirements. Any sign erected will be done so in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.53.
   F.   Outdoor Sales. All outdoor sales space will be provided with a
permanent durable and dustless surface, and will be graded and drained so as to
properly dispose of all surface water.
   G.   Outdoor Storage. Generally, outdoor storage will not be permitted, and
when permitted upon review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Council, all outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials, products, and
all objectionable materials will be enclosed by a fence, wall, or plant
materials adequate to completely conceal such facilities from any adjacent
properties and any public right-of-way.
   H.   Waste Materials. No materials or wastes will be deposited upon a lot in
such a form that may be transferred off the property by natural causes or
forces.
7.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.5.
8.   Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than 60 percent of the lot area may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
170.25   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1).
1.   General Description. This industrial district has been designated to
provide areas for development by industrial firms that have high standards of
performance and that can be located in close proximity to residential and
commercial uses. These district regulations are designed to permit the
operations of most manufacturing, wholesaling, and warehousing activities with
adequate protection to adjacent district uses and sufficient control of
external effects to protect one industry from another. Some retail uses are
permitted that service the industrial uses within the industrial area or that
do not depend upon the direct visits of retail customers. No outdoor storage is
allowed in this district and all industrial operations must be in an enclosed
building, unless otherwise provided for herein.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Light Industrial
District (I-1) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Any use or structure permitted in the Highway-Oriented Commercial
Service District (C-3).
   B.   Contractor’s storage yard when properly screened to obstruct the view.
   C.   Lumber processing yard, including millworks and saw mills, when
properly screened to obstruct the view.
   D.   Automobile repair garage with special conditions.
   E.   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of
such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries,
and food products.
   F.   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared material: canvas,
cellophane, cloth, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-
precious metals or stone, rubber, textiles, wood, and yarn.
   G.   Assembly firm, without fabrication, of completely fabricated parts.
   H.   Firms involved in the servicing, packaging or storage of commodities
produced in the I-1 district.
   I.   Laboratory and research firm involved in the research, experimentation,
or testing of materials, goods, or products.
   J.   The manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances including, but not
limited to, refrigerators and stoves; electronic instruments and devices
including, but not limited to, phonographs, radio, and television sets; and
electric and neon signs.
   K.   Planned Development District.
   L.   Accessory uses, buildings or other structures, and devices customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted use or special use may
be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership on the same parcel, and do not include structures or features
inconsistent with the permitted use or special use.
   M.   Warehousing or mini-warehousing uses.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Outdoor storage facilities.
   B.   Any other use that is determined by the Board of Adjustment upon review
to be of the same general character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not
including any use which may become noxious or offensive in an I-1 district. In
determining the character or nature of such use, the Board of Adjustment will
refer to Section
170.25(7)(D).
4.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
Light Industrial District (I-1):
   A.   Dwellings, except for watchman or caretaker on the premises.
   B.   Churches or temples, schools, hospitals, clinics, and other
institutions for human care, except when incidental to a permitted use.
   C.   Auto salvage and wrecking operations, industrial metal and waste
salvage operations, and junk yards.
   D.   Manufacture and storage of ammunition, dynamite, and other high
explosives.
5.   Height Regulations. No building or structure will exceed 100 feet in
height and no accessory structure will exceed 40 feet in height.
6.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. None required. The minimum lot width, setbacks, on-site
parking requirements, floor area ratios, building codes, maximum lot coverage,
etc., will ultimately determine minimum lot areas.
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot and yard
width requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width.   150 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth.   50 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Width and Rear Yard Depth:   Side and rear yards will be
governed by the requirement that buildings will adjoin public space, yards, or
streets on three sides and that each such space will be not less than 20 feet.
7.   Special Provisions.
   A.   Enclosure of Operations. All industrial operations, including off-
street loading space, (and solid waste collection and storage), or processing
will take place within completely enclosed buildings or structures.
   B.   Screening. Where an office, commercial, or industrial use abuts or is
across the street from a residential district, adequate screening and
landscaping will be provided in accordance with Section
170.43.
   C.   Parking Provisions. Parking spaces/areas will be provided, in
accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.52.
   D.   Performance Standards. Any use established in this district after the
effective date of this Zoning Code will be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards governing Subparagraphs (1) - (8). Where the performance
standards required by this Code are less restrictive than comparable
requirements imposed by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation of any kind of the State of Iowa or another governmental agency, the
more restrictive will govern. Uses already established on the effective date of
this Code will be permitted to be altered, enlarged, expanded, or modified
provided that the additions or changes comply with said performance standards.
      (1)   Noise. For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of
sound, the sound level meter, the octave band analyzer, and the impact noise
analyzer will be employed. The flat network and the fast meter response of the
sound level meter will be used. Sounds of very short duration, as forge
hammers, punch presses, and metal shears which cannot be measured accurately
with the sound level meter will be measured with the impact noise analyzer.
Octave band analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies (United States of
America Standard S16-1967, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements)
will be used in the table herein “Octave Band, Preferred Frequencies.” Octave
band analyzers calibrated with the pre-1960 octave bands (U.S.A.S. Z24. 10-
1953, Octave Band Filter Set) will be used with the tables herein “Octave Band,
Pre-1960”. The following uses and activities will be exempt from the noise
level regulations:
         a.   Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
         b.   Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities
between 7:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory
to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature or conducted
infrequently.
         c.   The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency
pressure relief valves which are used infrequently.
         d.   Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks,
airplanes, and railroads. The decibel values specified for residentially zoned
districts will be reduced by five decibels between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:30 a.m. Noises from essential services are excluded from this nighttime
reduction. The generation of noise will not exceed the decibel limits
prescribed below.
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels
Decibels (Re. .0002                                Adjacent Residential
Microbar) Octave Band Pre- Adjacent Lot (Decibels) District (Decibels)
1960 (Cycles/Sec.)
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels
Decibels (Re. .0002                                Adjacent Residential
Microbar) Octave Band Pre- Adjacent Lot (Decibels) District (Decibels)
1960 (Cycles/Sec.)
20-75                      79                      72
75-150                     74                      67
150-300                    66                      59
300-600                    59                      52
600-1,200                  53                      46
1,200-2,400                47                      40
2,400-4,800                41                      34
Above 4,800                39                      32
 
Octave Band Freq. (Cycles/ Adjacent Lot District  Adjacent Preferred
sec.)                      (Decibels)             Residential (Decibels)
Octave Band Freq. (Cycles/ Adjacent Lot District  Adjacent Preferred
sec.)                      (Decibels)             Residential (Decibels)
31.5                       83                     76
63                         78                     71
125                        72                     65
250                        64                     57
500                        57                     50
1,000                      51                     45
2,000                      46                     39
4,000                      41                     34
8,000                      38                     32
Also, impact noises measured on an impact noise analyzer will not exceed the
following peak intensities:
                           Adjacent Lot           Adjacent Residential District
Overall Peak               86 db                  80 db
 
      (2)   Vibration. No activity or operation will cause or create earth
borne vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below. Measurements
will be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or nearest residentially-zoned
district boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements will be
measured with an instrument or complement of instruments capable of
simultaneously measuring in three mutually perpendicular directions. The
maximum vector will be less than the vibrations displacement permitted. The
maximum permitted displacements will be permitted in each district by the
following formula:
       K
D = f
Where: D = Displacement in inches
K = A constant to be determined by reference to the following tables
f = The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles per
second.
The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below will be
determined by use of the formula in the preceding paragraph and the appropriate
K constant shown as follows:
Values of K to be used in vibration formula:
Location K
Values of K to be used in vibration formula:
Location                                  K
In any neighboring lot:
Continuous                                0.008
Impulsive                                 0.015
Less than eight pulses per 24-hour period 0.037
In any residentially-zoned district:
Continuous                                0.003
Impulsive                                 0.006
Less than eight pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
 
      (3)   Smoke and Particulate Matter. The standards and controls of the
Quad City Regional Air Pollution Control Board with reference to smoke and
particulate matter will be the controlling regulation in the City. However, in
the absence of such control, the following will be the controlling standard:
For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the
Ringelmann Chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular
8333 (May 1967) will be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter
of a density or equivalent opacity equal to or greater than No. 2 on the
Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided
hereinafter. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like within lot boundaries will
be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing,
wetting or other acceptable means. No operation will cause or allow to be
emitted into the open air from any process or control equipment or to pass any
convenient measuring point in a breaching or stack, particulate matter in the
gases that exceeds 0.35 grains per standard cubic foot (70 degrees Fahrenheit
and 14.7 psi) of gases during any one hour. Particulate matter loading in
pounds per acre described below will be determined by selecting a continuous
four-hour period which will result in the highest average emission rate. The
emission of smoke having a density or equivalent opacity in excess of
Ringelmann No. 1 is prohibited. However, for two minutes in any four-hour
period, smoke up to and including Ringelmann No. 2 will be permitted. The rate
of emission of particulate matter from all vents and stacks within the
boundaries of any lot will not exceed 0.5 pounds per hour per acre of lot area.
      (4)   Toxic matter. The release of airborne toxic matter will not exceed
one-eighth of the “Threshold Limit Values for 1967” as adopted by the American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, when measured at any point
beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation, whichever
is more restrictive. Concentrations will be measured and calculated as the
highest average that will occur over a continuous 24-hour period. If a toxic
substance is not listed, the applicant will satisfy the City that the proposed
level will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or injurious to
plant and animal life.
      (5)   Odorous matter. When odorous matter is released from any operation,
activity, or use, the concentration of such odorous materials will not exceed
the odor threshold when measured beyond the lot line, either at ground level or
habitable elevation.
      (6)   Fire and explosion hazards.
         a.   Detonable Materials. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation is limited to five pounds.
Such materials will include, but are not limited to: all primary explosives
such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene; all high
explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid; propellants and
components thereof, such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides,
hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as
dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds such as acetylides,
tetrazoles, and ozonides; unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent.
         b.   Flammable Solids. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intensive burning is permitted
provided said materials or products will be stored, utilized, or manufactured
within completely enclosed buildings having not less than two-hour fire-
resistant exterior walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing
system.
         c.   Flammable Liquids and Gases. The storage, utilization, or
manufacture of flammable liquids will be permitted in accordance with the
following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers, which will be unrestricted. Aboveground flammable liquids and gas
storage tanks will not be less than 50 feet from all lot lines. Flammable
liquids and gases in original sealed containers of 55-gallons liquid capacity
or less may be stored or utilized without restriction.
 
Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted (In Gallons)
Within Enclosed Buildings                                                Above- Underground
                                                                         ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° but less than 300° 20,000 100,000
Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point from and including 105°       10,000 100,000
Fahrenheit to and including 187° Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° Fahrenheit  3,000  100,000
 
When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure
will not exceed 30 times the quantities listed above.
      (7)   Glare. Any operation or activity, (including lighted signage),
producing glare will be conducted so that direct, indirect, and reflected
illumination from any source of light on any lot will not cause illumination in
excess of one-half foot candle when measured at any point on any adjoining
property. No fluctuating, revolving, flickering, flashing, or other such non-
constant sources of lighting will be allowed.
      (8)   Radiation hazards. The release of radioactive materials or the
emission of ionizing radiation outside of property lines will be in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the State or the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. Unsealed radioactive materials will not be manufactured, utilized,
or stored except when such materials are stored in a radioactive-proof
container stored at or below ground level.
   E.   Sign Requirements. Any sign erected will be done so in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.53.
   F.   Outdoor Sales. All outdoor sales space will be provided with a
permanent, durable, and dustless surface and will be graded and drained as to
properly dispose of all surface water.
   G.   Outdoor Storage. When permitted, all outdoor storage facilities for
fuel, raw materials, products, and all objectionable materials will be enclosed
by a fence, wall, or plant materials adequate to completely conceal such
facilities from any adjacent properties and any public right-of-way.
   H.   Waste Materials. No materials or waste will be deposited upon a lot in
such a form that may be transferred off the property by natural causes or
forces.
8.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.6.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than 40 percent of the lot area may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
170.26   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2).
1.   General Description. This industrial district has been designated to
provide for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in
the districts established by this Zoning Code. This district is designed
primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabricating activities, including
large scale or specialized operations, whose external effects will be felt to
some degree by surrounding districts. Less restriction is placed upon outdoor
use and storage, although such use must conform to the performance standards of
the district. Certain uses with established functions in the economy, but
having a well-known nuisance potential, are permitted only by special
exception. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it most
desirable that they be separated from residential and commercial uses by
adequate buffers or screening.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in a Heavy Industrial
District (I-2) may be used for any commercial or industrial use, (including
PDD), with the following exceptions or as noted otherwise:
   A.   Uses not complying with this Code or any other City, County, State, or
federal regulation or law.
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Cement, lime, or gypsum manufacture.
   B.   Commercial feedlot or confinement operation
   C.   Petroleum and inflammable liquids refining and production.
   D.   Excavation and extraction of sand, gravel, dirt, topsoil, and other
resources.
   E.   Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane, butane, or other
petroleum products.
   F.   Waste disposal plants of all types including, but not limited to,
trash, garbage, sewage treatment, etc.
   G.   Outdoor storage facilities.
   H.   Automobile salvage or junk yard, building material salvage yard, scrap
metal storage yard, or other salvage yard of any kind, provided that, all such
operations are conducted in such a manner that all operation, display, or
storage of material or equipment is so screened by ornamental fences, walks, or
permanent planting that it cannot be seen from any public right-of-way or from
adjoining lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level, and provided
further, however, that no such screening in excess of eight feet in height will
be required.
   I.   Any other use determined by the Board of Adjustment upon review to be
of the same general character as the foregoing permitted special exceptions.
4.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
Heavy Industrial District:
   A.   Dwellings, except for watchman or caretaker facilities on the premises.
   B.   Churches, schools, hospitals, clinics, and other institutions for human
care, except when incidental to a permitted use.
5.   Height Regulations. No building or structure will exceed 100 feet in
height and no accessory structure will exceed 40 feet in height.
6.   Lot area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements.
   A.   Lot Area. None required. The minimum lot width, setbacks, on-site
parking requirements, floor area ratio, building codes, maximum lot coverage,
etc., will ultimately determine the minimum lot area.
   B.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot and yard
width requirements will apply:
      (1)   Lot Width:   150 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth:   50 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Width and Rear Yard Depth:   Side and rear yards will be
governed by the requirement that buildings will adjoin public space, yards, or
streets on three sides and that each such space will be not less than 20 feet.
7.   Special Provisions.
   A.   Enclosure of Operations. Industrial operations, including storage, in
this district may take place outdoors only if permitted upon review by the
Board of Adjustment. (Solid waste collection and storage or processing will be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings or structures).
   B.   Screening. Where an industrial use in this district abuts or is across
the street from any other district, adequate screening and landscaping will be
provided in accordance with Section
170.43. Further, when permitted, all outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw
materials, products, and all objectionable materials will be enclosed by a
fence, wall, or plant materials adequate to completely conceal such facilities
from any adjacent properties and any public right-of-way.
   C.   Parking Provisions. Parking spaces and areas will be provided, in
accordance with the applicable regulations, as set forth in Section
170.52.
   D.   Performance Standards. Any use established in this district after the
effective date of this Zoning Code will be so operated as to comply with the
performance standards set forth in Section
170.25(7)(D), except as hereinafter modified:
      (1)   Noise. When a use or lot in this district is not adjacent to any
commercial or residentially zoned district or use, the Adjacent Lot - Maximum
Permitted Sound Levels as specified, do not apply. (See Section
170.25(7)(D)(1)(d)).
      (2)   Smoke and particulate matter. The emission rate of smoke having a
density or equivalent opacity equal to or greater than Ringelmann No. 2 is
prohibited, except for six minutes in any one-hour period, when such density
may be exceeded. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and
vents within the boundaries of any lot will not exceed three pounds per hour
per acre of lot area. (See Section
170.25(D)(3)).
      (3)   Detonable Materials. Quantities in excess of five pounds of such
materials may be stored or utilized but not manufactured. (See Section
170.25(D)(6)(a)).
      (4)   Flammable solids. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid
materials or products as specified herein may take place outdoors if done so
not less than 50 feet from any lot line and only if approved by the Board of
Adjustment. (See Section
170.25(D)(6)(b)).
      (5)   Flammable liquids and gases. The above-ground storage, utilization
or manufacture of flammable liquids will be permitted in accordance with the
following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers, which will be unrestricted.
Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted (In Gallons):
Total Capacity of Flammable Materials Permitted (In Gallons):
Industries Engaged in Storage for Resale:
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° Fahrenheit, but less than400,000
300° Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point from and including 105° Fahrenheit 200,000
to and including 187° Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° Fahrenheit       100,000
TOTAL                                                                         700,000
Industries Engaged in Utilization and Manufacture of Flammable Materials Where
Storage is an Ancillary Use:
Materials having a closed cup flash point of over 187° Fahrenheit, but less  200,000
than 300° Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point from and including 105° Fahrenheit
to and including                                                              100,000
187° Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° Fahrenheit       50,000
TOTAL                                                                         350,000
***The quantity of flammable liquids or materials stored below-ground are
unrestricted.
 
      (5)   Sign Requirements. Any sign erected will be done so in accordance
with the applicable regulations set forth in Section
170.53.
      (6)   Outdoor Sales. All outdoor sales space will be provided with a
permanent, durable, and dustless surface and will be graded and drained as to
properly dispose of all surface water.
      (7)   Waste Materials. No materials or waste will be deposited upon a lot
in such a form that may be transferred off the property by natural causes or
forces.
8.   Floor Area Ratio. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 2.0.
9.   Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than 60 percent of the lot area may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
170.27   OVERLAY FLOOD DISTRICTS.
See
Chapter 165 – Floodplain Management.
170.28   OVERLAY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PDD).
1.   General Description and Purposes of District. This overlay planned
development district (PDD) district has been established to promote to the
extent possible;
   A.   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by
allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict application
of the other sections of this Zoning Code or the Subdivision Development
Regulations, while preserving the primary purposes and intent of this Zoning
Code;
   B.   The permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas
and facilities;
   C.   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic,
and geologic features;
   D.   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that results in better development, design, and the construction of aesthetic
amenities;
   E.   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, and other facilities, such as, but not limited to, cluster
developments;
   F.   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
and welfare;
   G.   A substitute procedure for the review of subdivisions and zoning-
related issues, (i.e., variances, special exceptions, etc.);
   H.   Developments which incorporate a single type or a variety of related
uses which are planned and developed as a unit, but which depart from the
specified standards and requirements of other sections of this Zoning Code or
the Subdivision Development Regulations; and,
   I.   The provision of amenities, facilities, and open spaces not otherwise
required by law.
The foregoing purposes and principles will not be interpreted to permit the
further reduction of standards and minimum requirements set forth in this
section.
2.   Procedures For the Submittal, Review, and Consideration of Planned
Development District (PDD) Proposals. The procedures used in the submittal,
review, and consideration of PDD proposals will be as follows:
   A.   Planning Consultation, Sketch Plan Discussion, and Preliminary Review
Requirements.
      (1)   Planning Consultation. In order to make the most of the
opportunities related to the PDD process and to conserve time, effort, and
expense, the developer should consult with the Council, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the City Administrator, and other public officials prior to the
preparation of the tentative plan of the PDD. The City’s comprehensive plans
should be reviewed to determine how the proposed PDD will fit into those plans.
Requirements of the master street development plan; school and recreational
sites; shopping centers, community facilities; sanitation; water supply,
drainage, and erosion; and relationship to other developments, existing and
proposed in the vicinity, should be determined in advance of the preparation of
the PDD plan. Consultation should also be held with those familiar with the
economic factors affecting the PDD. A thorough estimate of the situation will
result in sound decisions with respect to the form, character, and extent of
the proposed PDD. Land, which the City finds to be unsuitable for designation
as a PDD due to flooding or poor drainage characteristics, or topographic
features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, and general health of
future residents, will not be so designated until the objectionable features
have been eliminated, or until adequate safeguards against such hazards are
provided. In applicable cases, plans will be reviewed by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) and their findings and recommendations incorporated in
the approval of such plans.
      (2)   Sketch Plan Discussion and Preliminary Review Requirements. Prior
to the filing of a formal application for a PDD zoning amendment it shall be
required that the developer submit to the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer certain materials relating to the proposed PDD. These materials will
include information relative to the site, conditions of the site, existing
community facilities, and utilities on and adjacent to the site, number and
size of lots proposed, existing and proposed structures, etc. These materials
will include as a minimum:
         a.   Location Plan. This is a plan showing the location and
relationship of the proposed PDD to the City in general, streets, and other
community facilities serving it. This plan will include, as a minimum, the
following:
            (i)   PDD name in bold letters, centered at the top of the plan
            (ii)   Bold, heavy outline of area to be included in PDD.
            (iii)   Existing streets and City utilities on/or adjoining the
property to be included in the PDD.
            (iv)   North point, graphic bar scale, and date.
            (v)   Outline of the Overlay Floodplain District area as described
in Section
170.27 of this Zoning Code, if the proposed PDD lies within said district.
         b.   Sketch Plan(s). This is a plan or a set of plans showing the
proposed layout of streets, lots, structures, (including architectural
renderings, etc.), and other features of the specific site proposed for the PDD
in relation to existing conditions, features, and structures, as well as
existing topographic data.
The PDD sketch plan discussion and preliminary review process does not require
formal applications, fees, or filings. The Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer will submit the required, submitted, materials to the Planning and
Zoning Commission at their next regularly scheduled meeting. (See Section
170.35) The Planning and Zoning Commission will, within 30 days from the date
of the meeting at which the materials are reviewed, make known its comments
regarding the proposed PDD to the developer and the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
   B.   Preliminary PDD Plan and Rezoning Application Preparation and Filing
Requirements. An application for the preliminary consideration of a request for
a rezoning to the PDD Zoning District, (See Appendix), will be accompanied by a
filing fee specified by resolution of the Council, a preliminary PDD plan and
related documents meeting the requirements of Sections
170.14(9) of the Subdivision Development Regulations, the information, (as
revised, if necessary), contained in Sections 170.28 – 170.28(2)(A) and above,
and any other information deemed necessary by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer to insure that the proposed PDD zoning district amendment
will conform to the City’s Comprehensive Plan and to the purposes of a PDD
Zoning District as set forth in Section 170.28 above.
      (1)   Additional Filing Information Required. In addition to the filing
information requirements specified above, the following information will be
supplied by the developer at the time of filing:
         a.   Character. A written narrative, explaining the character of the
PDD and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations.
         b.   Ownership. A statement of present and proposed ownership of all
land within the project, including present tract designation.
         c.   Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
            (i)   Stages in which the project will be built, with emphasis on
public areas and facilities to be developed with each stage, will be shown on
the plan and through supporting graphic material.
            (ii)   Completion date or dates of new construction for above- and
below-ground facilities, utilities, and buffer zones or screening. (See also
170.28(2)(D) below)
            (iii)   If different land use types are to be included within the
planned unit development, the schedule must include the mix of uses to be built
in each stage.
         d.   Density. Provide information on the density of residential uses
and the number of dwelling units by type.
         e.   Use. Provide a list of uses planned for the ancillary and
nonresidential areas.
         f.   Architectural Plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all
primary buildings will be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an
understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and
the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
         g.   Unsubdivided Lands. Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use
area, including land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and
dwelling units per acre.
         h.   Common Open Space Documents. All common open space will be either
conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a nonprofit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and
residents of the Planned Development District, or retained by the developer
with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the City, that the
common open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as open area.
All land conveyed to a nonprofit corporation or like entity will be subject to
the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for
maintenance and improvement of the common open space.
   C.   Preliminary PDD Plan or Rezoning Application Hearing and Review
Processes. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council will conduct
their respective hearings, reviews, and considerations of a proposed,
preliminary PDD rezoning request pursuant to the amendment provisions contained
within Section
170.37(10). Approval of the preliminary PDD rezoning request by the Council
does not constitute approval of the PDD Zoning District, but is merely an
authorization and an expression of interest by the City which will serve as a
guide to the developer in preparation of the final PDD; plan and any
preliminary PDD plan not finally approved by the Council is revocable by the
Council pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. A PDD rezoning
request may be submitted for preliminary, combined with, final approval if all
of the land is to be developed at one time, (any and all development completed
within two years from the date of approval of the PDD plan), and if all
requirements as specified herein are met.
   D.   Final PDD Plan or Rezoning Application Preparation and Filing
Requirements. An application for the final consideration of a request for a
rezoning to the PDD Zoning District, (See Appendix), will be accompanied by a
filing fee specified by resolution of the Council, a final PDD plan which will
conform substantially to the approved, preliminary PDD plan or subject to minor
changes, and related documents meeting the requirements of Sections 171.11(1)
(J)-2(B) of the Subdivision Development Regulations, and any other information
deemed necessary by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer to insure that
the proposed PDD Zoning District amendment will conform to the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and to the purposes of a PDD Zoning District as set forth in
Section 170.28. A final PDD plan may be submitted in stages with each stage
reflecting the approved preliminary PDD plan, provided, however, that said
stages conform to all of the requirements set forth herein and a submittal
schedule is approved as a part of the preliminary approval process. If a
staged-submittal process is used, all submittals must conform with the agreed-
to schedule and no submittal will be allowed later than five years from the
approval date of the preliminary PDD plan by the Council. The Council may grant
an extension of time for a submittal or the developer may resubmit an entirely
new preliminary PDD rezoning request application for consideration. In the
event that no action is taken on behalf of the developer in conformance with
the above, the Council will initiate such zoning amendments as it deems
necessary to preserve the public interest. If development falls more than two
years behind the schedule filed with the preliminary or final PDD plan, the
plan becomes subject to revocation. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
will monitor all pending PDD projects and inform the Council of those plans six
months or more behind schedule.
   E.   Final PDD Plan or Rezoning Application Hearing and Review Processes.
The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council will conduct their
respective hearings, reviews, and considerations of a proposed, final PDD
rezoning request pursuant to the amendment provisions contained within Section
170.37.
      (1)   Recording the Final Planned Development District Plan. An approved
final PDD plan will be filed with the County Recorder within 30 days of the
date of approval by the Council, and if not filed within such time, will have
no validity and will not be recorded without reapproval by the Council and
recertification by the Clerk. Within five working days after recording, a duly
noted, recorded copy will be filed with the Clerk of the City. The construction
of any public improvements or the issuance of any building permits in the PDD
Zoning District will be allowed only after recording of the final PDD plan with
the County Recorder and submittal of said recorded plan to the Clerk. The
recording of the final plan will inform all who deal with the planned unit
development of the restrictions placed upon the land and will serve as a zoning
control device notification.
      (2)   Changes in the Planned Development District Plan. The planned
development district will be developed according to the approved, recorded, and
filed final PDD plan, except where authorized changes or amendments are
permitted. The recorded plan and supporting data together with all recorded
amendments will be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees, and
assigns, and will limit and control the use of premises and location of
structures in the planned development district project as set forth therein.
         a.   Major Changes. A change in the approved preliminary or final PDD
plan which alters the concept or intent of the planned development district
including a change in usage, the configuration, increase in floor area or the
height of buildings, an increase in intensity, a reduction of proposed open
space, a change in road locations or standards, a change in the final governing
agreement, provisions or covenants, or other such changes will be deemed a
major change, and will be reviewed and considered only by submission of a new
preliminary and final PDD plan. All approved major changes in the final PDD
plan will be recorded with the County Recorder as amendments to the final PDD
plan as specified above.
         b.   Minor Changes. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may
approve minor changes in the planned development district plan which do not
change the concept or intent of the development, without going through the
submittal, review, and consideration steps. Minor changes will be any change
not defined as a major change.
3.   Minimum Standards for Consideration and General Scope of Authorized
Variances Within the PDD Concept. The site under consideration for any PDD
rezoning request must;
   A.   Be under single ownership or unified control;
   B.   Be not less than four acres in size, and;
   C.   Not more than 60 percent of the ground area of any PDD may be devoted
to the principal uses permitted, (i.e. structures, parking areas, etc.).
Any PDD concept may depart from strict compliance with the required density,
dimension, area, height, bulk, use, and other similar regulations listed for
the standard zoning districts and subdivision regulations and other provisions
of this Zoning Code so long as the PDD project will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare; and
only if said variances are so authorized and approved by the Council throughout
the PDD review and consideration processes as outlined herein.
170.29   OVERLAY GREENWAY DISTRICT (GD).
1.   General Description and Purposes of District. With increasing urban
development pressures within the City, the Overlay Greenway District (GD) has
been established to promote the preservation of those existing City natural
resources and environmentally sensitive areas that are deemed to be essential
to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of our residents. These
areas allow for the natural filtration of streams and rivers and provide
improved stormwater and floodplain management. These areas promote erosion
control along waterfronts and ravines and create protective buffers for
woodlands and prairies. These typically linear corridors protect migration
routes for wildlife and allow for the interconnection of recreation and multi-
purpose trails. These areas can provide opportunities for urban landscaping and
design and economic development associated with increased property values,
recreation related retail sales, and rental enterprises, tourism attractions,
and quality of life initiatives which can attract corporations and businesses
to our City. Greenways have been further defined as “passive” and “active” or a
combination of these types. These definitions aid in the prioritization
process, strategies for implementation, and these development standards. The
foregoing purposes and principles will not be interpreted to permit the further
reduction of standards and minimum requirements set forth in this section.
2.   Greenway Districts (Areas Defined). The following greenway areas are
hereby established within the City:
   A.   Mississippi River. The City recognizes the value and importance of the
Mississippi River as a tourist attraction, commercial and environmental
resource, and panoramic wonder. It is designated as an existing and future
active greenway with passive components. The Great River Road of Iowa, (U.S.
67), parallels the shoreline of the river as well as a major railroad corridor.
This river corridor is envisioned to be vital, distinctive, and accessible,
coordinated in its use, and integrated through good design.
   B.   Cody Trail. This active greenway, developed from the Iowa
Sesquicentennial Celebration of 1996, embraces a part of the history of the
County and the City. The Cody Trail provides a historic and scenic on-road, 12-
mile route throughout Northern Scott County. This trail highlights the
birthplace and boyhood home(s) of William Frederick (Buffalo Bill) Cody in and
around the City area. In the City, this trail starts in the 1,000 block of
North Cody Road (U.S. 67), continues on Cody Road North to Territorial Road,
and then proceeds West on Territorial Road to the City’s Westernmost corporate
limits, (23rd Street).
   C.   Valley Drive Corridor. Valley Drive is proposed as a future active
greenway. A spur from the Great River Trail is proposed which would preserve
the scenic, forested, bluff areas along the on-road trail route.
   D.   West Sycamore Creek. Future passive greenways are proposed for this
relatively minor drainage area located on the West side of I-80. Protection
from erosion and improved water quality in these areas will benefit the
Mississippi River at its confluence.
   E.   East Sycamore Creek. A trail spur from the Great River Trail will
complement this future active greenway. The creek flows nearby the Mississippi
Valley Welcome Center, which is promoted as an area gateway to the Quad-Cities.
This greenway also provides a connection to 15th Street Park and surrounding
residential subdivisions.
   F.   Silver Creek. This passive greenway watershed contains 1,327 acres and
flows into the Mississippi River. Protecting the stream bank and water quality,
while providing a wildlife corridor, is a priority of this greenway.
   G.   McCarty Creek. This passive greenway watershed contains 3,894 acres.
This stream flows adjacent to the City Quarries along Territory Road. Future
reclamation plans will convert the existing quarry site into a lake and open
space recreational area at the conclusion of the mining process. Protection
from run-off, erosion, and sedimentation control are primary concerns in this
greenway.
170.30   INFILL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (IDOD).
1.   General Description and Purposes of District. The Infill Development
Overlay District (IDOD) has been established to encourage infill and
redevelopment in the older residential area to include parcels of land that do
not meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the Zoning Code as well as
those that do meet the minimum requirements. It has been established to
encourage development that maintains the character of existing neighborhood
buildings and structures; to permit a flexible approach to providing single-
family houses; and to foster well-planned, modest homes in a residential area
in keeping with the visual character of the neighborhood.
   A.   Allowing development of single-family homes in close proximity to each
other within the district and within a limited area;
   B.   Preserving and restoring the overall character of the identified
overlay district area;
   C.   Promoting a balance of home sizes;
   D.   Promoting the opportunity for people to develop residences in areas of
land that would not otherwise be developed;
   E.   Promoting a high level of design quality; and
   F.   Facilitating development proposals responsive to current and future
market conditions.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. Property and buildings in the Infill Development
Overlay District (IDOD) will be used only for the following purposes:
   A.   Single-family detached dwelling, either site-built or pre-fabricated
modular home, providing compliance with the provisions of the following
subsections on density, floor area ratio, and minimum dwelling size.
   B.   Accessory uses or building which are customarily incidental to any of
the above stated use.
   C.   Planned Development District (PDD).
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   Church, temple, synagogue, or mosque.
   B.   Childcare center.
   C.   Two-family dwellings, assuming underlying zoning district is either R-
2 or R-3.
   D.   Home occupation.
   E.   Municipal administrative or public service building or properties,
except storage yards, warehouses, or garages, connected therewith.
   F.   Park, playground, or community center.
   G.   Public library and similar public culture uses.
   H.   Public school or private school offering general educational courses
the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
   I.   Public utility service facilities - such as, but not limited to, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, water tower or
well, sanitary sewer lift stations and treatment facilities, and
telecommunication facilities.
(Subsection 3 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 35 feet
in height and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the principal
building as verified by a State licensed professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements. Lot area and yard requirements
are significantly more flexible than the traditional requirements of the
Single-Family Residential District (R-1), under the stipulations that the lot
and dwelling will not create additional nuisances towards neighbors, and will
meet other additional development standards of the Infill Development Overlay
District, including:
   A.   The proposed building or structure is consistent in architectural
style, scale, setbacks, and frontage with abutting structures, and those in the
immediate neighborhood.
   B.   Each lot will have access and utility service comparable to that
serving nearby properties.
   C.   No traffic congestion, health, or safety limitations would be created
by the development.
   D.   Access shall be provided to the extent feasible through an existing
side street or a shared driveway; curb cuts shall be minimized.
   E.   Lot area. The following minimum lot area requirements will apply:
      (1)   5,000 square feet.
   F.   Lot Width and Yard Requirements. The following minimum lot width and
yard requirements will be observed:
      (1)   Lot Width   60 feet.
      (2)   Front Yard Depth   25 feet.
      (3)   Side Yard Minimum Width   5 feet.
      (4)   Sum of Side Yard Widths   10 feet.
      (5)   Rear Yard Depth   30 feet.
6.   Density. The allowable residential density in this zoning district will
not exceed 9.3 dwelling units per acre, except under the provisions of a PDD.
7.   Floor Area Ration. The allowable floor area ratio in this zoning district
will not exceed 0.4.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. Each single-family detached dwelling and any
other structure occupied, in whole or in part, for residential purposes will
contain at least 1,000 square feet of finished square feet.
9.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. The minimum horizontal distance between
any buildings will be 10 feet for single-family dwellings.
10.   Minimum Structure Width. The minimum dimension (width) of the main body
of any residential structure will not be less than 22 feet for at least 75
percent of the distance of the major dimension (length).
11.   Parking Standards. Newly constructed homes in the Infill Development
Overlay District shall include off-street parking amenities for at least two
vehicles. A continuous parking surface such as concrete, asphalt, paver bricks,
or other alternative materials that are shown to be impervious yet as durable
as concrete pavement.
12.   Commonly Held Adjacent Lots. Any lot that is commonly held in ownership
with an adjacent lot in this district may be treated as a single lot in
accordance with this Code, provided that the total area of such lots is at
least 5,000 square feet in area, the lots have a combined contiguous frontage
of at least 60 feet, and vacant of structures, parking facilities, or accessory
uses. Additionally, an exceptionally large lot in the Infill Development
Overlay District may be re-platted into two separate lots if each adjacent lot
meets the minimum requirements outlined above.
13.   Infill Overlay District (Areas Defined on Map). The Infill Overlay
District is hereby established within the City, as defined by the corresponding
map in the Zoning Code.
170.31   MARINA OVERLAY DISTRICT (MOD).
1.   General Description and Purposes of District. The Marina Overlay District
is intended to foster river-oriented improvements, visual and physical river
access, and encourage well-planned design along the riverfront to enhance the
vision of the community. The proposed Marina Overlay District has been
identified along U.S. 67 beginning just south of downtown and extending north
up to the existing corporate limits. This district is intended to provide the
community with better river access, increase business development along the
riverfront, encourage community pride, and use of the riverfront, and
eventually host a portion of the Mississippi River Trail connecting Bettendorf
to LeClaire to Princeton.
   A.   To recognize, preserve, maintain, and promote economically viable uses
that are a benefit to the City;
   B.   To maximize public benefit for further development of the riverfront
area;
   C.   To provide for improved scenic and aesthetic controls;
   D.   To recognize the riverfront area as a visual, environmental, and
recreational resource that affects and benefits the City as a whole;
   E.   To protect adjacent properties from the negative effects of
incompatible development;
   F.   To establish a physically attractive pattern of development for the
general welfare of the City. The MOD extends along the Mississippi River in the
corporate limits of the City. The exact boundary of the MOD is delineated on
the Official City Zoning Map. The Marina Overlay District regulations
supplement and control (where inconsistent) the regulations of underlying
district(s). All other applicable provisions and standards of the Zoning Code
and other pertinent ordinances shall remain in effect.
2.   Principal Uses Permitted. All uses permitted by right in the underlying
zoning district(s).
3.   Special Exceptions. The following principal uses may be permitted as
special exceptions by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
contained herein:
   A.   All uses permitted by review by the Board of Adjustment in the
underlying zoning district(s).
   B.   Any other uses deemed permitted by the Board of Adjustment.
4.   Height Regulations. No principal building or structure will exceed 35 feet
in height, and no accessory structure will exceed the elevation of the
principal building as verified by a State licensed professional engineer.
5.   Lot Area, Lot Width, and Yard Requirements. All requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) concerning lot area and yard depths shall remain
applicable except where modified by the following sections.
6.   Density. All requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) concerning
density shall remain applicable except where modified by the following
sections.
7.   Floor Area Ration. All requirements of the underlying zoning district(s)
concerning floor area ratio shall remain applicable except where modified by
the following sections.
8.   Minimum Size of Dwelling. All requirements of the underlying zoning
district(s) concerning dwelling size shall remain applicable except where
modified by the following sections.
9.   Minimum Spacing Between Buildings. All requirements of the underlying
zoning district(s) concerning minimum building spacing shall remain applicable
except where modified by the following sections.
10.   Minimum Structure Width. All requirements of the underlying zoning
district(s) concerning structure width shall remain applicable except where
modified by the following sections.
11.   Public Space and Easements. For the benefit of the public, physical or
visual access to or along the riverfront is encouraged. This will serve to
provide open areas and vehicle-free areas for use by the general public. Given
the path of adjacent railway, desired design standards also include visual
access areas such as vistas, scenic overlooks, and open space plazas.
   A.   A public pedestrian easement should be located adjacent to the
riverfront, if feasible, and not subject to excessive risks with unwarranted
railway crossing.
      (1)   The easement should connect to any adjacent public pedestrian
easement in a physically logical and efficient manner.
      (2)   Such pedestrian easements should be located in a safe and logical
fashion and be usable by pedestrians or bicyclists.
      (3)   The City shall be responsible for the cost, installation, and
maintenance of the asphalt surfacing, lighting, signage, security, and fencing
where needed, and any other facilities and public space necessary for the
public use along the riverfront.
      (4)   The developer, their successors, and assigns, if any, shall provide
cross-easements for ingress and egress to interconnect parcels on the
riverfront facing side of the property within the MOD when appropriate. In some
cases, a street or drive connecting more than two parcels may be needed.
      (5)   Appropriate right-of-way easements for accommodating access to the
riverfront shall be established with the platting of any and all parcels within
the MOD. Maintenance responsibilities and City ingress and egress rights to
said right-of-way shall be granted with any and all plats submitted. Public
street right-of-way shall be dedicated to the public on the riverfront facing
parcels in a coordinated and continuous manner in order to make full use of any
and all pedestrian bridges or pedestrian-oriented infrastructure constructed
within the district.
   B.   A public vista should be constructed to maintain, enhance, and develop
river views from streets, paths and trails, and developed areas. Obstacles
should be removed, and outdoor furnishings such as benches and informational
and educational signs describing the scene or vista, should be provided.
   C.   A scenic overlook should be erected to provide panoramic views and
specific focal points of the riverfront. Well-designed towers or raised
platforms to enhance the overlook should be provided.
   D.   A plaza should be established to provide open space opportunities for
passive recreation, often enclosed by either landscaping or buildings, and
encouraged to complement existing land uses. Tiles lining the plaza may be
artistically designed in a mosaic to tell river or community history.
Sample Easement Diagram
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3e35c7736fb27749608ba8a4377bf3cac6451e6f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2177.png]
 
12.   Development Incentives. To encourage the creation of public space along
the riverfront, various developer incentives are offered upon the designation
of public space and easements. These spaces shall be adjacent to the riverfront
on the owners’ property, or an alternative location may be proposed, if that
location is not possible.
   A.   For every 400 square feet of dedicated public space or pedestrian
easement that is provided by the owner, the maximum building height allowable
may be increased up to 45 feet for the principal building or structure. The
granting of this increase shall also be dependent upon design and topographical
considerations.
   B.   For every 400 square feet of dedicated public space or pedestrian
easement that is provided by the owner, the required setbacks from public
right-of-way may be varied as long as design, floodplain, safety, topographic,
and view considerations are satisfactorily addressed; provided, however, the
setback may not be reduced to less than 10 feet.
   C.   For every 400 square feet of dedicated public space or pedestrian
easement that is provided by the owner, one parking space may be deducted from
the required parking total. This provision shall not apply to residential use
within the MOD.
13.   Buffer Yard Restrictions. Landscaped areas or buffer yards that obstruct
the view to the Mississippi River are not permitted, unless granted approval by
the Board of Adjustment.
14.   Architectural Standards. Mixed-use buildings and commercial development
must demonstrate that it promotes and enhances attractive, stimulating, and
visually compatible design by the following:
   A.   Any building façade oriented to the public view shall provide ground
floor transparent windows to allow visual access into and out of the building;
   B.   Primary entrances shall open on to a street or interior courtyard.
   C.   Building frontages along streets shall break any flat, monolithic
façade by including architectural features such as, but not limited to, bay
windows, recessed entrances, fluted masonry, fenestration, cornices, or other
articulation so as to provide visual interest and a pedestrian scale to the
first floor.
   D.   Multi-story buildings shall extend the same architectural features
above the ground floor level through variations in design, detail, and
proportion, and by avoiding designs featuring a monolithic street façade.
15.   Marina Overlay District (Areas Defined on Map). The Marina Overlay
District is hereby established within the City, as defined by the corresponding
map in the Zoning Code. The Marina District is located along U.S. 67 beginning
just south of downtown, and then extending north up to the existing corporate
limits.
170.32   ORGANIZATION.
The administration of this Zoning Code is vested in the following four offices
of the government of the City: the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer,
Board of Adjustment, Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Council. This Code
sets the authority of each of these four offices, and then describes the
procedures and substantive standards with respect to the following
administrative functions: issuance of zoning certificates and occupancy
permits, variances, special exceptions, appeals, uses on review, and other
powers of the Board of Adjustment, and amendments.
170.33   BUILDING AND ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will discharge the following duties
under this Code:
1.   Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
2.   Issue all occupancy permits and make and maintain records thereof;
3.   Issue occupancy and use permits regulating the erection of buildings or
structures and use of land for periods not to exceed 10 days for specific
purposes such as temporary carnivals, churches, charities, and revival meetings
which are not detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, or general welfare; provided, however, that said use or operation
and any incidental temporary structures or tents are in conformance with all
other Codes of the City;
4.   Conduct inspection of buildings, structures, and use of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this Zoning Code;
5.   Assign street numbers in accordance with the City’s current street
numbering system in
Chapter 139;
6.   Perform all duties which are required of them under the terms of this
Code;
7.   Maintain permanent and current records of this Zoning Code, including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special exceptions, variances, appeals,
and applications therefore;
8.   For new and substantially improved buildings subject to the floodplain
management regulations of this Code, maintain a record of the certified first
floor elevation or the level to which such buildings have been floodproofed;
9.   Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all matters
arising out of this Zoning Code;
10.   Forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission all applications for
amendments to this Zoning Code, accompanied by their recommendations for
action;
11.   Transmit to the Board of Adjustment only those applications for appeals,
variances, special exceptions, or other matters on which the Board of
Adjustment is authorized by this Zoning Code to act upon;
12.   Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of the Zoning Code and make reports of his recommendations to the
Planning and Zoning Commission;
13.   Maintain the permanent and current map of areas of the City designated as
having particular historical, architectural, and aesthetic value; and,
14.   Transmit to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of Adjustment,
and to the Council, their written report containing, at a minimum, a fact
finding of all relevant, pertinent facts surrounding any action initiated
within the scope of this Zoning Code, a list of probable options and
alternatives for actions by the respective bodies, their recommendations for
actions by the respective bodies, and any other information that may be deemed
necessary by the respective bodies.
15.   If a Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer is not currently on staff,
the City may appoint a designee, or as the case may be, contract with the
County to fulfill the official duties on a temporary basis.
170.34   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1.   Creation, Membership, and Duration. A Board of Adjustment, (“Board”), is
hereby established, which will consist of five members each serving a five-year
term as appointed by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.8)
2.   Jurisdiction. The Board of Adjustment is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
   A.   To hear and act upon all applications for special exceptions in the
manner prescribed and as specifically authorized in this Code;
   B.   To hear and act upon appeals from any administrative order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Building Official under this Code;
   C.   To hear and act upon the applications for variances from the terms
provided in this Code in the manner prescribed and as specifically authorized
by and subject to the standards established herein;
   D.   To interpret the provisions of this Code and the district map in the
manner provided for herein; and,
   E.   To hear and act upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to consider under this Code, as prescribed by the applicable
provisions of the Code of Iowa.
3.   Rules of Procedure - Meetings.
   A.   Official meetings of the Board of Adjustment will be held upon:
      (1)   The written request of the Chairperson submitted to the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer; or,
      (2)   The written request of a majority of the Board members submitted to
the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer; or,
      (3)   Approval of an official motion duly considered and approved by a
majority of the Board members at an official meeting of the Board; or,
      (4)   The written request of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
if approved by the Board Chairperson; or
      (5)   The timely receipt by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
of a properly submitted and completed Petition for Hearing and Consideration of
Action application filed by any interested, affected person.
   B.   Any official meetings called for or requested to be held by the Board
of Adjustment will be held on the first and third Thursdays of the month,
unless otherwise agreed to by a majority vote of the Board members at any
official meeting, or unless otherwise requested in writing by the Mayor, or as
otherwise provided for herein.
   C.   Hearings and continuances will be conducted as follows:
      (1)   The first meeting held to consider a requested action will be held
to receive any and all public input and to conduct any necessary fact-finding.
      (2)   Any person may appear and testify at the meeting, when recognized
by the Chairperson, either in person, or they may be represented by a duly
authorized agent.
      (3)   The Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
      (4)   Whenever possible, decisions by the Board will be made during the
same hearing at which the testimony and evidence are presented.
      (5)   The Board may continue a case (temporary adjournment), deferring
the decision for two weeks, except that the first meeting will permit public
comment, whereas unless otherwise agreed upon by the Board, the second meeting
will be limited to Board member questions, discussions, and comments.
   D.   All meetings conducted by the Board will be open to the public subject
to the allowances provided for in Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
   E.   The Board of Adjustment may grant or deny a request, in whole or in
part, or may “conditionally” grant or deny a request as they so deem necessary
and appropriate at their sole discretion.
   F.   Meetings of the Board of Adjustment may be temporarily adjourned and
reconvened at a later date without taking any action as deemed necessary and
appropriate by approval of a majority of the Board members.
   G.   Petitions for Withdrawals, Amendments, or Postponements By the
Applicant. Any petitioned matter submitted to the Board of Adjustment may be
withdrawn, amended, or postponed and action upon said matter may be temporarily
postponed, once, for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days from the date of
the originally scheduled meeting,
      (1)   Providing that a detailed, written, explanatory request from the
petitioner asking for said withdrawal, time extension, and/or amendment of said
petition is received by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer no later
than four working days prior to the originally scheduled meeting date.
      (2)   In the case of a properly and timely filed request for withdrawal
of the petition, the Board will not meet but the Secretary of the Board will
acknowledge and file the request for the permanent record and the Board will be
notified.
      (3)   In the case of a properly and timely filed request for a temporary
extension of time and/or an amendment to the original petition, the Board will
continue to meet as scheduled and will acknowledge the request for an extension
and/or amendment for the permanent record and consider and act upon the request
(s) at the meeting.
      (4)   The Board may grant, deny, or conditionally grant or deny the
request for the full-time extension requested or some other time extension as
the Board may deem appropriate, but any such extension will not exceed 30
calendar days as spelled out above.
      (5)   If the Board denies a request for an extension, then the meeting
will be conducted as scheduled at the specified time and place. The Board may
grant, deny, or conditionally grant or deny the request to consider and act
upon an amended petition as the Board may deem appropriate.
      (6)   Any additional expenses incurred by the City as a result of
granting an extension or amendment request which was submitted by the
petitioner will be borne by the petitioner and paid in full to the City prior
to the date set for the rescheduled meeting.
   H.   Petition for Postponement by Property Owners. Consideration and action
upon said matter may be temporarily postponed, once, for a period not to exceed
30 calendar days from the date of the originally scheduled meeting, if
petitioners:
      (1)   Provide a detailed, written, explanatory request for such action,
signed by 20 percent or more of the property owners whose property boundaries
lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of any and all public and quasi-public right-
of-way distances) of the boundaries of the property upon which the proposed
matter is to be considered, is received by the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer no later than four working days prior to the originally scheduled
meeting date.
      (2)   If such a request is properly and timely filed, the Board’s action
(s) will be conducted as spelled out above.
   I.   Record Keeping and Rulemaking. The Board of Adjustment will keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and will also keep
records of its hearings and other official actions.
      (1)   A copy of every rule or regulation, order, requirement, decision,
or determination of the Board of Adjustment will be filed immediately in the
office of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
      (2)   The Board will adopt other rules and procedures, not otherwise in
conflict with this Zoning Code or with the applicable State statutes and select
or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
4.   Removal From Office. The Board of Adjustment members will recommend to the
Council, removal from the office of any Board member having more than three
consecutive, unexcused absences. Additionally, the Council may remove any
member of the Board for cause upon written charges and after holding a public
hearing on said matter.
5.   Finality of Decisions of the Board of Adjustment. All decisions and
findings of the Board of Adjustment will be final and will only be subject to
judicial review as provided for by law.
6.   Variances.
   A.   Authority. The Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing, may vary
the regulations of this Zoning Code in harmony with its general purpose and
intent only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth and only in
accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed.
   B.   Initiation of Variance. Variances affecting a particular property may
be requested by any person, firm, corporation, or government agency having a
freehold interest in that property, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession of that property, or a contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest of an exclusive possessory interest in that property, either
of which is specifically enforceable, by submitting to the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer a properly completed “Petition for Hearing and
Consideration of Action” application.
   C.   Application for Variance. An application for a variance must be filed
in writing with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said application
will contain such information as the Board of Adjustment may, by rule, require.
   D.   Hearing on Application. Upon acceptance in proper form of the
application referred to in Section 170.34(6)(C) above by the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Board of Adjustment will hold at least one
public hearing on the requested variance within 30 calendar days from the date
of acceptance of the application, subject to the provisions of Section
170.37(5).
   E.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
will be:
      (1)   Published at least once, not less than seven calendar days, or more
than 20 calendar days, before the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City.
      (2)   Said notice will also be delivered by certified mail not less than
seven calendar days, nor more than 20 calendar days, before the hearing to all
property owners whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of
any and all public and quasi-public right-of-way distances), of the boundaries
of the property upon which the use, or structure is located that is the subject
of the requested variance.
      (3)   No less than seven working days prior to the public hearing on a
petition requesting a variance, the applicant shall post a notice sign on or
near the property upon which the application is being made and shall remove and
return the sign immediately following the public hearing on the application.
The sign will be provided to the applicant by the Board Secretary upon receipt
of a signed deposit, which shall be refunded if the sign is returned in good
condition within seven working days of the date of the decision on the
application.
   F.   Standards for Variances. The Board of Adjustment will not vary the
regulations of this Code, as authorized in this section, unless there is
evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
      (2)   The conditions, upon which a petition for a variance is based, are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
      (3)   The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire
for financial gain;
      (4)   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this Zoning Code
and has not been created by any persons having an interest in the property;
      (5)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located;
      (6)   The requested variance will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion of the
public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
      (7)   The purpose of the variance will not be to establish a use
otherwise excluded from the particular district in which it is requested,
except as noted otherwise herein; and,
      (8)   The requested variance will not be contrary to the public interest
and will ensure that the spirit of this Zoning Code will be observed and
substantial justice done.
   G.   Conditions. The Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards for variances established in this section. Said
conditions and restrictions, if imposed, must be adhered to and failure to do
so will automatically and immediately cause the variance to be revoked.
   H.   Recording Required. Approved variances and attached conditions must be
recorded in the County Recorder’s office at the applicant’s expense. The
recording fee will be paid at City Hall at the same time that the permit for
the project being granted a variance is issued.
   I.   Authorized Variances. Variances from the regulations of this Zoning
Code may be granted by the Board of Adjustment only in accordance with the
“Standards for Variances” established in Section
170.37(6) and may be granted only in the following instances and in no others:
      (1)   To permit any yard or setback line of lesser dimension than
required by the applicable regulations;
      (2)   To permit any building or structure to exceed the height
limitations imposed by the applicable regulations;
      (3)   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited
solely because of the insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no
event will the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than 70
percent of the required area and width;
      (4)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses provided that substantial use of such
facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of
the same days of the week. (See Section
170.52(5)(F))
      (5)   To modify or waive the off-street parking and loading space
requirements or approve any special location plan in any of the districts
wherever the character or use of a building is such as to make unnecessary the
full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations
would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted
with merely being granted for a convenience. (See Section
170.52)
      (6)   To permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or
use located in a district which prohibits that use of land or building; or the
height and area of buildings existing at the time of the adoption of this
Zoning Code where such alteration or enlargement is a necessary incident to the
use of the structure existing at the time of the adoption, amendment, or change
of this Zoning Code;
      (7)   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy to the extent
of more than 65 percent of its assessed valuation as determined by the records
of the County Assessor’s Office, where the Board finds some compelling public
necessity requiring a conditional continuance of the nonconforming use.
      (8)   To permit a lower level of flood protection for floodplain uses
than required by the floodplain management regulations contained in Section
170.27.
      (9)   To permit an increase in the allowable light intensity on any
adjoining property, or to allow any other deviation from the lighting and
related provisions of this Zoning Code. Any person requesting a variance of
this nature will, in addition to those requirements for filing as spelled out
in Section 170.34(6), add to their application the following information:
         a.   Type and use of outdoor light involved.
         b.   Specific exemption requested; including proposed foot candle
intensity on any and all adjacent, effected buildings.
         c.   Physical size of outdoor light involved.
         d.   Type of illumination.
         e.   Rated lumen output of lamp or lamps per location.
         f.   Proposed location of outdoor light.
         g.   Duration of use of outdoor light.
         h.   Site and necessary elevation plans to depict vertical and
horizontal relationships between proposed light source and any and all
adjacent, effected buildings.
      (10)   To assist and enhance economic development activities in areas of
the City designated as Urban Renewal Areas (URA) or Tax Increment Financing
(TIF) areas, provided such variance is consistent with the standards outlined
in Section 170.34(6)(I) and the City’s Comprehensive Development Plan.
   J.   Findings on Variances. All decisions by the Board of Adjustment on
requests for variances must be supplemented with a written finding of fact
stating the conformity or nonconformity, as the case may be, of their decision
with the standards for variance set forth in this chapter.
   K.   Effective Date(s) and Revocation of a Variance. Variances become
effective immediately upon their approval by the Board and will be valid for a
period no longer than six months from the date of such decision and will
automatically be revoked unless the building permit is obtained within such
period and the erection or alteration of a building is substantially complete
or the use commenced within such period or unless otherwise specified in the
Board's official action granting the variance.
   L.   Effect of Denial of a Variance Request or Voluntary Withdrawal of
Petition. No application for a variance that has been denied wholly, or in
part, by the Board of Adjustment or that has been voluntarily withdrawn by the
petitioner will be resubmitted for consideration, in its original form, for a
period of at least one year from the date of said order of denial or the date
of the withdrawal request, except on the grounds of new evidence being
presented to and being found to be valid by the Board of Adjustment. This
section does not preclude any person from submitting a new, modified
application for substantially the same variance. Modified may mean any one of
the following: a new petitioner, different set-back footage, altered structural
or special features, etc.
7.   Appeals.
   A.   Authority. The Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing, may vary
any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer or Building Official.
   B.   Initiation of Appeal. Appeals affecting a particular property may be
requested by any person, firm, corporation, or government agency having a
freehold interest in that property, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession of that property, or a contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest of an exclusive possessory interest in that property, either
of which is specifically enforceable, by submitting to the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer a properly completed Petition for Hearing and Consideration
of Action Application.
   C.   Application for Appeal. An application for an appeal must be filed in
writing with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said application will
contain such information as the Board of Adjustment may, by rule, require.
   D.   Imminent Peril to Life and Property. An appeal properly filed and
accepted will stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, within 24 hours after the application for the appeal has been filed
and accepted by them, that by reason of acts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in their opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
   E.   Hearing on Application. Upon acceptance in proper form of the
application referred to in Section 170.34(3) above by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Board of Adjustment will hold at least one public
hearing on the appeal within 30 calendar days from the date of acceptance of
the application, subject to the provisions of Section 170.34(3).
   F.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
will be:
      (1)   Published at least once, not less than seven calendar days, nor
more than 20 calendar days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City.
      (2)   Said notice will also be delivered by certified mail not less than
seven calendar days, nor more than 20 calendar days, before the hearing to all
property owners whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of
any and all public and quasi-public right-of-way distances), of the boundaries
of the property upon which the use, or structure, is located that is the
subject of the appeal.
      (3)   No less than seven working days prior to the public hearing on a
petition requesting an appeal, the applicant shall post a notice sign on or
near the property upon which the application is being made and shall remove and
return the sign immediately following the public hearing on the application.
The sign will be provided to the applicant by the Board Secretary upon receipt
of a signed deposit, which shall be refunded if the sign is returned in good
condition within seven working days of the date of the decision on the
application.
   G.   Findings on Appeals. In exercising its appellate power, the Board of
Adjustment may reverse, or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make any such
order, requirement, decision, or determination as it so deems necessary, and to
that end will have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
8.   Special Exceptions.
   A.   Authority. The development and administration of this Zoning Code is
based upon the division of the City into zoning districts in which the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that
there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot
be properly classified in any particular district or districts, without
consideration in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular locations. To
that end, the Board of Adjustment may grant special exceptions to the strict
interpretation of this Zoning Code in harmony with its general purpose and
intent only in specific instances hereinafter set forth and only in accordance
with the standards hereinafter prescribed. Such special exceptions fall into
two categories:
      (1)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and,
      (2)   Uses entirely private in character but of such a nature that their
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
   B.   Initiation of Special Exceptions. Consideration of a special exception
affecting a particular property may be requested by any person having a
freehold interest in land, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest of
an exclusive possessory interest, either of which is specifically enforceable,
by submitting to the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer a properly
completed Petition for Hearing and Consideration of Action.
   C.   Application for Special Exceptions. An application for a special
exception must be filed in writing with the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer. Said application will contain such information as the Board of
Adjustment may, by rule, require. The application will include a statement in
writing by the applicant accompanied by adequate evidence showing that the
proposed special exception will, on review, conform to the standards set forth
in Section 170.34(6).
   D.   Hearing on Application. Upon acceptance in proper form of the
application referred to in Section 170.34(3) above by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Board of Adjustment will hold at least one public
hearing on the proposed special exception within 30 calendar days from the date
of acceptance of the application, subject to the provisions of 170.34(3).
   E.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
will be:
      (1)   Published at least once, not less than seven calendar days, or more
than 20 calendar days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City.
      (2)   Said notice will also be delivered by certified mail not less than
seven calendar days, nor more than 20 calendar days, before the hearing to all
property owners whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of
any and all public and quasi-public right-of-way distances), of the boundaries
of the property upon which the use, or structure is located that is the subject
of the proposed special exception.
      (3)   No less than seven working days prior to the public hearing on a
petition requesting a special exception, the applicant shall post a notice sign
on or near the property upon which the application is being made and shall
remove and return the sign immediately following the public hearing on the
application. The sign will be provided to the applicant by the Board Secretary
upon receipt of a signed deposit, which shall be refunded if the sign is
returned in good condition within seven working days of the date of the
decision on the application.
   F.   Standards for Special Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment will not
grant a special exception to the provisions of this Zoning Code, as authorized
in this section, unless there is evidence presented to it in each specific case
that:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special
exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare;
      (2)   The special exception will not be detrimental to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood;
      (3)   The establishment of the special exception will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district;
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, or necessary facilities
have been or are being provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been, or will be, taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
and
      (6)   The special exception will, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the Board of Adjustment.
   G.   Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special
exception, the Board of Adjustment may stipulate such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and
operation of the special exception as it deems necessary for the protection of
the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and
requirements specified in Section 170.34(8). In all cases in which special
exceptions are granted with conditions or restrictions, the Board of Adjustment
may require such evidence and guarantees, as it deems necessary, to insure that
the conditions or restrictions stipulated in connection therewith are being and
will be complied with. Said conditions or restrictions, if imposed, must be
adhered to and failure to do so will automatically and immediately cause the
special exception to be revoked.
   H.   Findings on Special Exceptions. All decisions by the Board of
Adjustment on requests for special exceptions must be supplemented with a
written finding of fact stating the conformity or nonconformity, as the case
may be, of their decision with the standards for special exceptions set forth
in this article.
   I.   Effective Date(s) and Revocation of Special Exceptions. In addition to
the provisions of Section 170.34(8), and unless otherwise specified, special
exceptions granted become effective immediately and will be valid for a period
no longer than six months from the date of such decision and will automatically
be revoked unless the special exception is fully and completely established
during such period or unless otherwise specified in the Board’s official action
granting the special exception.
   J.   Effect of Denial of Special Exception Request or Voluntary Withdrawal
of Petition. No application for a special exception that has been denied
wholly, or in part, by the Board of Adjustment, or that has been voluntarily
withdrawn by the petitioner, will be resubmitted for consideration, in its
original form, for a period of at least one year from the date of said order of
denial or the date of the withdrawal request, except on the grounds of new
evidence found to be valid by the Board of Adjustment. This section does not
preclude any person from submitting a new, modified application for
substantially the same special exception. Modified could mean any one of the
following: a new petitioner, different or conditional use, altered structural
or special features, etc.
9.   Other Conditions By the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment may
also conduct hearings on and consider action on the following items on the
following items:
   A.   Interpretation of Zoning District Map. Where the application of the
rules for the interpretation of district boundaries contained in Sections
170.12 and
170.34 leaves a reasonable doubt as to the boundary between two districts the
Board of Adjustment will interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purposes of this Zoning Code.
   B.   Temporary Uses and Permits. The Board of Adjustment may issue a permit
for the temporary use of a building or premises in any district for a purpose
or use that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by this Code,
provided that such use is of a true temporary nature and does not involve the
erection of substantial structures. Such permit may be granted in the form of a
temporary and immediately revocable permit for not more than one 12-month
period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare.
   C.   Certain Uses Located in Industrial Districts. In determining whether
certain uses will be located in an I-1 or an I-2 District, the Board of
Adjustment will give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent
uses and structures, and the consistency therewith of the proposed use and
development. Before authorizing a use in an industrially-zoned district, the
Board will determine whether the proposed use would be hazardous, harmful,
noxious, offensive, or a nuisance to the surrounding properties by reason of
noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and
heat, fire and safety hazards, sewage wastes and pollution, transportation and
traffic, aesthetic, and psychological effects. (See Sections
170.25 and
170.26)
170.35   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
1.   Creation, Membership, and Duration. The Planning and Zoning Commission is
established by
Chapter 22.
2.   Jurisdiction. The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby vested with the
following jurisdiction and authority:
   A.   To hear and act upon all applications for amendments to this chapter
and report said findings and recommendations to the City Council, unless
otherwise provided for herein;
   B.   On its own initiative, to petition the City Council requesting an
amendment, supplement, change, or repeal of a Zoning ordinance provided that it
has first held a public hearing upon all proposed matters prior to submitting
any final report or recommendation(s);
   C.   To receive from the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer their
recommendation as related to the effectiveness of this chapter and report their
conclusions and recommendations to the City Council.
   D.   To hear and act upon all matters upon which it is required to consider
under this chapter.
   E.   To review this chapter in its entirety not less than once every 10
years and recommend any amendments to the City Council; and,
   F.   Other duties required to be performed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission outside of the scope of this chapter include (referenced),
Chapter 22 – Planning and Zoning Commission
Chapter 137 – Vacation and Disposal of Public Right-of-Ways
Chapter 167 – Urban Renewal
Chapter 168 – Urban Revitalization
Chapter 175 – Subdivision Regulations
3.   Rules of Procedure – Petitions (See Appendix, Illustration “G”). Upon the
timely receipt by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer of a properly
submitted and completed “PETITION FOR HEARING AND CONSIDERATION OF ACTION”
application filed by any interested, affected person, a hearing before the
Commission will be scheduled in accordance with the applicable procedures. Any
person may appear and testify at the hearing, when recognized by the
Chairperson, either in person, or they may be represented by a duly authorized
agent.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval or denial of a
petition, in whole or in part, or may recommend “conditional” approval or
denial of a request as they so deem necessary and appropriate. Further,
meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be temporarily adjourned and
reconvened at a later date without taking any action as deemed necessary and
appropriate by a majority approval of the Commission members. Any petitioned
matter submitted to the Commission may be withdrawn, amended, or consideration
and action upon said matter may be temporarily postponed, once, for a period
not to exceed 30 days from the date of the originally schedule meeting,
provided a detailed, written, explanatory request from the petitioner asking
for said withdrawal, time extension, or amendment of said petition is received
by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer not later than four working days
prior to the originally scheduled meeting date. If such a request is property
and timely filed, the Commission will continue to meet as scheduled and in the
case of a request for a permanent record and grant the request.
In the case of a request for a temporary extension of time or an amendment to
the original petition, the Commission will continue to meet as scheduled and
will acknowledge the request for an extension or amendment for the permanent
record and consider and act upon the request(s) at the meeting. The Commission
may grant, deny, or “conditionally” grant or deny the request for the full-time
extension requested or some other time extension as the Commission may deem
appropriate, but any such extension will not exceed 30 days as spelled out
above. If the Commission denies a request for extension, then the meeting will
be conducted as scheduled at the specified time and place. The Commission may
grant, deny, or “conditionally” grant or deny the request to consider and act
upon an amended petition as the Commission may deem appropriate.
Any additional expenses incurred by the City as a result of granting an
extension or amendment request which was submitted by the petitioner will be
borne by the petitioner and paid in full to the City prior to the date set for
the rescheduled meeting.
Further, consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily
postponed, once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the
originally scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written explanatory request
for such action, signed by 20 percent or more of the property owners whose
property boundaries lie within 200 feet, inclusive of any and all public and
quasi-public right-of-way distances, of the boundaries of the property upon
which the proposed matter is to be considered, is received by the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer no later than four working days prior to the
originally scheduled meeting date. If such a request is properly and timely
filed, the Commission’s action(s) will be conducted as spelled out above.
The Commission will keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and will also keep records of its hearing and other official actions. A
copy of every rule or regulation, order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission will be filed immediately
in the office of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. The Commission
will adopt other rules and procedures, not otherwise in conflict with this
Zoning Code or with the applicable State statutes and select or appoint such
officers as it deems necessary.
170.36   CITY COUNCIL.
1.   Jurisdiction. The City Council is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority pertaining to this chapter:
   A.   To appoint the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer whose
responsibility will be to enforce the provisions of this chapter; Commission is
provided for in this chapter and the Code of Iowa.
   B.   To receive and act upon all recommendations concerning amendments,
supplements, changes, or repeal of the Zoning chapter submitted to them by the
Planning and Zoning Commission;
   C.   To receive from the Planning and Zoning Commission all recommendations
on the effectiveness of this chapter; and,
   D.   To act upon all matters upon which it is required to do so under this
chapter.
2.   Rules of Procedures – Meetings (Pertaining to this chapter). Any official
meeting called for or requested to be held by the City Council in the
administration of this chapter will be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first or third
Monday of each month, unless otherwise provided for herein or provided for in
Chapter 17 of this Code. Further, the City Council’s formal hearing, review,
and consideration of any zoning or subdivision ordinance related matters will
take place no sooner than 10 days following the Commission’s hearing and final
action on the matter, unless another hearing date is otherwise established by
resolution of the City Council.
All meetings conducted by the City Council will be open to the public subject
to the allowances provided for in
Chapter 17. Any person may appear and testify at the meeting, when recognized
by the Mayor, either in person, or they may be represented by a duly authorized
agent.
The City Council may approve or deny a request, in whole or in part, and may
“conditionally” approve or deny a request as they so deem necessary and
appropriate. Further, meetings of the City Council may be temporarily adjourned
and reconvened at a later date without taking any action as deemed necessary
and appropriate by a majority approval of the Council members.
Any petitioned matter submitted to the City Council may be withdrawn, amended,
or consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily postponed,
once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the originally
scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory request from the
petitioner asking for said withdrawal, time extension, or amendment of said
petition is received by the City Clerk no later than four working days prior to
the originally schedule meeting date. If such a request is properly and timely
filed, the City Council will continue to meet as scheduled and, in the case of
a request for a withdrawal of the petition, the City Council will acknowledge
the request for the permanent record and grant the request.
In the case of a request for a temporary extension of time or amendment to the
original petition, the City Council will continue to meet as scheduled and will
acknowledge the request for an extension or amendment for the permanent record
and consider and act upon the request(s) at the meeting. The City Council may
grant, deny, or “conditionally” grant or deny the request for the full-time
extension requested or some other time extension as the City Council may deem
appropriate, but any such extension will not exceed 30 days as spelled out
above. If the City Council denies a request for an extension, then the meeting
will be conducted as scheduled or deny the requests to consider and act upon an
amended petition as the City Council may deem appropriate. Any additional
expenses incurred by the City as a result of granting an extension or amendment
request which was submitted by the petitioner will be borne by the petitioner
and paid in full to the City prior to the date set for the rescheduled meeting.
Further, consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily
postponed, once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the
originally schedule meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory request
for such action, signed by 20 percent or more of the property owners whose
property boundaries lie within 200 feet, inclusive of any and all public and
quasi-public right-of-way distances, of the boundaries of the property upon
which the proposed matter is to be considered, is received by the City Clerk no
later than four working days prior to the originally scheduled meeting date.
170.37   AMENDMENTS.
1.   Authority. Amendments to this Zoning Code may be necessary, from time to
time, for the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
and general welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the City, and
lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways. The
Council may, from time to time in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the
regulations imposed in the districts created by this Zoning Code. The Code may
be amended, provided that in all amendments adopted under the authority of this
section, due consideration and allowance(s) will be made for existing
conditions, the conservation of property values, the direction of building
development to the best advantages of the entire community, and the uses to
which the property is devoted at the time of the adoption of such amendment.
Any amendment to the floodplain management regulations of this Code must
receive prior approval from the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
2.   Initiation of Amendment. The Council, Planning and Zoning Commission,
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, or any person having a freehold
interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest of an exclusive
possessory interest, either of which is specifically enforceable, involving
land within the City, may file an application for an amendment to the district
map, or any person or entity may file an application for an amendment to the
text of this Code with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
3.   Application for Amendment. An application for an amendment must be filed,
in writing, with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said application
will contain such information as required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Such application, when accepted for filing by the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer, will be forwarded along with their recommendations
for action, to the Planning and Zoning Commission with the request to hold a
public hearing on said application for amendment.
4.   Hearing on Application. Upon acceptance in proper form of the application
referred to in Section 170.37(3) above by the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing on each
amendment application within 30 days from the date of acceptance by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer of the application at such time and
place as will be established by the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to
the provisions of Section
170.35(3).
5.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of any such public hearing
conducted under this section will be published at least once, not less than
seven days, nor more than 20 days before the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. In the case of a proposed amendment to the district
map, said notice will also be delivered by certified mail not less than seven
days, nor more than 20 days, before the hearing to all property owners whose
property boundaries lie within 200 feet, inclusive of any and all public and
quasi-public right-of-way distances, of the boundaries of the property upon
which the proposed amendment is to be considered.
6.   Findings on Amendments and Recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Within 30 days after the close of the hearing(s) on a proposed
amendment, the Planning and Zoning Commission will make written findings of
fact and will submit same together with its recommendation(s) to the Council.
Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning
classification of a particular property, the findings of fact and
recommendation(s) will include at least the following information:
   A.   Existing use of property within the general area of the property in
question;
   B.   The zoning classification of property within the general area of the
property in question;
   C.   The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under
the existing zoning classification;
   D.   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property
in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since the day
the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification; and,
   E.   Minimum Size of Parcel. A lot, lots, or parcel of land will not qualify
for a zoning amendment unless it possesses 200 feet of frontage and contains
25,000 square feet of area, or adjoins a lot, lots, or parcel of land which
bears the same zoning district classification as the proposed zoning amendment.
   F.   Information and findings specifically addressing PDD proposals;
      (1)   In what respects the proposed PDD plan is consistent with the
stated purposes of the PDD requirements.
      (2)   The extent to which the proposed PDD plan meets the requirements
and standards of the PDD district.
      (3)   The extent to which the proposed PDD plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject proposal
including, but not limited to, the density, dimensions, area, bulk, and use,
and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
      (4)   The physical design of the proposed PDD and the manner in which
said design makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate
control over vehicular traffic, provides for, and protects designated common
open space, and furthers the amenities of light, air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment.
      (5)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed PDD plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood.
      (6)   The desirability of the proposed PDD plan to the physical
development, tax base, and economic well-being of the entire community.
      (7)   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the City’s
Comprehensive Plan.
      (8)   Specific points noted on the PDD plan that have an impact on its
design, function, and visibility in the community.
7.   The Planning and Zoning Commission will not recommend the adoption of a
proposed amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in
the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the adoption of an amendment
changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any higher
classification than that requested by the applicant. (For the purpose of this
Zoning Code, the R-1 District will be considered the highest classification,
and the I-2 District will be considered the lowest classification). Further,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend the conditional adoption of a
zoning classification amendment whereby certain conditions and/or restrictions
may be placed on the structures or uses allowed on the property if the zoning
classification were to be amended.
8.   City Council to Receive Planning and Zoning Commission’s Report. The
Council will not act upon a proposed amendment to this Zoning Code until it
shall have received and formally accepted a written report and recommendation
(s) from the Planning and Zoning Commission on the proposed amendment(s).
9.   Hearing on Application. The Council will hold a public hearing on each
amendment application within 30 days from the date of formal acceptance of the
Planning and Zoning Commission's written report and recommendation(s), subject
to the provisions of Section 170.37, but the hearing may not be held earlier
than the next regularly scheduled Council Meeting following the published
notice.
10.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time and place of any such public
hearing conducted under this section will be published at least once, not less
than seven days, nor more than 20 days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. In the case of a proposed amendment to the
district map, said notice will also be delivered by certified mail not less
than seven days, nor more than 20 days, before the hearing to all property
owners whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, inclusive of any and all
public and quasi-public right-of-way distances, of the boundaries of the
property upon which the proposed amendment is to be considered. Supplemental or
additional notices may be published or distributed as the Council may require
from time to time.
11.   Approval or Denial of Application. As mentioned in Section 170.37, the
City Council may approve or deny, or conditionally approve or deny, any
application for any amendment, provided however, that if the Council’s action
(s) varies materially from the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation
(s) or, in the case of a proposed zoning classification amendment, upon the
receipt by the Clerk of a written, signed protest by the property owners of 20
percent or more of the area included in the proposed zoning classification
amendment, or by the property owners of 20 percent or more of the property
which is located within 200 feet, inclusive of any and all public and quasi-
public right-of-way distances, of the exterior boundaries of the property which
is the subject of the proposed zoning classification amendment, such amendment
will not be approved except by the concurring vote of four-fifths of all the
members of the Council on the formal resolution considering said amendment.
(This protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the originally scheduled
public hearing). If the formal resolution considering said amendment is not
approved, the matter and process is complete, and no further action(s) will be
taken. If the formal resolution considering said amendment is approved, then
the final, effective approval of any amendment request occurs only after the
successful passage and adoption of the amending ordinance by a simple majority
of all of the members of the Council.
170.38   ZONING CERTIFICATES AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
1.   Zoning Certificates. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining
to the use of land or buildings will be issued by an officer, department, or
employee of the City unless the application for such permit has been examined
by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer and has affixed to it an
acknowledgement, indicating that the proposed building or structure complies
with all the provisions of this Code. Any permit or certificate issued in
conflict with the provisions of the Code will be null and void.
   A.   Plats. In order to insure that the building or structure conforms with
the provisions of this code, the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will
require the following prior to the issuance of a building permit;
      (1)   A plat (original or reproduction thereof), in duplicate of the
piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block, or blocks drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions, as certified by a registered land surveyor as a true copy of
the piece or parcel, lot or lots, block, or blocks, or portions thereof,
according to the registered or recorded plat of such land; or,
      (2)   A plat, in duplicate, drawn to a scale in such form as may, from
time to time, be prescribed by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
showing the ground area, height, and bulk of the building or structure, the
building lines in relation to lot lines, the use to be made of the building,
structure, or land, and such other information as may be required by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer for the proper enforcement of this
Code.
2.   Occupancy Permits. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the
effective date of this Zoning Code, and no addition to a previously existing
building will be occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, will be used for any purpose until an occupancy permit has been
issued. No change in a use, other than that of a permitted use to another
similar permitted use, will be made until an occupancy permit has been issued
by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Every occupancy permit will
indicate that the use or occupancy complies with the provision of this Code.
   A.   Application for Occupancy Permit. Every application for a building
permit will be deemed to be an application for an occupancy permit. Every
application for an occupancy permit for a new use of land where no building
permit is required will be made directly to the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer; and,
   B.   Issuance of Occupancy Permit. No occupancy permit for a building or
portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of this Zoning Code, will
be issued until construction has been completed and the premises inspected and
certified by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer to be in conformity
with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based.
      (1)   Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary
certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six months
from its date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy
of the premises. Reasons in writing for refusal to issue an occupancy permit
must be forwarded to the applicant no later than three days after the request
for an occupancy permit.
170.39   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, or land will be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered, or repaired,
except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this
Zoning Code upon the:
1.   Use of land or buildings;
2.   Bulk of buildings;
3.   Floor area requirements;
4.   Lot area requirements; and
5.   Yard requirements are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Zoning Code or of
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or
requirements will govern.
The requirements and regulations specified elsewhere in this Zoning Code will
be subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, modifications, and
interpretations contained in this section.
170.40   MISCELLANEOUS LOT PROVISIONS.
1.   Minimum Street Frontage for Lots. No lot will be created after the
adoption of this Zoning Code unless it abuts at least 60 feet on a public
street except as otherwise provided for herein.
2.   Lots Without Street Frontage. Every structure or group of structures, and
every use or group of uses, will be located upon a lot. Where unique land
planning designs are employed in a planned development district to conserve the
natural character of the land or to create afunctional or compatible
arrangement of structures or uses, a lot which does not abut upon a public or
private street may be permitted provided that:
   A.   Adequate provision is made for free access to the lot for the property
owner, or in the case of a nonresidential lot, for those persons who would
normally require access to the lot.
   B.   Adequate provision is made for the unobstructed access of firefighting
services, police protection, mail carrier letter service, rubbish collection,
and other governmental services.
   C.   Adequate provision is made for the extension and maintenance of public
and private utility services.
   D.   The arrangement will not contribute toward congestion in nearby streets
as a result of delivery services, lack of guest parking, or other reasons.
3.   Lot of Record. In any residentially zoned district on a lot of record at
the time of enactment of this Zoning Code, a single-family dwelling may be
established regardless of the size of the lot, provided all other requirements
of this Zoning Code are complied with. However, where two or more vacant and
contiguous substandard recorded lots are held in common ownership, they may be
combined into zoning lots which require a restrictive covenant and agreement
not to sever form and will thereafter be maintained in common ownership and
will be so joined and developed for the purpose of forming an effective and
conforming zoning lot. For the purpose of this section, the razing of a
building on a substandard lot will constitute the formation of a vacant lot.
4.   Division of Zoning Lot. No improved zoning lot will hereafter be divided
into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots, resulting from
each such division, conform with all the applicable regulations of the zoning
district in which the property is located.
5.   Two Uses on a Lot. Where two or more permitted or special uses, each
requiring a minimum lot area, are provided in the same building or on the same
lot, the required lot area will be the sum of the areas required for each use
individually.
6.   Number of Buildings and/or Uses on a Zoning Lot. Except in the case of
Planned Development Districts (PDD), or as otherwise allowed herein, not more
than one detached, principal building or use will be located on any one zoning
lot of record.
7.   Lots Unserved by Sewer. In any residentially zoned district where public
sanitary sewer is not reasonably available, one single-family detached dwelling
may be constructed, provided, the otherwise specified lot area and width
requirements will be a minimum of 20,000 square feet, and 100 feet
respectively, subject to the suitability of the lot for on-site sewerage
disposal, and provided the housing meets all requirements of the Iowa
Department of Public Health.
8.   Attached Accessory Structures. Construction of an accessory structure,
that is attached or adjoining the principal building, must be constructed of a
comparable, similar, or complimentary material as the adjacent or adjoining
principal building.
170.41   USE OR REDUCTION OF REQUIRED YARDS.
No lot, yard, court, parking area, or other open space will be so reduced in
area or dimension as to make any such area or dimension less than the minimum
required by this Zoning Code, and, if already less than the minimum required,
it will not be further reduced, except for additional right-of-way acquisition
by the City. No required open space provided about any building or structure
will be included as part of any open space required for another building or
structure.
170.42   CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS.
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, will be permitted only within a district in which a new building for
similar occupancy would be permitted under this Zoning Code, and only when the
resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street
parking. Each conversion will be subject also to such further requirements as
may be specified herein.
170.43   SCREENING AND FENCING.
When specifically required by this Zoning Code or by virtue of any authority
granted hereunder, screening will be designed, planted, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with the following conditions:
1.   Screening Along Front Property Lines. Screening along the front property
line will be permitted as follows:
   A.   Evergreen Plantings.
      (1)   Initial height: Not less than one foot.
      (2)   Permanent height: Not more than three feet.
   B.   Masonry Walls.
      (1)   Height: Not more than three feet.
      (2)   Density: Open
   C.   Other Requirements.
      (1)   As approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council.
2.   Screening Along Side or Rear Property Lines. Screening along the side or
rear property lines will be permitted as follows:
   A.   Evergreen Plantings.
      (1)   Initial height: Not less than three feet.
      (2)   Permanent height: At least five and one-half feet.
      (3)   Density: Plant material will be planted so that, within five years,
vision and lights will be obscured by the plantings.
   B.   Masonry Walls.
      (1)   Height: Not more than six feet.
      (2)   Density: Solid.
   C.   Other Requirements.
      (1)   As approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council.
3.   Permissible Screening Materials. All materials used to provide screening
as required by this Zoning Code will conform to the following requirements:
   A.   Plant materials will be permanent-type evergreens capable of existing
in the local climate.
   B.   Masonry materials will be new materials in good condition, properly
installed, and with initial maintenance materials applied.
4.   Time of Installation. The installation of screening as required by this
Zoning Code will conform to the following requirements:
   A.   New Developments. All screening will be installed, constructed, or
provided before the property is occupied or used for its intended purpose(s).
   B.   Existing Uses. All uses actually established and in operation on the
effective date of this Zoning Code will be made to comply with the screening
requirements within a period of three years from the effective date of this
Zoning Code.
5.   Screening Maintenance. All screening materials will be properly and
adequately maintained and kept free of trash and litter.
6.   Fence Regulations. Fences shall be constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:
   A.   Residential and Commercial Districts.
      (1)   Height. Fences developed within the front yard may be constructed
to a height not to exceed 42 inches. Fences developed within the side or rear
yards may be constructed to a height not to exceed six feet. The height limits
shall be reduced by the height of any artificial berm on which a fence is
obstructed.
      (2)   Orientation. In all cases, the smooth, finished, nonstructural or
dressed side of the fence, if any, shall be directed toward the adjacent
property. Materials will be new materials in good condition and properly
installed.
      (3)   Density. Only open fences, (fences having openings between the
material of which the fence is constructed representing more than 70 percent of
the total surface are of the fence), or material of which the fence is
constructed representing not less than 20 percent, of the total surface area of
the fence, with a total length not exceeding 50 percent, of the lineal footage
of the front yard, may be constructed in the front yard. Fences constructed on
the side and rear yards may be of any density, unless otherwise restricted.
      (4)   Setbacks. Subject to the provision of Section
170.44 below and others as enumerated herein, fences may be constructed along
the boundaries of a lot without any setback restrictions. No fence, (or any
other structure, including hedges, bushes, or trees), shall be constructed,
either temporarily or permanently, within any designated easement, right-of-
way, or designated floodway. The City, or other lawful user of any such
easement or right-of-way, shall not be held liable for the removal of or damage
to any such fence or other structure which shall have been constructed in
violation of this provision. Any property owner or tenant who shall act in
violation of this provision shall assume full and complete responsibility for
any such removal or damage after written notification to remove such fence or
other structure.
   B.   Agricultural and Rural Districts. Fences in the A-1 and RR districts
which enclose agricultural, livestock, or row crop operations, and do not
exceed 42 inches in height, may be constructed along all boundaries of a lot
without regards for the setback requirements and visibility triangle
restrictions provided the fence is constructed as an open fence.
   C.   Industrial Districts. Fences constructed in industrial districts shall
also conform with the requirements as enumerated herein, with the exception
that they will be subject to the front yard setback requirements for that
district.
   D.   Barbed Wire and Electric Fences Prohibited. See Section
41.10.
   E.   Fencing of Swimming Pools Required. See Section
157.06.
170.44   VISION CLEARANCES AT CORNERS.
On all corner lots, no fences, structures, or plant materials will be placed
within a triangular space determined by a diagonal line connecting two points
measured 35 feet equidistant from the property corner. (See Section
170.07(22)(E)). Further, at all private driveways, place, or street
intersections and at alley, place, street, or alley intersections, no fences,
structures, or plant materials will be placed within a triangular space
determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 10 feet
equidistant from the point caused by the intersection of these areas, or the
property corner.
170.45   AFFECT ON ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
Essential services will be permitted to locate and operate as authorized and
regulated by this Zoning Code or other ordinances of the City. It is the
express intent of this section and Zoning Code to ordinarily exempt essential
services as defined herein from the application of this Zoning Code unless the
location of such services causes or will cause a hardship on adjoining
properties or on the neighborhood in general as determined upon review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council.
170.46   VALIDITY OF EXISTING BUILDING PERMITS.
Nothing contained herein will require any change in the overall layout, plans,
construction, size, or designated uses of any development, building, structure
or part thereof, for which the official approvals and required building permits
have been granted before the enactment of this Zoning Code, the construction of
which, conforming with such plans, will have been started prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Code and the completion thereof carried on in a
normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, and not discontinued
until completion, except for reasons beyond the developer’s control.
170.47   OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
All outdoor lighting on private property will be subject to the provisions of
Section
170.25(7)(D)(7) with the following exceptions:
1.   Holiday outdoor lighting displayed from November 15 through January 15.
2.   Light produced directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fuels.
3.   Exterior illumination of the structure of a church, school, public
library, or other publicly owned community building.
See authorized variances, Section
170.34(6).
170.48   HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Zoning Code will not apply in
the following situations:
1.   To barns, silos, or other farm buildings or structures on farms, provided
these are not less than 50 feet from every lot line; to church spires,
belfries, cupolas, and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers,
masts, and aerials; to parapet walls extending not more than four feet above
the limiting height of the building. However, if in the opinion of the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer, such structure would adversely affect adjoining
or adjacent properties, such greater height will not be authorized except by
the Board of Adjustment; to bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevator
penthouses, water tanks, monitors, and scenery lofts; to cooling towers, grain
elevators, gas holders, or other structures; or where a manufacturing process
requires a greater height than specified, such may be authorized by the Board
of Adjustment.
170.49   YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
The following general exceptions and modifications will be permitted in and
apply to all yards:
1.   Open terraces, decks, and patios, where the top of the upper-most walking
surface of the structure is not over 30 inches above the grade and the top of
the standard protective fall rail is not over 36 inches above the upper-most
walking surface and are at least five feet from every lot line. This exception
does not include permanently roofed structures. Parking, driveways, and walks
not greater than 50 inches wide that connect to a public right-of-way and are
at least five feet from a residential property line and are subject to
provisions contained elsewhere in this code.
2.   Awnings and canopies that project not more than 10 feet out from the
structure and that are at least seven feet above the average level of the
adjoining ground;
3.   Chimneys that project not more than 18 inches into the yard;
4.   Arbors, trellises, flagpoles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes, and
other similar ornamental objects;
5.   Retaining Walls. Retaining walls less than 30 inches high that are at
least five feet from the property line.
6.   Television satellite dishes not more than 24 inches in diameter. No free-
standing towers or antennas of any kind shall be permitted on any lot.
7.   Front Yards. The following general exceptions and modifications, which are
at least five feet from every lot line and project not more than three feet
into the yard, will be permitted in and apply to all front yards:
   A.   Uncovered porches, steps, attached decks, verandas, or balconies where
the top of the upper-most walking surface of the structure is not over one
story high and the top of the standard protective fall rail is at least 36
inches above the upper most walking surface, one story bay windows, chimneys,
flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, plantings, or similar features.
   B.   In any district where the average depth of two or more existing front
yards on lots within 100 feet of the lot in question and within the same block
front is less or greater than the least front yard depth prescribed, front
yards may be varied by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer for first
time, new construction only. If varied, the depth of the front yard on said lot
will not be less than the average depth of the other existing front yards or
the average depth of the two lots immediately adjoining or, in the case of a
corner lot, the depth of the front yard on the lot immediately adjoining;
provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on a lot in any residential
district will be at least 20 feet and will not exceed 60 feet.
8.   Side Yards. The following general exceptions and modifications will be
permitted in and apply to all side yards:
   A.   Along any district boundary line, any abutting side yard on a lot in
the less restricted district will have at least a width equal to that required
in the more restrictive district. Where a lot in an industrially zoned district
abuts a lot in a residentially zoned district, the side yard will be increased
by three feet for each story that the building proposed on such lot exceeds the
height limit of the said residentially zoned district.
   B.   On a corner lot the least width of a side yard along the side street
lot line will be equal to the required front yard along the side street. No
part of any accessory building will be nearer a side street lot line than the
least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
   C.   Accessory buildings or structures subject to the provisions contained
elsewhere in this Zoning Code.
   D.   Fences, plantings, or walls not over six feet above the average natural
grade.
   E.   Fire escapes, not less than five feet from the side lot line. Bay
windows which project not more than three feet from the building, provided
these projections are entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of
the side wall, making an interior angle of 22.5 degrees in the horizontal plane
with the side wall. The sum of the lengths of such projection will not exceed
one-third of the length of the wall of the main building.
   F.   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, and lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, gutters, and the like into or over a required
side yard not more than one and one-half feet.
   G.   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, verandas, stoops, balconies, or
similar features, not higher than the elevation of the first story of the
building and which features are not less than five feet from a side lot line.
   H.   Whenever a lot of record has an average width that is 20 or more
percent less than the minimum average width required in the district in which
it is located, the width of the side yard may be reduced to 10 percent of the
average width of the lot but will not be reduced to a width less than five feet
in residentially zoned districts.
9.   Rear Yards. The following general exceptions and modifications will be
permitted in and apply to all rear yards:
   A.   Fences, plantings, or walls not over six feet above the average natural
grade.
   B.   Accessory buildings or structures, which are not over nine feet in
height, which are not placed any closer than six feet to the rear lot line, and
which are subject to the provisions contained elsewhere in this Zoning Code.
   C.   Fire escapes, bays, balconies, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders,
sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves, terraces,
steps, attached decks, porches, and the like provided that they are at least 10
feet from rear lot lines.
   D.   On any lot of record, created prior to August 16, 1961, the rear yard
depth may be varied from that required herein by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer down to a minimum of not less than six feet.
170.50   ZERO LOT LINE ZONING.
Separate or divided ownership of each single-family unit of a two-family or
single-family attached dwelling will be allowed subject to and conditioned upon
compliance with the following requirements:
1.   The lot or parcel of real estate being divided into two or more parcels
allowing separate ownership thereof must originally meet all of the
requirements for uses permitted in One- and Two-Family Residential District or
a Multi-Family Residential District.
2.   A two-family or single family attached dwelling must be in existence, or
will be constructed thereon, consisting of two or more attached dwelling units
with each unit having a separate access and utility services.
3.   The division of the lot or parcel into two or more parcels will be in such
a manner as to result in one single-family dwelling unit being located on
either side of a common boundary line(s) with the common wall(s), floor(s),
and/or ceiling(s) located on the common boundary line(s) between the attached,
single-family dwelling units.
4.   Prior to the division into two or more parcels, there will be recorded in
the County Recorder’s Office, restrictive and protective covenants, agreement
(s), or covenants providing that the owners thereof are jointly and severally
liable and responsible for the maintenance and repair of the common elements
including, but not limited to, utilities, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
easements and driveways, yards, green spaces, and other common areas, all to
the point of division.
5.   The two-family and single-family attached dwellings will, in all respects
other than the division thereof, be considered as any other single-family
dwelling and will meet all requirements pertaining thereto with express
understanding that nothing herein will be construed to allow other than
residential use of the resulting parcels of real estate in the event that the
attached dwelling(s) are partially or totally damaged or destroyed.
6.   The above requirements notwithstanding, no residential structure may be
constructed across any lot line except in the case of immediately adjoining
lots where the property owner(s) execute and record a Restrictive Covenant and
Agreement Not to Sever form. For the purpose of administering this section, the
adjoining residential lots shall be considered as one lot with respect to
establishing yard and set-back provisions. The authorizations and provisions of
this section apply only to proposed construction located on those lots which
were platted prior to June 20, 1983, which are immediately adjacent to and
adjoining each other, (sharing a common side lot line), for a distance of not
less than 100 feet, and which, when considered as one lot, will not create a
double-frontage lot as defined herein.
170.51   DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, OR USES.
1.   Time of Construction. No detached, accessory building, structure, or use
will be constructed or used on any lot prior to the time of construction of the
principal building or use to which it is accessory except when the accessory
building, structure, or use is constructed in accordance with the following:
   A.   Is built on a residential lot that is immediately adjoining that lot
upon which is located the principal structure or use and is not separated, in
any way, by an alley, street, easement of any sort, or any other public way or
any fence or other such structure.
   B.   The above-referenced adjoining residential lot is owned by the owner of
the lot upon which is located the principal use or building only, and the owner
(s) execute and record a Restrictive Covenant and Agreement Not to Sever form.
For the purpose of administering this section, the adjoining lots shall be
considered as one lot with respect to establishing yard and set-back
provisions.
   C.   The proposed building, structure, or use is intended to be used solely
for the private and non- commercial benefit of the adjoining property owner.
   D.   At such time as the lot, upon which is constructed an accessory use or
structure, is no longer under the joint ownership of the person owning the lot
immediately adjacent to it, then the accessory use or structure will cease to
exist and the City may cause said use or structure to be removed by whatever
legal means may be available for said remedy at the property owner’s expense.
   E.   Percentage of Required Yard Occupied. No detached accessory building or
buildings will occupy more than 30 percent of the area of a required yard.
   F.   Height of Accessory Buildings. No detached accessory building or
structure will exceed the maximum height as specified for each zoning district.
   G.   Size and Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings and Structures. The
ground floor area aggregate total of any one or more detached accessory
buildings or structures on any residential lot, (including RR lots), or
immediately adjoining lot(s) as specified in Section
170.40, will not exceed the total ground floor area of the related principal
building or structure in question nor more than seven percent of the total lot
area(s), whichever is larger. Any detached accessory building greater than 120
square feet shall be stick-built with a permanent foundation, or must be
designed, manufactured, and originally intended to be used as an accessory
structure and have a permanent foundation. There shall not be more than two
detached accessory buildings associated with any one principal building at any
time.
   H.   Location on Lot. No detached accessory building or structure located in
a residential district will be erected in any front yard and will be so located
as to conform with all other applicable set-back requirements. In any
residential district, no detached accessory building or structure shall be
closer than eight feet to the principal building, and for each foot over 20
feet in length that the wall of an accessory structure, (except swimming
pools), parallels and is next to the principal building, the required distance
between the structures shall be increased by an additional one foot.
(Section 170.51 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
170.52   OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS AND LOADING SPACES AND SPECIAL PARKING
PROVISIONS.
1.   Definitions and Interpretations.
   A.   “Employees” means employees will be based on the maximum number of
persons on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
   B.   “Floor area” means, for the purpose of this section, in the case of
merchandising or service types of uses, floor area will mean the gross floor
area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public or
customers, patrons, or clients, but will not include areas used principally for
nonpublic purposes, such as restrooms, utilities, or dressing rooms.
   C.   “Fractions” means when units of measurement result in the requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction will require one parking space.
   D.   “Parking space interpretation” means parking spaces required for
single-family and two-family dwellings must be located on a driveway, in a car
port, or in a garage, or any continuous parking surface such as concrete,
asphalt, paver bricks, or other alternative materials that are shown to be
impervious yet as durable as concrete pavement.
   E.   Parking space” means a permanently surfaced area, of brick, asphalt, or
concrete, other than on a street or alley, either enclosed or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one automobile, but not less than nine feet wide by
19 feet long, and not less than 171 square feet, exclusive of permanently
surfaced access drives, driveways, or aisles, connecting the parking space(s)
with the street or alley, which permits satisfactory ingress and egress of an
automobile. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be not less than that
required by the Iowa Administrative Code.
   F.   “Seating and benches in places of public assembly” means in stadiums,
sports arenas, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons
or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each
20 inches of such seating facilities will be counted as one seat for the
purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking facilities under
this Zoning Code.
   G.   “Separation from use” means off-street parking will be located as
hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance will be the
walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the
nearest point of the building that such facility is required to serve. There
will be no permanent recurring, on-street private parking allowed in any
commercial or industrial district unless otherwise provided for by specific
authorization of the Council.
(Subsection 1 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
2.   Off-Street Loading Spaces. In all districts, in connection with every
building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 2,500
square feet or more, which is to be occupied by uses requiring the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there will be provided
and maintained on the same premises with such building at least one off-street
loading space, (with clear dimensions of at least 12 access and circulation
areas), accessible from an alley, access easement, or from a street, plus one
additional such loading space for each additional 10,000 square feet or
fraction thereof, or gross floor area so used in excess of 15,000 square feet.
Such space may occupy all, or any part of a required rear yard, or when
authorized by the Board of Adjustment, part of any other yard or court space on
the same premises.
3.   Off-Street Parking Areas - Scope. The provisions of this section will
apply and govern in all zoning districts, unless otherwise specified herein.
The following general requirements will apply:
   A.   The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking spaces will be the
joint and several responsibility of the operator or owner of the use or land
for which off-street parking space is required to be provided and maintained.
   B.   For land, structures, or uses actually used, occupied, or operated on
the effective date of this Zoning Code, there will be provided such off-street
parking space as was required for such land, structures, or uses by any
previous ordinance. If such land, structures, or uses are enlarged, expanded,
or changed through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity, additional employment, or other unit of measurement specified herein,
there will be provided, for that increment of expansion only, at least the
amount of off-street parking space that would be required hereunder if the
increment were a separate land, structure, or use established or placed into
operation after the effective date of this Zoning Code.
   C.   For all uses established or placed into operation after the effective
date of this Zoning Code, there will be constructed, provided, preserved, and
maintained the amount of off-street parking space hereinafter set forth.
Whenever the intensity of use of any structure or premises shall be increased
through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity,
additional employment, or other unit of measurement, such additional parking as
required herein to provide for the expanded use, shall be provided.
   D.   Whenever the existing use of a building, structure, or land area is
changed to a new use, parking facilities will be provided as required by the
new use. However, if the use existed prior to the effective date of this Zoning
Code, parking is required only in the amount that the new use would exceed the
requirements for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking
provisions of this Zoning Code.
   E.   Parking in existence on the effective date of this Zoning Code or that
was provided voluntarily after such effective date, will not hereafter be
reduced below, or if already less than, will not further be reduced below, the
requirements of this Zoning Code for a new use.
   F.   All off-street parking space, whether or not required by this Zoning
Code and when provided in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code or
in accordance with the provisions of any former ordinance, will be used,
maintained, and operated as hereinafter required.
   G.   Parking for all types of uses may be provided either in garages or open
parking areas conforming with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   H.   Where sufficient existing public parking facilities are located so as
to provide or supplement part or all of the required parking spaces, the Board
of Adjustment may reduce the number of spaces required for a particular use or
group of uses.
   I.   Parking may be with or without charge.
4.   Design, Development, and Maintenance. Every parcel of land hereafter used
as a public or private parking space, including a commercial parking lot and
also an automobile or trailer sales lot, will be designed, developed, and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Will not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any
vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
   B.   Will be improved and provided with a permanent surface of asphalt,
brick, or concrete which will be maintained at all times in such a manner so as
to be free of dust, trash, and debris.
   C.   Will be graded and drained so as to prevent the accumulation of surface
water and so as not to direct the flow of surface water from such areas onto
adjoining property or onto streets or alleys that have no drainage facilities.
   D.   Any lighting used to illuminate such parking areas will be so arranged
as to reflect the light away from adjoining properties and traffic areas.
   E.   In any residential districts, unless fully enclosed, parking areas
shall be used only by vehicles up to one and one-half tons manufacturer’s
capacity rating.
(See Section
69.09)
5.   Location. Off-street parking spaces will be located on the same zoning lot
as the use for which provided, except as otherwise specifically provided for
herein:
   A.   Parking in Yards –
      (1)   Residential Districts. In any residentially zoned districts, no
vehicle will be parked in any yard except upon a permanently constructed
driveway, built in accordance to provisions elsewhere in this Code. Parking
lots may be allowed in the front yard of residentially zoned districts if
authorized by the Board of Adjustment and provided that the district does not
require that the front yard be landscaped and devoted to another use, and
further provided that the parking is in accordance with all other Zoning Code
provisions.
      (2)   Commercial and Industrial Districts. In commercial and industrial
districts, no vehicle will be parked in any front yard except upon a
permanently constructed parking lot. Parking lots are allowed in the front yard
of commercial and industrial districts provided that the district does not
require that the front yard be landscaped and devoted to another use, and
further provided that the parking is in accordance with all other Zoning Code
provisions.
(Paragraph A – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   B.   Parkways. No parking will be permitted between the property line and
the curb line or edge of the pavement or roadway in the event no curb exists.
   C.   Combining of Spaces. Off-Street parking space will be provided for each
use. However, two or more uses located on the same zoning lot may jointly
provide for one combined parking facility.
      (1)   Where an off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by
two or more uses having different standards for determining the amount of off-
street parking space required, the parking space will be adequate in area to
provide the sum total of off-street parking space requirements of all such
uses.
      (2)   Where off-street parking space is combined and used jointly by two
or more uses having the same standard for determining the amount of off-street
parking space required, all such uses, for the purposes of this subsection,
will be considered a single unit and the gross floor area of all such uses in
all structures on the same lot or the number of employees of all such uses in
all structures on the same lot as fixed by the applicable standard, will be
taken as a single total for the purpose of determining the amount of off-street
parking space required.
   D.   Sharing of Spaces. Two or more uses may share the same off-street
parking space if the schedules of operation of all such uses are such that none
of the uses sharing the space require the off-street parking space at the same
time as any other use sharing the space. Each such use that is sharing space
will be considered as having provided such shared space individually.
   E.   Special Location Plan Option. Pursuant to the procedures thereinafter
set forth, either part or all of the required off-street parking space may be
located off the lot of the use for which the space is provided, if so granted
by a variance by the Board of Adjustment:
      (1)   Application Submittal. All applications for approval of a special
location plan hereunder will be filed with the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer by the owner(s) of the entire land area to be included within the
special location plan and the owner or owners of all structures then existing
on said land area and holders of all encumbrances of said land area and
structures then existing on said land area. The application will contain
sufficient evidence to establish to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment
that the applicants are the owners and/or encumbrancer of the designated land
and structures and will contain such information and representation required by
this Zoning Code or deemed necessary and will include plans showing the
following details: The location of the uses or structures for which off- street
parking space is required and the location at which the off-street parking
space is to be provided.
      (2)   Review and Consideration Procedures. All applications will be
reviewed and considered by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the provisions
contained in Section
170.34(7).
         a.   Any approval may establish necessary conditions and limitations
as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary.
         b.   All special location plans will be binding upon the applicants
for such special plans, their successors and assigns, will limit and control
the issuance and validity of all zoning permits and zoning certificates and
will restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures
included within such special plans to all conditions and limitations specified
in such plans and the approvals thereof.
6.   Number of Parking Spaces Required. The following numbers of useable off-
street parking spaces will be provided as a minimum, along with adequate
provisions for ingress, egress, maneuvering, and required handicapped spaces:
   A.   Residential Uses.
 
Use                               Parking Spaces Required
One- and two-family dwellings     Two for each dwelling unit excluding
                                  accessory dwelling units
Multiple-family dwellings         Two for each dwelling unit
Hotels, motels, inns, auto courts Two for each guest room, sleeping room, plus
                                  one for owner, manager, and each employee
Mobile home parks                 Two for each mobile home space
Retirement village                Two for each dwelling unit
(Paragraph A – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
   B.   Commercial Uses.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                                                         Parking Spaces
                                                                            Required
                                                                            Stacking
                                                                            places to
                                                                            accommodate
                                                                            automobiles
                                                                            equaling in
                                                                            number to five
                                                                            times maximum
                                                                            capacity of
                                                                            automobile
                                                                            laundry for
                                                                            each wash-rack
                                                                            plus one for
Automobile laundry (car wash)                                               each two
                                                                            employees.
                                                                            (Maximum
                                                                            capacity, in
                                                                            this instance,
                                                                            shall mean the
                                                                            greatest
                                                                            number of
                                                                            automobiles
                                                                            undergoing
                                                                            some phase of
                                                                            washing at the
                                                                            same time).
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            800 square
Automobile or machine sales and service garage                              feet of floor
                                                                            area plus one
                                                                            for each full-
                                                                            time employee
                                                                            Two for each
                                                                            island of
                                                                            pumps and each
Automobile service stations                                                 stations
                                                                            service stall
                                                                            plus one for
                                                                            each two
                                                                            employees.
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            200 square
                                                                            feet of floor
                                                                            area. Drive-in
                                                                            establishment,
Banks and other financial institutions                                      6 stacking
                                                                            places per
                                                                            teller or
                                                                            customer
                                                                            service
                                                                            window.
                                                                            Two for each
                                                                            chair plus one
                                                                            for each
Barber shop and Beauty Shop                                                 employee at
                                                                            work at the
                                                                            same time, and
                                                                            each tanning
                                                                            bed.
                                                                            Two parking
                                                                            spaces for the
                                                                            owner or
Bed and Breakfasts                                                          manager, plus
                                                                            one space for
                                                                            each employee
                                                                            and one per
                                                                            guest room
                                                                            Three for each
                                                                            alley, plus
                                                                            such
                                                                            additional
                                                                            spaces as may
Bowling alleys                                                              be required
                                                                            herein for
                                                                            affiliated
                                                                            uses, such as
                                                                            bars,
                                                                            restaurants,
                                                                            etc.
                                                                            One for each
Business and professional offices                                           300 square
                                                                            feet of floor
                                                                            area
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            two washers
                                                                            and/or
                                                                            cleaning
Coin operated cleaning laundries                                            machines plus
                                                                            one for each
                                                                            two employees
                                                                            at work at the
                                                                            same time
                                                                            One for each
Commercial rental storage facilities (i.e., “U-Store-It” type)          six rental
                                                                            units with not
                                                                            less than two
                                                                            Six per chapel
                                                                            room or parlor
                                                                            or one for 50
                                                                            square feet of
                                                                            room used for
Funeral homes, mortuaries                                                   services,
                                                                            whichever is
                                                                            greater, plus
                                                                            one for each
                                                                            funeral
                                                                            vehicle kept
                                                                            on premises
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            one and one-
                                                                            half water
Marina/boat storage                                                         slips, storage
                                                                            areas, or boat
                                                                            stored
                                                                            anywhere on
                                                                            the property
                                                                            Two for each
                                                                            office,
                                                                            examining
Medical or dental clinics                                                   room, and
                                                                            treatment room
                                                                            plus one for
                                                                            each employee.
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            three seats or
                                                                            one for each
                                                                            100 square
                                                                            feet of floor
Restaurants or establishments dispensing food and beverages for consumption area, plus one
at indoor tables, (not including drive-in restaurants)                      for each two
                                                                            employees at
                                                                            work at the
                                                                            same time,
                                                                            whichever is
                                                                            greater
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            15 square feet
                                                                            of floor area
                                                                            designated for
Restaurants, dry cleaners, and other similar type businesses designed to    customers
primarily accommodate pick-up, drop-off, or carry-out type activities       waiting to be
                                                                            served plus
                                                                            one for each
                                                                            employee at
                                                                            work at the
                                                                            same time
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            20 square feet
                                                                            of floor area,
                                                                            but not less
                                                                            than 10, plus
Restaurants-drive in or refreshment stands where food and or beverages are  not less than
consumed in a vehicle                                                       one-third of
                                                                            the total
                                                                            ground area be
                                                                            devoted
                                                                            exclusively to
                                                                            parking and
                                                                            accessways
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            180 square
                                                                            feet of floor
Retail stores-drug, grocery, hardware, convenience, and similar stores      area devoted
                                                                            to sales plus
                                                                            one for each
                                                                            full-time
                                                                            employee
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            500 square
Shoppers’s goods - appliance, household equipment, furniture, and similar feet of floor
stores                                                                      area plus one
                                                                            for each full-
                                                                            time employee
                                                                            Shopping
                                                                            centers with
                                                                            more than
                                                                            125,000 square
                                                                            feet of gross
                                                                            leaseable area
                                                                            and having 12
                                                                            or more stores
                                                                            shall provide
                                                                            five parking
                                                                            spaces for
                                                                            every 1,000
Shopping center or complex                                                  square feet of
                                                                            gross
                                                                            leaseable
                                                                            area. Parking
                                                                            for all other
                                                                            shopping
                                                                            centers shall
                                                                            be the sum of
                                                                            the
                                                                            requirements
                                                                            of the
                                                                            individual
                                                                            stores.
Theaters - indoor                                                           One for each
                                                                            four seats
                                                                            One for each
                                                                            two seats plus
Taverns and bars                                                            one for each
                                                                            two employees
                                                                            at work at the
                                                                            same time.
 
   C.   Industrial Uses.
 
Use                                   Parking Spaces Required
Manufacturing plants, research or     One for each two employees on maximum
testing laboratories, bottling plants working shift plus one for each vehicle
                                      used in conduct of enterprise
Truck terminals                       One for each two employees plus one for
                                      each truck
                                      One for each two employees plus one for
Warehouse and storage buildings       each vehicle used in conduct of
                                      enterprise
Wholesale establishments, (not
including warehouses and storage      One for each 600 square feet of floor
buildings other than accessory        area in excess of 4,000 square feet
buildings)
 
   D.   School, Institutions, and Places of Assembly.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Use                                     Parking Spaces Required
Auditoriums, gymnasiums, convention     One for each five seats or parking
halls, and all places of assembly with  spaces equal to on- fifth of facility
fixed seats                             in persons
Churches, temples, synagogues, and      One for each four seats in principle
mosques                                 auditorium
                                        One for each five students based on
College, universities, and trade        maximum number of students facility is
schools                                 designed to handle at one time plus one
                                        for each two employees
Dance halls and assembly halls without  One for each 50 square feet of floor
fixed seats                             area used for assembly or dancing
                                        Two for each classroom or one for each
Elementary schools                      four seats in principle auditorium,
                                        whichever is greater
                                        One for each two beds plus one for each
Hospitals                               staff doctor or visiting doctor plus
                                        one for each two employees
                                        One for each eight students based on
                                        maximum number of students facility is
Junior and Senior High Schools          designed to handle at one time or one
                                        for each four seats in the principle
                                        auditorium whichever is greater plus
                                        one for each two employees
Library, museums, art galleries, and    One for each 200 square feet of floor
civic, cultural, or historic            area
institutions
Nursery School                          One for each employee
Long-term care facilities or            One for each three beds, plus one for
convalescent homes. Assisted living     each two employees
facilities, and similar uses
Private clubs and lodges of facility in Parking spaces equal to one-fifth of
persons                                 capacity
 
   E.   Other Uses. For uses not specifically listed above in this schedule of
parking requirements, parking spaces will be provided on the same basis as
required for the most similar listed uses, or to satisfy the normal parking
demand both as determined by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
   F.   Central Business District (C-2) Parking Provisions. The previous
parking provisions notwithstanding, and acknowledging the opportunities and
challenges associated with providing adequate and suitable off-street parking
in the City’s Central Business District, particularly recognizing, maintaining,
and expanding on the historic character of this area; fully utilizing the
available public parking area on the City’s riverfront levee immediately
adjacent to this area; recognizing and promoting the need for diversity and
balance in the residential and commercial development within this area and the
need for developing adequate parking space to service this development given
the limited size of many of the originally platted lots contained within this
area, the following provisions shall be specifically and only applied to the C-
2 zoning district area that encompasses primarily the Cody Road right-of-way
from Byron Street to May Street. No on-site customer or employee parking is
required.
7.   Special Parking Provisions–Recreational Vehicles, Mobile Homes, Trucks.
Unless otherwise authorized, recreational vehicles of all types, mobile homes,
and trucks will not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or
other structure or on any lot except in accordance with the following
provisions:
   A.   Recreational Vehicles. In residential districts, not more than two
recreational vehicles, as defined in Section
170.07, which are currently licensed and registered to the person or persons
residing on the premises, or on the immediately adjoining lot, may be parked,
or stored on an unenclosed parking space on the premises, or on the immediately
adjoining lot. The recreational vehicle may only be connected to the property’s
water and electrical utilities for charging or loading of the vehicle's
systems. A recreational vehicle will not be occupied while it is stored in any
area within the corporate limits except in a mobile home park authorized under
this Zoning Code or as otherwise provided for herein below.
      (1)   No portion of any recreational vehicle shall extend onto any public
right-of-way.
      (2)   Parking is permitted on residentially zoned property in the side or
rear yards. The parking of recreational vehicles in the side or rear yards must
be done in accordance with the applicable zoning setback requirements.
      (3)   Parking is permitted in the front yard when:
         a.   The recreational vehicle is parked or stored on a permanently
surfaced parking area; and,
         b.   There is insufficient space available to park the recreational
vehicle in the rear or side yard; or,
         c.   There is no reasonable and readily available access to the rear
or side yards.
      (4)   Recreational vehicles may only be parked on vacant residential lots
when:
         a.   The lot is immediately adjoining that lot upon which is located
the principal residence of the currently licensed and registered owner(s) of
the vehicle(s) and the lot is not separated, in any way, by an alley, street,
easement of any sort, or any other public way, or any fence, or other such
structure.
         b.   The above-referenced adjoining residential lot is owned by the
currently licensed and registered owner(s) of the vehicle(s).
         c.   At such time as the lot, upon which recreational vehicle is
parked or stored, is no longer under the joint ownership of the person owning
the lot immediately adjacent to it, then the recreational vehicle must be
removed immediately from said lot and, if not, the City may cause said
recreational vehicle to be removed by whatever legal means may be available for
said remedy at the property owner’s expense.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles shall not be used for the storage of goods,
materials, or equipment other than those items which are considered to be a
part of the vehicle and essential for immediate use.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles may not be used for human occupancy on any
premises outside of a campground or travel trailer park except when used for
construction purposes at a job-site location with the permission of the City.
A contractor’s storage or job trailer must be plainly and visibly labeled with
the contractor’s name, address, phone number, logo, etc. No more than two such
trailers will be allowed on any one construction site at one time unless
otherwise approved in writing by the Council. Such trailers and their location
may be allowed only upon the approval and notification of the City
Administrator or the Council. No mobile home will be used as a contractor’s
storage or job trailer. All such trailers will be removed no later than seven
days after completion of the construction activity.
      (7)   Those properties that are immediately and directly adjacent to and
whose boundaries border the Mississippi River are exempt from the private
property location provisions of this chapter relating to the storage or parking
of watercraft only, (i.e., Canal Shore Drive S.W., West Canal Shore Drive, and
the addresses of 2423, 2429, and 2435 S. Cody Road). Notwithstanding and
including those provisions contained within Section
170.40, any person, firm, corporation, agent, employee, or contractor who
violates the provisions of this specific section will be given notice of such
violation by the City and will be afforded a period of time not to exceed 14
days within which to correct said violation.
   B.   Mobile Home. A mobile home that is not a manufactured home will be
parked or stored only in a mobile home park or mobile home sales area. A mobile
home will not be occupied, either temporarily or permanently, while it is
parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits except in a mobile
home park or campground as authorized under this Zoning Code.
   C.   Trucks. Unless otherwise provided for herein, no person will park or
store any truck one and one-half tons or larger in any residential district.
Trucks may be parked for the purpose of loading or unloading adjacent to the
place of parking for a period not to exceed 24 hours. The provisions of this
section will apply to school buses but will not apply to City Public Works
Department vehicles parked adjacent to an on-going project, or other vehicles
so designated by the Council.
170.53   SIGNS.
For all provisions relating to signs, their erection, and use, see
Chapter 161.
170.54   ASSIGNMENT OF BUILDING ADDRESSES.
Every new residence, or commercial, or industrial establishment built on any
property in the City subsequent to the date of the adoption of this Zoning
Code, will receive a building address as assigned by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the current City street addressing and
numbering system, unless otherwise modified or granted by specific action of
the Council. (See
Chapter 150)
170.55   BUFFERS, GREENWAYS, AND OPEN SPACES.
A greenway, buffer, or open space reservation will be provided by easement in
all areas of interface between commercial, industrial, and residential zones.
1.   Definitions and Interpretations. For use in this section the following
definitions and interpretations will apply:
Buffer. In addition to definition, a buffer means any land use method that may
ease the effect between one land use and a different land use in the sense of
helping to achieve greater efficiency and economy of land development by
promoting the grouping of those activities which have similar needs and are
compatible, and in the sense of promoting the purpose of this Zoning Code. (See
Section
170.07(2)(K))
Greenway. In addition to the definition, greenway means a type of buffer in
which the use of land is open in the sense of being free of all structures,
parking areas, drives, signs, right-of-ways, easements, and the like, however,
a greenway may be fenced. Greenway easements will be a minimum of 50 feet wide
and may be developed for bicycle or pedestrian traffic and may have benches,
trees, and shrubs, and such uses must be specifically provided for in the
language of the easement. (See Definitions section)
Open Space. Means a type of buffer in which use of land is open in the sense of
being free of buildings only. Open space will be of a determined size and may
yield any desirable open space use (i.e., parks, parking lots, playgrounds,
etc.) (See Section
175.27(3))
2.   Use of Buffers Required. Buffer areas shall be provided when a use is
established in a more intensive zoning district which is adjacent to a less
intensive zoning district consisting of open spaces, greenways, landscaping,
berm fences, and other physical barriers, or some combination of the above, to
reduce the impact of the difference in activity, sound, light, and bulk of the
development within the less intense zone. Buffer areas shall be included and
shown on the site plan and shall include the following as a minimum:
Table of Buffer Requirements
(Distance Requirements Between Districts, in feet)
Table of Buffer Requirements
(Distance Requirements Between Districts, in feet)
    R*   C-1  C-2  C-3  I-1  I-2
R*  NONE 15   25   30   40   50
C-1 15   NONE 15   25   30   40
C-2 25   15   NONE 15   25   40
C-3 30   25   15   NONE 20   30
I-1 40   30   25   20   NONE 15
I-2 50   40   40   30   15   NONE
*Refers to any parcel containing a residential dwelling unit, including
A-1 and RR.
 
   A.   The buffer provision responsibility shall belong to the higher
intensity use when being established next to an existing lower density use.
   B.   When both properties are vacant and un-platted, half of the land
required to provide a buffer shall be provided by each use and the development
of buffer improvements shall be coordinated in conjunction with these
requirements.
   C.   The distance requirements for buffer areas may be reduced by up to 50
percent if an opaque structural barrier, decorative fence, wall, landscaping,
or other similar device or method is employed.
   D.   If landscaping is used as a buffer technique, it shall be capable of
effectively screening headlights, outdoor storage areas, and trash receptacle
areas from abutting uses.
3.   Provision of Greenways, Buffers, or Open Spaces. The provision of yards,
courts, and other open spaces and minimum lot areas legally required for a
building under this Code, will be a continuing obligation of the owner of such
building or of the property on which it is located as long as the building is
in existence. Such open spaces will be completely landscaped with such
aesthetic materials as, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, and grass, and
continuously maintained. Such open space will be landscaped so as not to
encourage the storage of motor vehicles except as permitted by this Code.
Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts, or other open spaces, or
minimum lot areas allocated to any building, will be by virtue of change of
ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, or other
open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
4.   Location of Open Spaces. All yards, courts, and other open spaces
allocated to a building or group of buildings will be located on the same
zoning lots as such buildings or group of buildings are located.
170.56   CAMPGROUNDS.
The purpose of this section is to regulate campgrounds and travel trailer parks
in the City, and to provide the minimum standard specifications for the
construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of said parks. Further,
it is unlawful for any person to hereafter establish, maintain, conduct, or
otherwise operate within the City limits, any campground or travel trailer
park, unless such person will first obtain a special exception and other
approval for the use of the described area as provided for herein. Recreational
vehicles, tents, or other portable dwellings may not be used for human
occupancy on any premises outside of a campground or travel trailer park,
except when used for construction purposes at a job-site location with the
permission of the City.
1.   Annual License and Inspection and Fees. The annual license fee for each
campground will be set by resolution by the Council, (or any fractional portion
thereof), and will be due and payable to the Clerk by the licensee on or before
the last day of January of each year. Prior to the issuance of a license, the
owner will provide to the Clerk a statement by the County Treasurer stating
that payment of all fees and charges as required by Chapter 435 of the Code of
Iowa, have been paid. The campground operator will be required to report to the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Building Inspector every year
at least 30 days prior to the opening for business of the park to inspect the
various facilities of the campground, and to issue to the operator of said
campground a notice showing compliance with the regulations of the City. The
charge for the inspection will be borne by the campground operator at the rate
per inspection set by resolution of the Council.
2.   Application for License to Operate a Campground. Any person desiring to
operate or expand a campground will first file an application for a campground
license with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer. The application will
be in writing, signed by the applicant and landowner and will be accompanied by
an initial license fee as set by Council resolution. The application will
contain the following:
   A.   Name and address of the applicant.
   B.   Street address location or legal description of the site, lot, or tract
of land upon which the campground is to be located.
   C.   Duplicate sets of the plat of the campground, and plans and
specifications of all buildings and other improvements.
   D.   Such further information as may be required by the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer and the Police Chief and Fire Chief to determine if the
proposed campground will comply with all laws relating to the public health and
safety.
   E.   Sufficient information to show complete compliance with Chapter 435 of
the Code of Iowa. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will forward said
application and related materials to the Police Chief and Fire Chief for their
review and consideration and, when they have rendered their decision the
application materials will then be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Council for final review, consideration, and action thereon.
2.   Design, Development, and Maintenance Standards. The following listed
standards will be used in the design, development, and maintenance of
campground/parks:
   A.   A maximum of 15 recreational vehicles or tents will be permitted on any
acre of ground, including streets, within a campground.
   B.   The site, lot, or tract of land upon which the park is located, will be
well drained and graded to insure adequate and proper water drainage and to
eliminate the creation of pools of standing or stagnant water.
   C.   The main entrance to the park will be off of a public highway or street
and said entrance must meet the approval of the City with regards to location,
width, grade, drainage, etc.
   D.   Individual camp sites will be developed and no more than one
recreational vehicle or tent will occupy a site at the same time.
   E.   Each site will be specifically developed appropriate to its use with
easy access for trailers or motor homes, adequate parking, separate underground
water, and electric service, and will be clearly marked with an easily read,
identifying number.
   F.   The owner will provide blanket overhead and underground easements for
the installation of utilities as requested.
   G.   All construction including electric and plumbing work, will be done to
standards of national, State, and local codes as each applies and will meet the
approval of the appropriate inspecting official of the City.
   H.   Provisions will be made for emptying holding tanks, if applicable.
   I.   All fires will be made in stoves or other equipment provided for that
purpose. Open unattended fires will not be permitted.
   J.   Playground equipment suitable for small children will be provided by
the park operator.
   K.   The park operator will assume all responsibility for the necessary
insect and rodent control on the premises of the park.
   L.   The park operator will be required to keep an accurate and complete
record of the overnight guests harbored in the park. Said records will include
the guest’s name, address, auto license number, and the year and make of car.
Also, the date of arrival and departure. This record will be shown upon request
to any duly authorized representative of any law enforcement agency.
   M.   No guest will stay in a travel trailer longer than 14 days, with
exceptions being made for sickness within the party or equipment breakdown of
the guest’s auto or trailer, in which case, another week will be allowed.
   N.   The park will be lighted at night with not less than 200-watt lamps at
intervals of 100 feet, or equivalent lighting approved by the City. Lamps must
be located at least 15 feet above the ground.
   O.   An adequate supply of safe, potable water for drinking and domestic
services will be provided for each site. An adequate supply of hot water will
be provided at all times in the service buildings for bathing, washing,
cleaning, and laundry facilities.
   P.   Each and every rule and regulation promulgated by the State Department
of Health, Department of Natural Resources, and all City regulations now in
effect, or which may hereafter be enacted affecting public health, will be
complied with. Disposal systems for accepting sewage from tanks and self-
contained aircraft type units will be maintained by the park operator. Said
unit(s) will be conveniently located for units entering or leaving the park.
These facilities will be inspected by the City at least once a year. The
campground will be serviced by the public sewer system of the City or by a
private disposal system as approved by the City. All sewage disposal apparatus
including appurtenances thereto, will be provided, maintained, and operated in
such a manner so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard. All plumbing
provided in the campground will comply with State laws and local ordinances
governing plumbing.
   Q.   An adequate system of enclosed refuse and garbage collection and
necessary containers, therefore, will be provided by the campground operator
and full use will be made of these services available for waste and garbage
disposal. It will be the responsibility of the campground operator to provide
such adequate service as may be required by the City.
3.   All requirements with respect to expansions or additions to existing parks
will be with respect to said additions or expansion and will not require
anything with respect to parks existing as of the adoption date of this Zoning
Code, except as specifically provided for in this chapter, which would not have
been required in the absence of such addition or expansion.
170.57   SITE PLANS REQUIRED FOR UNDEVELOPED PARCELS.
1.   Site Plans - Purpose and Review Applicability.
   A.   Purpose. In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, it is
essential that new developments on currently undeveloped land and substantial
improvements made to existing properties meet established minimum standards for
the design of such developments, to protect existing developments, to insure
adequate provisions for public or private utilities, such as sewer, water, gas,
electricity, storm sewers and streets, and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the public.
   B.   Review Applicability. A site plan review is required whenever a person,
firm, corporation, or any other entity wishes to construct any structure or
make any improvements of any nature to a previously undeveloped tract of land
for any purpose other than for the construction of or improvements to a one or
two-family, residential use, or whenever a person, firm, corporation, or any
other entity wishes to construct any structure or make any improvements of any
nature to an existing, improved tract of land where the proposed use of the
tract of land will change or where the proposed construction or improvements:
      (1)   Significantly changes or alters the size or structure of the
building,
      (2)   Significantly changes or alters pedestrian or vehicular traffic
flow or parking requirements, either on or off-site, or
      (3)   Substantially increases the capacity or activity of the current
building or site.
If the proposed use is a principal permitted use within that zoning district,
the Planning and Zoning Commission will review the site plan. For special
permitted uses, the site plan will be reviewed by the Commission only after a
special exception has been considered and issued by the Board of Adjustment.
(See Section
170.34(3)(I))
2.   Application Review and Consideration Procedures. The site plan review
application, and consideration procedures will be the same as those used for
amendments to this Zoning Code, as listed in Section
170.34(3).
3.   Site Plan Review Standards. The standards of site design listed below are
intended only as minimum requirements so that the general development pattern
in the City may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances and topography,
and to insure reasonable and orderly growth in the City.
   A.   All proposed developments will conform to the land use policies of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City, the subdivision regulations and procedures,
where applicable; such other City ordinances as may pertain to such
developments; and any applicable rules and regulations of the Department of
Transportation, the Department of Health, the Department of Natural Resources,
other agencies of the State, and County.
   B.   Internal roads and streets will be constructed to accommodate the
traffic generated. Entrances and exits on to public streets will not unduly
increase congestion or traffic hazards on the public streets and the proposed
site.
   C.   The proposed development will be designed with appropriate regard for
topography, surface drainage, natural drainage-ways and streams, wooded areas,
and other naturally sensitive areas which lend themselves to protection from
degradation.
   D.   The proposed development will be designed with adequate water supply
and distribution systems and sewage treatment facilities and storm water drains
and structures necessary to protect the public health and welfare by not
overloading existing public utilities. Except when waived by the Council,
runoff from development will not be outletted into drainage facilities in
excess of the existing runoff prior to development.
   E.   The proposed development will be designed, and the buildings and
improvements will be located within the tract or parcel in such a manner as not
to unduly diminish or impair the use and enjoyment of adjoining or surrounding
property. And to such end, the developer will provide for such fences,
landscaping, screening, and other improvements as are proper and necessary to
buffer the proposed use from the existing or potential surrounding land uses.
   F.   The proposed development will be designed so as not to unduly increase
the public danger of fire, explosion, and other safety hazards to the general
public and the persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
property.
4.   Required Information on Site Plan(s). The purpose of the site plan is to
delineate the information needed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
Council to determine whether the proposed development meets the requirements of
this section and complies with the standards listed in Section
170.57(3).
The site plan, drawn to a scale of one-inch equals 100 feet (1” = 100’), or
larger, but not larger than 30 inches by 36 inches (30” x 36”), will be
prepared by a registered engineer, landscape architect, urban planner, or other
similar professional and will include at least the following:
   A.   Location map showing relationship to surrounding roads, streams, and
public facilities and utilities.
   B.   The existing and proposed site conditions, including contours at two
foot intervals where the ground slope is less than 10 percent, and contours at
five foot intervals where the ground slope is greater than 10 percent. (Areas
having a slope greater than 10 percent will be highlighted or specifically
delineated.) Water courses, floodplains, and other unique natural features will
be shown. Individual trees having a diameter of four inches or more measured
four feet above the natural ground line or general wooded areas will be shown.
(If the site contains any generally wooded areas, the edges of the wooded area
(s) and a note reading wooded area will be shown, in addition to the
individually designated trees mentioned above.)
   C.   All required linear yard dimensions of the particular zoning district
in question and those provided if different from required.
   D.   Parking spaces, drives, radius of curvature of ingress and egress
drives, circulation patterns of traffic, access to public or private streets,
and location of all structures.
   E.   Physical characteristics pertinent to the development.
   F.   The total lot area to be considered and exterior lot dimensions; the
square footage and percentage of the lot covered by existing and proposed
structure(s) and hard surfacing; and area of required yards and open space.
   G.   The number of parking spaces required, and number provided.
   H.   The following identification: owner's name, the underlying zoning
designation, location of the property, applicant's name, address, and phone
number, attorney's name, and phone number, if involved in the consideration
process, and the name, phone number, and address of the party who prepared the
drawing.
   I.   All dimensions are necessary to assure that the proposed development is
in accord with the requirements of this section.
   J.   Front, side, and rear setbacks.
   K.   Key plan, legend, and notes.
   L.   Proposed and existing features not otherwise mentioned, such as
specific recreational areas and equipment, water retention areas, ponds,
waterways, etc.
   M.   Aerial perspective drawing(s) of the site showing concept described in
the site plan, specifically representing the building and/or sign appearance(s)
and contour effect of the site.
   N.   Elevation plans for exterior vertical and horizontal design of the
building(s) and sign(s) which are being contemplated.
   O.   Conceptual construction plans for public or private improvements for
streets, sanitary, storm sewers, and water systems in accordance with the
procedures of Sections
175.09(1)(N) through
175.09(1)(Q) of the subdivision development regulations.
   P.   Legal documents such as, but not limited to, homeowners' association/
water association agreements, restrictive covenants, and agreement contracts or
other documents necessary to insure the concept involved.
   Q.   Proposed streets and existing streets with both paving and right-of-way
indicated.
   R.   All utility easements, both privately owned and public, and any
proposed.
   S.   Outline of proposed and existing buildings on the site.
   T.   Proposed or existing paving or surfaced area for driveways or parking
lots, or other uses for durable surface.
   U.   Proposed or existing sidewalk locations and easements, if appropriate.
   V.   Proposed and existing landscaping, other than natural features.
   W.   Proposed or existing sign location(s) and height(s).
   X.   Identification of existing and proposed plats and development on
adjacent property as well as the location of existing and proposed signs within
100 feet of the site.
   Y.   Proposed or existing property lines.
   Z.   Proposed or existing fencing and identification of the type and height
of fence.
   AA.   Proposed or existing access or other easements.
   BB.   Location of proposed or existing manholes, drainage intake, fire
hydrants, utility pole anchors, and guides.
   CC.   Date, north marker, bar-graph scale, and name of proposed development.
   DD.   Location and name of adjoining subdivisions, subdivision lots therein,
and names of the adjoining landowners.
   EE.   Analysis of site run-off characteristics, (including plan(s) and
calculations).
   FF.   Drainage areas shall be drawn showing the direction of flow of all
surface water.
   GG.   Photographs of the site, including camera location, direction of
views, and key numbers.
   HH.   Final approval signature block of the Council and Planning and Zoning
Commission with signature and date spaces for Mayor, Clerk, and Planning and
Zoning Commission Chairperson.
   II.   Such other information as deemed necessary by the Council, Planning
and Zoning Commission, or the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
5.   Site Plan Changes. Site plan changes will be reviewed and considered as
follows:
   A.   Approved Site Development Plan - Binding Requirement. The site will be
developed according to the approved site development plan except where
authorized changes are permitted. The approved site development plan and
supporting data will be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees,
and assigns. Any site development work, including structures, landscaping, and
any other improvements, considered and approved by the City under the site
review process must be fully completed, and any and all site developments and
improvements must be capable of being fully utilized for their intended purpose
(s), no later than 18 months from the date of the City’s approval of such plan,
unless some other time-frame is specified in the City’s formal approval. If the
site development work as approved has not commenced or is not fully completed,
(as specified above), within the above-stated time-frame, a Stop Work Order
will be issued by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, at which time
all site development work will cease on the site, and the site plan must be
resubmitted to the City, pursuant to the requirements of this section, for
their further review and reconsideration. No further site development work will
be permitted on the site until such time as the City has reviewed and re-
approved the site plan.
   B.   Major Changes. A change in the approved site development plan which
alters the concept or intent of the development including a change in the
configuration, increase in floor area or the height of buildings, an increase
in intensity, a reduction of proposed open space, a change in road locations or
standards, or other major changes, will be approved only by submission of a new
site plan in accordance with the procedures as previously set forth for the
approval of site development plans.
   C.   Minor Changes. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may approve
minor changes in the site development plan which do not change the concept or
intent of the development.
   D.   Approved Plans Superseded by Approved Revised Plans. All approved site
development plans superseded by an approved revised site development plan will
be considered to be null and void at the time of approval of the revised plan.
6.   Fees. At the time an application and site development plan proposal are
filed with the City and prior to any consideration by the City, the applicant
will remit a site plan review fee in accordance with the fee schedule as listed
in the Petition for Hearing and Consideration of Action application form.
170.58   HARBORING AND MAINTAINING LIVESTOCK.
The harboring and maintaining of livestock is only permitted in the General
Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts where such activities in said
district are no closer than 500 feet to the nearest residential dwelling other
than that used by the party(s) conducting said activities. Urban chickens are
permitted in Single-Family Residential or Rural Residential Districts in
accordance with City Code
Chapter 55.
(Section 170.58 – Ord._852 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
170.59   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of these provisions
are to:
1.   Purpose.
   A.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas;
   B.   Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;
   C.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
   D.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
   E.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
   F.   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful
design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
   G.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
   H.   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
   I.   To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
In furtherance of these goals, the City shall give due consideration to the
master plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive
areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
2.   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
following:
   A.   All new towers or antennas constructed or placed in City shall be
subject to these regulations, except as provided in Paragraphs B-D shown below.
   B.   This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any
antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a
federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
   C.   Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to
meet the requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements of Sections
170.59(8) and 170.59(9).
   D.   For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array, consisting of
one or more tower units and supporting ground systems which function as one AM
broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks
and separation distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the
towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added within the
perimeter of the AM array by right.
3.   Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be considered either
principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure
on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on
such lot.
4.   Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower
or antenna complies with district development regulations including, but not
limited to, setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
5.   Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer an inventory of
its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that
are either within the jurisdiction of City or within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design
of each tower. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer may share such
information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or
special use permits under this Zoning Code or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas within the jurisdiction of City, provided, however that the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer is not, by sharing such information, in
any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
6.   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce
visual obtrusiveness.
   B.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
   C.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
7.   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
8.   State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the
State or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers
and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling State or federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner’s expense.
9.   Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable State or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to
the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance
within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner’s expense.
10.   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation
distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the City
irrespective of municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
11.   Non-Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, such as, but not limited to public utilities or private
utilities.
12.   Filing of Franchises. Owners or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in City have been obtained and
shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
13.   Additional Public Notice Required. For purposes of this section, any
special use request, variance, or other request, shall be accompanied by a
public notice which shall be given to all abutting property owners and all
property owners of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in Section 170.59(20)(I)(2), Table 2, in addition to
any notice otherwise required by this Code.
14.   Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
15.   Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
Section 170.59(21).
16.   Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The City encourages the users of towers and
antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers or
antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given
priority in the review process.
17.   Permitted Uses. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be
permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use
permit. The following uses are specifically permitted:
   A.   Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise
controlled by the City, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or
tower has been approved by City.
18.   Administratively Approved Uses. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
   A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council shall consider
requests for the siting of towers or antennas and the uses listed in this
section, following the procedures of the site plan review process, see Section
170.57.
   B.   Each tower or antenna siting applicant applying for administrative
approval shall apply to the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer providing
the information and application fee as set forth in the site plan review
process, see Section
170.57.
   C.   The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the
application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with the requirements of this Code.
   D.   In connection with the consideration of any tower or antenna siting
proposal, any zoning district setback requirements may be waived by up to 50
percent, if shared siting and uses are presented for the City’s consideration.
   E.   In connection with any such approval, and in order to encourage the use
of mono-poles, the reconstruction of an existing tower to mono-pole
construction may be allowed.
19.   List of Approved Locations and Uses. The following locations and uses may
be considered for siting:
   A.   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, may be considered in any A-1, RR, C-3, I-1, or I-2 zoning districts.
   B.   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers in accordance with
the following:
      (1)   Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer as an accessory use to any commercial
or industrial structure, provided:
         a.   The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest
point of the structure.
         b.   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations.
         c.   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
      (2)   An antenna which is attached to an existing tower may be approved
by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer without further site plan review
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council, and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of towers,
collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such collocation is
accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
         a.   A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the
existing tower, unless the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer allows
reconstruction as a mono-pole.
      (3)   Height.
         a.   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height,
not to exceed 30 feet over the tower’s existing height, to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna.
         b.   The height change referred to in Section 170.59(19)(C) above may
only occur one time per communication tower.
         c.   The additional height referred to in Section 170.59(19)(B)(3)(a)
above shall not require any additional distance separation as set forth herein.
The tower’s pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such distance
separations.
      (4)   Onsite Location.
         a.   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the collocation of
an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing
location.
         b.   After a tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one
tower may remain on the site.
         c.   A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the
original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant to Section 170.59(20)(I). The location of a tower
hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a violation of Section 170.59(20)
(I).
         d.   The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in Section 170.59(20)(I) shall only be permitted when approved by
the Council.
   C.   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple low-
powered transmitters or receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such
as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers.
20.   Special Exceptions Required. The following provisions shall govern the
considerations of granting special exceptions for towers or antennas by the
Board of Adjustment:
   A.   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use or permitted to be
approved administratively pursuant to this chapter, then a special exception
shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an
antenna in all zoning districts.
   B.   Applications for special exceptions under this section shall be subject
to the procedures and requirements of Section
170.34(8) of the Zoning Code, except as herein.
   C.   In granting a special exception, the Board of Adjustment may impose
conditions to the extent the Board of Adjustment concludes such conditions are
necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining
properties.
   D.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   E.   In addition to the information required for the submittal of a special
exception contained within Section
170.34(8), an applicant for a special exception concerning the siting of a
tower and/or antenna shall submit the following information:
      (1)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities or the County),
land use plan classification of the site, and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in Section 170.59(20)(I), adjacent
roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking,
and other information deemed by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer to
be necessary to assess compliance with this Zoning Code.
      (2)   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
      (3)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and un-platted
residentially zoned properties.
      (4)   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to Section 170.59(20)(E) shall
be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the
type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner or operator of the
existing tower(s), if known.
      (5)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
      (6)   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
      (7)   A description of compliance with Sections 170.59(20)(E) -170.59(20)
(I) and all applicable federal, State, or local laws.
      (8)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction
of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future
users.
      (9)   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for
the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the municipality.
      (10)   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures, to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
      (11)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the City based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological, or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
   F.   Factors Considered in Granting Special Exceptions for Towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of special exception applications
pursuant to Section
170.34, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a special exception, although the Board of
Adjustment may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of
these criteria if the Board of Adjustment concludes that the goals of this Code
are better served thereby:
      (1)   Height of the proposed tower.
      (2)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
      (3)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
      (4)   Surrounding topography;
      (5)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
      (6)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
      (7)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
      (8)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in Section 170.59(20)(G) below of this ordinance.
   G.   Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or
Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that no
existing tower, structure, or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's a proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Board of Adjustment
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
      (1)   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet applicant’s engineering requirements.
      (2)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant’s engineering requirements.
      (3)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
      (4)   The applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant’s proposed antenna.
      (5)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
      (6)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
      (7)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network
using multiple low-powered transmitters or receivers attached to a wire-line
system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or
antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
   H.   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers
for which a special exception is required; provided, however, that the Board of
Adjustment may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this
chapter would be better served thereby:
      (1)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to 100 percent of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
      (2)   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
   I.   Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the standard separation
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby:
      (1)   Tower separation from off-site uses or designated areas shall be
measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses or
designated areas and shall comply with the minimum standards as specified in
Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated Area               Separation Distance
Single-family dwellings                    200 feet or 200% height of tower,
                                           whichever is greater
Vacant Single-Family or One-and Two-Family
residentially zoned land which is either   200 feet or 200% height of tower,
platted or has preliminary subdivision     whichever is greater2
plan approval which is not expired
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned       200 feet or 200% height of tower,
lands3                                     whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential          100 feet or 100% height of tower,
dwellings                                  whichever is greater
Non-residentially zoned lands or non-      None; only setbacks apply
residential uses
1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes.
2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback line.
3 Includes any un-platted residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any multi-
family residentially zoned land.
(Subparagraph (1) – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
(2)   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for and measured
between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of
the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the
proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown in Table 2.
 
Table 2
Existing Towers - Types
                                    Mono-                 Mono-
                      Lattice Guyed pole 75 ft. in height pole less than 75 ft.
                                    or greater            in height
Lattice               5,000   5,000 1,500                 750
Guyed                 5,000   5,000 1,500                 750
Mono-pole 75 ft. in   1,500   1,500 1,500                 750
Height or Greater
Monopole Less Than 75 750     750   750                   750
ft. in Height
 
   J.   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-
climbing device; provided however, that the Board of Adjustment may waive such
requirements, as it deems appropriate.
   K.   Landscaping. All applicants shall abide by these landscaping
requirements, or those found in Section 170.61, whichever is greater, provided,
however, that the Board of Adjustment may waive such requirements if the goals
of this chapter would be better served thereby.
      (1)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
      (2)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
21.   Buildings or Other Equipment Storage.
   A.   Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following:
      (1)   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height. In addition, for
buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the related
unmanned equipment structure, if over 100 square feet of gross floor area or 15
feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the
roof of the structure.
      (2)   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   B.   Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located in a rear or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than eight feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area. The cabinet
or structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
at least 42 - 48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches. Placement
of the cabinet or any screening must not interfere with the ability of drivers
of vehicles to see at intersections (the vision clearance area).
      (2)   In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than eight feet in height or 100 square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across the street
from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence four feet in height or an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of
at least 36 inches.
   C.   Antennas Located on Towers. The related unmanned equipment structure
shall not contain more than 100 square feet of gross floor area or be more than
eight feet in height and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard
requirements of the zoning district in which located.
   D.   Modification of Building Size Requirements. The requirements of
Sections 170.59(21)(A) – 170.59(2)(C) above may modified by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Council, in the case of permitted uses, or by the Board of
Adjustment, in the case of uses permitted by special exception to encourage
collocation.
22.   Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any antenna or tower that is
not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within
90 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90
days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense. If
there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not
become effective until all users cease using the tower.
23.   Nonconforming Uses.
   A.   Not Expansion of Nonconforming Use. Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or
structure.
   B.   Preexisting Towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
preexisting towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a
preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
170.60   GARAGE SALES.
1.   Hours of Operation. Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than
the daylight hours of three consecutive days.
2.   Display of sale property. Personal property offered for sale may be
displayed within the residence in a garage, carport, a rear yard and/or front
yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage
sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way. Only personal property
shall be sold.
3.   Advertising and signs. Only the following specified signs may be displayed
in relation to a pending garage sale:
   A.   Four signs of not more than four square feet each shall be permitted to
be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being
conducted.
   B.   Four signs of not more than two square feet each are permitted off
premise provided that written permission to erect said signs is received from
the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed.
   C.   No off-premises sign shall be exhibited prior to the day such sale is
to commence. No sign may be exhibited on the premise of the garage sale more
than two days prior to the sale.
   D.   Signs must be removed at the close of the garage sale.
   E.   Signs are specifically prohibited from being posted on any City right-
of-way or structures located within the right-of-way.
4.   Number of Garage Sales. No residence shall be the site of more than three
garage sales per calendar year. The owner and occupant of the residence whereon
the garage sale is located shall be deemed to jointly control the property for
purposes of this section and shall be responsible for complying with this
section.
170.61   LANDSCAPING.
These landscaping regulations are intended to improve the physical appearance
of the community; to improve the environmental performance of new development
by contributing to the abatement of heat, glare, and noise, and by promoting
natural percolation of stormwater, and by improving the quality of air; to
buffer potentially incompatible land uses from one another; and to conserve the
value of property and neighborhoods within the City.
1.   Applicability. No building permit shall be issued for the construction,
reconstruction, or structural alteration of a building and/or its parking area
nor shall a Certificate of Occupancy be granted for a use without conformity
with the provisions of these landscape regulations. However, the following
shall be exempt from the landscape regulations of this section:
   A.   Reconstruction or replacement of a lawfully existing use or structure
following casualty loss.
   B.   Reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvements to existing uses or
structures which does not substantially change the location of structures or
the location and design of parking facilities or other site improvements.
   C.   Additions or enlargements of existing uses or structures, except
surface parking, which increase floor area or impervious coverage by less than
20 percent. Where such additions or enlargements are 20 percent or greater,
these provisions shall apply only to that portion of the lot, site, or common
development where the new development occurs.
   D.   Any individual lot occupied by a single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling in an R-1 of R-2 Zoning District.
2.   Conflicts. Any conflict between this section and another section of this
Code shall be resolved in favor of the more restrictive provision.
3.   Landscape Plan Review Procedure. A landscape plan shall be submitted as
part of the site plan review process. If no site plan review is required, a
landscape plan shall be submitted for consideration before any building permits
are issued. The Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application. An applicant should submit 18 copies of the landscape plan with
the application.
   A.   Landscape Plan Contents Requirements. A landscape plan at a scale of
one inch 20 feet shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other similar
professional and shall show graphically and label clearly all items related to
the project, including but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Title, scale, north marker, and date.
      (2)   Zoning classification of site and adjoining property.
      (3)   Location and dimensions of all retaining walls, fences, walks,
existing and proposed structures, overhead utilities, refuse disposal areas,
electrical and mechanical equipment, and vehicle use areas.
      (4)   All lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way.
      (5)   All surrounding roads, including names.
      (6)   The total square footage of the vehicle use areas and the street
yard.
      (7)   Any condition listed in Section
170.43.
      (8)   Location, scientific name, common name, quantity, and size of all
existing plant materials and designation of all vegetation to remain and/or be
removed.
      (9)   Proposed landscape plantings by location, scientific name, common
name, quantity, planting size, and planting method. A plant list should be
provided listing this information and keyed to plant locations on the plan.
      (10)   Plant installation details.
      (11)   Contours at one foot intervals of all proposed berms and the area
within the drip-line of all trees to be preserved.
      (12)   Drainage and detention areas.
      (13)   Any other feature as determined necessary by the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
      (14)   Elevations, cross-sections, and other details as determined
necessary by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
      (15)   Designation of area(s) to be used for snow storage.
4.   Common Development. A common development that includes more than one lot
or site shall be treated as one lot or site for the purposes of satisfying the
requirements of this section.
5.   Previously approved site plans. Any site plan or landscaping plan approved
by the Council prior to the effective date of this chapter shall remain
enforceable and in force.
6.   Final Calculations. All final calculations of required landscaping shall
be rounded up to the next whole number if the tenths place is equal to or
greater than five. All final calculations used to determine the required
landscaping shall be rounded down to the next whole number if the tenths place
is less than five.
7.   Installation. All landscaping required by this section shall be installed
prior to occupancy or commencement of a use. If the landscaping cannot be
installed prior to occupancy or commencement of a use because of climatic
conditions, the building Inspector may issue a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy and grant a delay of landscaping installation until the calendar date
of June 1 immediately following the date of said Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy. However, in such case, the applicant shall post a surety or cash
bond equal to 150 percent of the total cost of the landscaping. No final
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is installed as
approved.
8.   Maintenance of Required Landscaping. Upon installation or preservation of
required landscape materials, appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure
their continued health and maintenance. Required materials that do not remain
healthy shall be replaced consistent with the approved landscape plan.
9.   Obstruction of View. Landscaping installed in any landscaped area shall be
in accordance with the visibility requirements outlined in Section
170.44.
10.   Rights-of-Way, Easements, and Drainage. Required landscaping shall not
disturb drainage systems or be placed upon easements or rights-of-way.
11.   Material Standards. All landscape material required by this Zoning Code
shall conform to generally accepted industry standards.
170.62   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT LAND USES.
The purpose of the provisions of this section is to protect health, welfare,
and property values from secondary effects of the location of various adult
entertainment land uses, within the City limits. The City has reviewed various
ordinances, communicated with other communities, and reviewed various studies
relating to such location of adult entertainment land uses, and has determined
that the protection sought is best served by enacting provisions of regulation
as set forth subsequent hereto. It is the purpose of this section to regulate
sexually-oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious
location and concentration of sexually-oriented businesses within the City. The
provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or
effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials. Nothing in this section is
intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or
maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any other
provisions of law.
1.   Location of Adult Use Establishments.
   A.   Adult use establishments are prohibited within 1,000 feet from the
following specified zoning districts or uses:
      (1)   Any residential district, including overlay planned developments.
      (2)   Any public or private school, including daycare facilities.
      (3)   Any church, religious facility or institution, or community center.
      (4)   Any public park.
      (5)   Any other public building or facility.
      (6)   From the intersection of the centerlines of U.S. Highway 67 (Cody
Road) and Interstate 80.
   B.   No two adult use establishments shall be located closer than 300 feet
to one another.
   C.   The distances provided for herein-above shall be measured by following
a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest
point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to
the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary
line from which the proposed land use is to be separated.
170.63   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
All solar energy systems should be erected pursuant to
Chapter 158, Solar Energy Uses. The application shall be on forms provided by
the Building Inspector and shall contain all information needed to show that
the proposed construction or alteration complies with all applicable provisions
of this chapter.
1.   Small Solar Energy System.
   A.   Small systems shall be allowed as permitted use in identified zoning
districts if it meets conditions in this Code.
   B.   Only one freestanding unit shall be allowed per property and shall only
be allowed in a rear yard location and shall meet all rear yard setback
requirements as an accessory structure.
   C.   Maximum height for freestanding unit shall be 15 feet.
   D.   Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory structures
and shall not project into minimum yard setback requirement.
   E.   Roof-mounted system panels (other than solar panels flat to the roof)
shall only be located on the rear side of a roof facing or shall not exceed
total height of subject zoning district property is located.
   F.   Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front and/or side roof
facing only if they are mounted flat against the roof surface or incorporated
into roofing surface material.
   G.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
   H.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within 90 days.
   I.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no advertising
or logos on system panels or supporting structure other than a small
identification of the manufacturer.
   J.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached to
structures.
   K.   System shall comply with adopted building and fire codes and all other
applicable State and federal regulations.
2.   Large Solar Energy Systems.
   A.   Large multiple unit systems shall be allowed as permitted uses in the
identified zoning districts if it meets conditions in this Code.
   B.   Large multiple unit freestanding systems shall only be allowed in a
rear yard location and shall meet all rear yard setback requirements as an
accessory structure.
   C.   Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory structures
and shall not project into minimum yard setback requirement.
   D.   Roof-mounted system panels (other than flat solar panels) shall only be
located on the rear side of a roof facing or shall not exceed total height of
subject zoning district property is located.
   E.   Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front or side roof facing
only if they are mounted flat against the roof surface or incorporated into
roofing surface material.
   F.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
   G.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within 90 days.
   H.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no advertising
or logos on system panels or supporting structure other than a small
identification of the manufacturer.
   I.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached to
structures.
   J.   System shall comply with adopted building and fire codes and all other
applicable State and federal regulations.
3.   Solar Farm.
   A.   Large multiple unit systems shall be allowed as permitted uses in the
identified zoning districts, if it meets conditions in this Code.
   B.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
   C.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within 90 days.
   D.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no advertising
or logos on system panels or supporting structure other than a small
identification of the manufacturer.
   E.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached to
structures.
   F.   System shall comply with adopted building and fire codes and all other
applicable State and federal regulations.
170.64   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
May be installed on a principal or accessory structure (building-mounted) on
all agricultural, commercial, and industrial zoning districts when meeting the
following requirements:
1.   Shall incorporate a low-profile design.
2.   Shall be secured from climbing and unauthorized access.
3.   Lattice or guyed towers shall not be utilized. Tower and exposed system
components shall be non-reflective white, gray, or a similar neutral color as
approved by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
4.   Shall display no unlawful signs.
5.   Applicant shall provide notice to the local electric utility company and
submit a copy of an approved net metering agreement to the City prior to
obtaining a building permit.
6.   Each lot shall be allowed one system with a single operating turbine,
regardless of mounting or installation type. Multiple turbine systems may be
allowed with approval of a Special Use Permit where an applicant demonstrates
that the installations will integrate into the architectural design of the
building or site and will minimize visual and nuisance impacts to adjoining
properties.
7.   Shall not exceed noise standards of 60 dBA, measured at the property line.
8.   A Special Use Permit shall be required. Application documents shall
include elevation drawings and also façade renderings which accurately depict
the proposed installation as viewed from street level from all directions.
9.   Any wind energy system which is inoperable or abandoned for a period of 12
consecutive months must be repaired or removed within 90 days following notice
from the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer.
170.65   GEOTHERMAL ENERGY.
The following regulations shall apply to the construction and use of geothermal
energy systems within the City:
1.   All components of ground source heat pump system including pumps, borings,
and loops shall be set back at least five feet from interior and rear lot
lines.
2.   All components of ground source heat pump system shall not encroach on
easements.
3.   Ground source heat pump system are prohibited in surface waters, except
for stormwater ponds where they are permitted.
4.   Only closed loop ground source heat pump systems utilizing Department of
Public Health approved heat transfer fluids are permitted.
5.   Ground source heat pumps are considered mechanical equipment and subject
to the requirements of this Code.
6.   The energy produced by a ground source heat pump system must be used on-
site.
7.   A ground source heat pump system that is allowed to remain in a
nonfunctional or inoperative state for a period of 12 consecutive months, and
which is not brought in operation within the time specified by the City, after
notification to the owner or operator of the ground source heat pump system,
shall be presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance subject to
removal at the expense of the operator.
170.66   RETAINING WALLS.
When it is found necessary to grade a lot to a higher or lower finished grade
than the natural grade of adjoining property on the sides and to the rear of
such lot, it shall be incumbent upon the owner of such lot to get permission
from the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer to change to a higher or lower
finished grade more than 30 inches, and it shall further be incumbent upon the
owner of the lot to provide suitable retaining walls or other approved
protection on his property to protect the adjacent property and structures from
the draining of surface waters or damage, and further to protect the adjacent
property and structures from caving of earth and to assist in the maintaining
of the existing natural grade of such adjacent property.
1.   Retaining walls exceeding four feet in height, including staged walls that
cumulatively exceed four feet in height, shall be constructed in accordance
with plans prepared by a registered engineer.
2.   Retaining walls shall not restrict drainage or be placed in public rights-
of-way or drainage easements and must be in compliance with the vision
clearances at corners. Retaining walls placed in drainage and utility easements
shall require the property owner to receive approval from the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer and sign an encroachment agreement and a hold-
harmless agreement.
3.   All retaining walls shall be maintained by the owner in good repair. If
upon inspection, it is determined that a retaining wall is not in good repair
and is unsafe or in a hazardous condition, the owner shall, upon written
notice, repair the same within 90 days.
4.   All retaining walls greater than 30 inches must be shown on the
construction site plans. The retaining wall will be allowed if not shown on the
site plans.
5.   Any retaining wall, regardless of height, constructed within five feet of
the property line, requires written authorization from the adjacent property
owner and the Building and Zoning Enforcement Official.
170.67   SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
Short-term rental is a permitted use for residential property or dwelling
units, and shall be considered a No-Impact Home Occupation use for residential
properties. The short-term rental shall meet all other standards of home
occupations, in addition to those outlined below.
1.   Any disturbance such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, or
glare extending beyond the confines of the dwelling unit or accessory structure
is prohibited.
2.   Any exterior display, exterior storage of materials, signs (except as
otherwise permitted), house calls after 9:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m., exterior
additions or alterations or other indication from the exterior that the
dwelling unit or accessory structure is being used in part for any use other
than that of a dwelling or accessory structure for purely residential purposes
are prohibited.
3.   If, in the determination of the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer,
the above conditions are not being met or that the short-term rental creates a
disturbance or becomes a nuisance to the general neighborhood in some other
manner, the short-term rental will be treated as a nuisance under
Chapter 50 of this Code.
(Section 170.67 – Ord._855 – Sep. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 175
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
175.01 Short Title                      175.24 Blocks
175.02 Purpose                          175.25 Lots
175.03 Authority                        175.26 Easements
175.04 Approvals and Exceptions         175.27 Character of Development
175.05 Definitions                      175.28 General Information
175.06 Procedures for the Review of     175.29 Street and Alley Improvements
Subdivisions
175.07 Sketch Plan Discussion and       175.30 Sewage Disposal
Preliminary Review Requirements
175.08 Platting Procedures for Minor    175.31 Water Supply
and/or Urban Renewal Development Plats
175.09 Preliminary Plat - Preparation   175.32 Storm Drainage
and Filing Requirements
175.10 Site Plan                        175.33 Utilities
175.11 Notice of Possible Effect to     175.34 Monuments
Drainage Tiles
175.12 Public Notification              175.35 Overlay Flood District
175.13 Previous Subdivision Reference   175.36 Erosion and Sedimentation
List Required                           Control
                                        175.37 Establishment of Office and
175.14 Preliminary Plat Subdivision Fee Appointment of a Building and Zoning
                                        Enforcement Officer
175.15 Preliminary Plat - Review and    175.38 Standards and Minimums
Consideration
175.16 Final Plat - Preparation and     175.39 Amendments To and Required of
Filing Requirements                     this Ordinance
175.17 Guarantee of Improvements        175.40 Building Permits
175.18 Instruments that May be Filed in
Lieu of the Final Completion of         175.41 Occupancy Permits
Improvements
175.19 Public Notification              175.42 Approval Required - Restrictions
                                        on Unapproved Plats
175.20 Final Plat Subdivision Fee       175.43 Penalties
175.21 Final Plat - Review and          175.44 Repealer
Consideration
175.22 Streets and Street Right-of-Way  175.45 Conflict with Private Deeds,
Criteria                                Covenants, and Agreements
175.23 Alleys and Alley Right-of-Way
Criteria
 
175.01   SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known as and may be referred to and cited as “The
Subdivision Development Regulations for the City of LeClaire, Iowa, and
Contiguous Area.” It embraces all the lands and properties lying within said
City, and within the areas set forth and described as being contiguous or
adjacent to said City within a maximum of two miles from the said City limits,
but outside said City.
175.02   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is:
1.   To promote the adequacy and efficiency of the street and road system so as
to avoid congestion and promote safety;
2.   To secure the proper distribution of population and the necessary open
spaces for light and air;
3.   To improve the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens;
4.   To establish minimum standards for the design and development of all new
subdivisions so that existing developments will be protected and so the new
subdivisions will conform to the City plans;
5.   To facilitate the adequate provision of water, sewerage, storm drainage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements;
6.   To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth;
7.   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the City;
8.   To safeguard the interests of the homeowner, the subdivider, the investor,
and the City;
9.   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and
prevent excessive development costs, unless an agreement to extend such
utilities is executed by the developer;
10.   To assure the development of land for the highest possible use with all
the necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence, and;
11.   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the City and the subdivider.
175.03   AUTHORITY.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapters 354 and
355 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and which are specifically adopted by
reference.
175.04   APPROVALS AND EXCEPTIONS.
No land shall be subdivided or filed for record, nor any street laid out, nor
any improvements made to the land, until the plat or plans of the subdivision
or street improvements shall have been referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and recommendation and approved by action of the Council.
(The use of eminent domain to establish or create said road, highway, street,
or alley shall not require the owner to submit a subdivision plat). This
approval must be in writing and placed on the original tracing of the final
plat according to the procedures outlined herein. No lot, tract, or parcel of
land within any such subdivision shall be offered for sale nor will any sale,
contract for sale, or option be made or given until subdivision plans have been
properly reviewed and formally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the Council. (The sale or exchange of small parcels of land to or between
immediately adjoining property owners, where such sale or exchange does not
create additional, buildable lots, shall not be considered as a subdivision of
land). No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, stormwater drainage,
sewer facilities, gas service, electric service or lighting, or grading, paving
or surfacing of streets, will hereafter be made within or abutting any such
subdivision by any owner or owners, or their agent, or by any public service
corporation at the request of such owner or owners, or their agent, until
preliminary plats for the subdivision and also the plans for improvements
thereto have been formally approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Council, according to the procedures outlined herein.
175.05   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter and in order to carry out the provisions
contained herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be interpreted as
defined herein. Words used in the present tense will include the future tense;
the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular. The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel.” The word “will”
is mandatory, and the word “may” is permissive. The phrase “used for” will
include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained
for,” and “occupied for.” The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby
defined as follows, and will be interpreted as such throughout these
regulations, unless otherwise modified herein. Terms not herein defined will
have the meaning customarily assigned to them:
1.   Words beginning with “A.”
   A.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way which affords only a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of abutting properties.
   B.   “Auditor’s plat” means a subdivision plat required by either the County
Auditor or the County Assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of
the Auditor or the Assessor. Such plats are intended to clarify property tax
descriptions for the purposes of assessment and taxation.
2.   Words beginning with “B.”
   A.   “Base course” means the layer or layers of specified or selected
materials of designed thickness upon which the final traffic surface is
constructed.
   B.   “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, and/or other physical barriers.
   C.   “Building” means any structure designed or built for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of people, animals, chattels, or property of
any kind, including mobile homes. Any structure with an interior area not
normally accessible for human use will not be considered as a building. When
separated by party walls without openings through such walls, each portion of
such a building will be considered a separate structure.
   D.   “Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer” means the person appointed to
occupy the office created herein, in which office is vested the principal
administrative and enforcement duties associated with this chapter.
   E.   “Building setback line” means a line on a plat between which line and
the property line no building or structure of any kind may be erected.
3.   Words beginning with “C.”
   A.   “Circle drive” means a residential street of a closed circular shape
which has one entrance open to traffic and intersects or intercepts no street
other than the entrance.
   B.   “City Engineer” means the person or firm designated to act in that
capacity in the review of engineering data as outlined herein where the service
of a City Engineer is specifically mentioned.
   C.   “Conveyance” means an instrument filed with a recorder as evidence of
the transfer of title to land, including any form of deed or contract.
   D.   “Communication service or communications” means communication services
provided to the public such as telephone, cable television, and other such
services as may require the use of easements for the delivery of services
within their operating permits.
   E.   “Crosswalk” means a strip of land dedicated to public use, which is
reserved across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
   F.   “Cul-de-sac” means a local street terminated at one end with a
permanent turn-around, and the open end being the only means of access to
another street.
4.   Words beginning with “D.”
   A.   “Dedication” means that action of the subdivider whereby title to land,
right-of-ways, and/or public improvements, as required by this chapter and
action of the Council, is conveyed to the City.
   B.   “Design standards” means the “LeClaire Standard Public Works
Improvements Specifications” and any construction or development standards that
may be referenced therein.
   C.   “Division” means dividing a tract or parcel of land into two parcels of
land by conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other
than a public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the
purpose of this chapter.
5.   Words beginning with “E.”
   A.   “Easement” means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of
land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.
   B.   “Excess stormwater passageway” (“major system,” see Section
175.32) means a drainage easement designed to carry that portion of stormwater
runoff from the 100-year frequency storm that exceeds the carrying capacity of
storm sewers and natural drainage channels serving a specific watershed.
6.   Words beginning with “F.”
   A.   “Five-year storm” means the equivalent of two inches of rain falling in
a one-hour period or less.
   B.   “Flag lot” means a lot with a long, unbuildable approach used to
provide access and meet frontage provisions for subdivision lots.
   C.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid run-off of surface waters from any source.
   D.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   E.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood levels and flow
velocities.
   F.   “Flood hazard area” means any area subject to flooding by a one percent
probability flood, otherwise referred to as a base flood as designated by the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources or the Federal Insurance Administration.
   G.   “Frontage road” means a collector street which is parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and expressways, and which provides access to
abutting properties and affords protection to local traffic from fast, through-
moving traffic on the arterial streets or expressways.
7.   Words beginning with “G.”
8.   Words beginning with “H.”
   A.   “Half street” means a street having width less than that required by
these and other appropriate regulations.
   B.   “Highway” means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic, which traverses a
non-urban area, usually a State or federally numbered route. (Interstate 80 and
U.S. Highway 67 are highways in this City).
9.   Words beginning with “I.”
   A.   “Improvements” means changes to land necessary to prepare it for
building sites including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving,
curb paving, sidewalks, walkways, watermains, sewers, drainageways, and other
public works and appurtenances.
   B.   “Individual subsurface sewage treatment facility” means a sewage
disposal system designed to function on an individual lot basis. (A septic tank
is a type of individual subsurface sewage treatment facility).
10.   Words beginning with “J.”
11.   Words beginning with “K.”
12.   Words beginning with “L.”
   A.   “Land remnant” or “outlot” means any portion of a tract of land which
cannot be developed after the tract has been subdivided.
   B.   “Loop street” means a residential street that begins and ends at two
spaced points on the same street, and which intersects or intercepts no other
street. (Glenwood Drive and Mississippi Terrace Drive are examples of loop
streets in this City).
   C.   “Lot” means a parcel of land which is, or may be, occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings or related use, together with such yards,
parking, or open spaces within the lot lines as may be required by these
regulations, and having its principal frontage on a street or upon an approved
private drive.
   D.   “Lot area” means the total horizontal plane area included within lot
lines.
   E.   “Lot, buildable” means any singular parcel of land meeting all of the
current, minimum lot requirements of the City’s Zoning Code for the particular
district within which the land is located.
   F.   “Lot, corner” means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides
abutting for their full length on a street, provided the interior angle at the
intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees.
   G.   “Lot, double frontage” means a lot having a frontage on two non-
intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
   H.   “Lot frontage” means that dimension of a lot, or portion of a lot,
abutting on a street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
   I.   “Lot, interior” means any lot other than a corner lot or through lot
with only one frontage street.
   J.   “Lot lines” means lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
   K.   “Lot line, front” means in the case of an interior lot, in the line
separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot or double
frontage lot, the line(s) separating said lot from the street(s).
   L.   “Lot line, rear” means the lot boundary opposite and most distant from
the front lot line. In the case of a pointed or irregular lot, it will be an
imaginary line parallel to and farthest from the front lot line not less than
10 feet long and wholly within the lot.
   M.   “Lot, reverse frontage” means a double frontage lot which has a
vehicular access point limited to the back of the lot, rather than having
access on its front.
   N.   “Lot line, side” means any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot
line.
   O.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is part of a subdivision, recorded in
the County Recorder’s Office. For lots not part of a recorded subdivision, a
lot of record shall be a lot whose deed is recorded in the County Recorder’s
Office prior to August 16, 1961, the adoption date of the City’s first
subdivision regulation ordinance.
   P.   “Low water entry” means the elevation at which surface water would
enter a building or structure.
13.   Words beginning with “M.”
   A.   “Metes and bounds” means the method used to describe a tract of urban
land intended to be used for dwelling or other purposes, so that it can be
recorded in the County Recorder’s Office, as contrasted with the description of
a part of a properly approved and recorded subdivision plat by the lot and
block number.
14.   Words beginning with “N.”
15.   Words beginning with “O.”
   A.   “100-year storm” means the equivalent of eight and eight-tenths inches
of rain falling in a one-hour period, or less. (Reference June 16, 1990, storm
data). A 100-year storm will have an intensity of rainfall, eight and eight-
tenths, which on the average, will be equaled or exceeded only once in 100
years. This does not imply that it will occur once in 100 years, or having
occurred, will not happen again for 100 years.
   B.   “Outlot” means a lot which is too small, too irregular, or
inaccessible, to allow construction of a house or other structure; or the
remaining area of a large parcel from which one or more smaller lots have been
subdivided.
16.   Words beginning with “P.”
   A.   “Parkway” means a route intended for use by both passenger vehicles and
pedestrians in a park-like setting with adequate separation to protect both.
   B.   “Planning and Zoning Commission” or “Plan Commission,” “Zoning
Commission,” or “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the
City.
   C.   “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan of
the subdivision is presented and which he submits for approval and intends in
final form to record.
   D.   “Plat, final” means the plan of record of a sub-division, together with
accompanying material as required in Section
175.16.
   E.   “Plat, major” means any subdivision which has four or more lots, or any
size subdivision requiring any new road, extension of municipal facilities, or
common facilities.
   F.   “Plat, minor” means any plat, re-plat, subdivision, or re-subdivision
that contains three or fewer lots; does not involve the installation,
construction, and dedication of any public improvements; and does not designate
any new lot boundaries outside those that already exist.
   G.   “Plat, preliminary” means the plan or layout of a proposed subdivision,
together with the accompanying material as required in Section
175.09.
   H.   “Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures” mean and
include, but are not limited to, poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors,
guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts,
switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances
located above the ground upon, along, across, or over the streets, alleys, and
ways of the City and used or are useful in supplying electric, communications,
or similar or associated services.
   I.   “Private drive” means a vehicular access that services two or more
lots, that has not been dedicated to or otherwise acquired by the City, and
that has not been maintained by the City for public use.
   J.   “Private sanitary sewer system” means a sewer system owned, controlled,
and maintained by property owners, a subdivider, or a duly constituted
homeowners association.
   K.   “Private sewage treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and
materials needed to properly treat and dispose of sewage from a single
residential, commercial, or industrial use.
   L.   “Private water well system” means any excavation that is drilled,
bored, driven, or dug in the earth to provide a source of water for a single
residential, commercial, or industrial use.
   M.   “Public sanitary sewer outlet” means a public sanitary sewerage system
which conveys sewage to a public wastewater treatment facility.
   N.   “Public sanitary sewer system” means a sewer owned, controlled,
maintained, and subject to the jurisdiction of the City Municipal Utilities
Department, its successors, and assigns.
   O.   “Public water supply” means that water system owned, controlled, and
maintained by the City Municipal Utilities Department, its successors, and
assigns.
   P.   “Public Works Director” means the Public Works Director for the City or
a person designated to act in that capacity.
17.   Words beginning with “Q.”
   A.   “Quasi-public sewage treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and materials needed to properly treat and dispose of sewage from more than one
residential, commercial, or industrial user, and other than a public sanitary
sewer system.
   B.   “Quasi-public water supply system” means any excavation that is
drilled, bored, driven, or dug in the earth to provide a source of water for
more than one residential, commercial, or industrial user, and other than a
public water supply.
18.   Words beginning with “R.”
   A.   “Replat” means a subdivision or plat, the site of which has heretofore
been platted or subdivided with lots or parcels of land. It may include all or
any part of a previous subdivision or plat.
   B.   “Reserve strip” means a narrow parcel of land created by the platting
of property lines several feet inside the property line/street right-of-way
line, which parcel is retained in private ownership and which use is to prevent
access of neighboring property to an improved and dedicated street.
   C.   “Resubdivision” means any division of land which has previously been
included in a recorded plat, including auditor’s plats. In appropriate context,
it may be a verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously
subdivided land.
   D.   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied, or intended to be
occupied, by a road, walkway, crosswalk, railroad, or other such use. Every
right-of-way established under this chapter and shown on a final plat is
separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and
not included within the dimension or areas of such lots or parcels.
   E.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street which has been, or is to be
improved and is or will be, available for vehicular traffic.
19.   Words beginning with “S.”
   A.   “Setback line” means that line denoting the distance required to obtain
the minimum front, side, and rear yards, measured from the property line, as
required by the appropriate zoning regulations.
   B.   “Sewerage system, central” means a type, which is approved by the State
Department of Natural Resources and the County Health Department as properly
designed to serve one or more subdivisions. (A septic tank is not a central
sewerage system.)
   C.   “Sidewalk” means that portion of the street, walkway, or crosswalk
which is paved and intended for pedestrian use only.
   D.   “Site plan” means an aerial view plan of the proposed site showing the
approximate location of the development. A site plan contains those features
listed in Section
175.10.
   E.   “Street” means a general term used to describe a public right-of-way
which provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian movement, and which may
provide for the primary vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent
to it, and which may also provide space for the location of utilities, (both
above- and below-ground).
   F.   “Street, arterial” means those streets designated and designed to carry
large volumes of traffic from one part of a community to another. They should
have considerable continuity. It will be the largest street size in the
hierarchy. It has a high Average Daily Traffic (ADT) count and is not intended
to be a residential street and will have limited access points as approved by
the Council only. An arterial street should provide connections with major
State and interstate road systems and has a high potential for the location of
significant community facilities as well as retail, commercial, and industrial
facilities.
   G.   “Street, collector” means streets that function to connect smaller
areas of the community and to conduct traffic between arterial streets and/or
various activity centers. It is a principal traffic artery within residential
areas and carries a relatively high traffic volume. A collector has potential
for sustaining minor retail or other commercial establishments along its route
which influence traffic flows.
   H.   “Street, expressway” means a limited access traffic-way connecting two
or more communities. (Interstate 80 is an expressway and an arterial traffic-
way in this City.)
   I.   “Street, local” means streets that are intended to provide access to
abutting properties, while carrying only minimal through traffic. These streets
may be cul-de-sacs, courts, lanes, places, or drives. Occasionally, these
streets will connect other local streets to each other.
   J.   “Street, marginal access” means a local street which is parallel to and
adjacent to primary streets and highways, and which provides access to abutting
properties, usually only on one side, and affords protection to local traffic
from fast through-moving traffic on the primary streets.
   K.   “Street, platted, non-developed” means any previously platted street
that at the time of consideration of any plat or re-plat has anything less than
a permanent, (A.C.C. or P.C.C.), type roadway surface.
   L.   “Street, sub-collector” means streets that provide access to places,
lanes, and drives and which conduct traffic to an activity center or a higher
classification street. It may be a loop street connecting one collector or
arterial street at two points, or a more or less straight street conducting
traffic between collector and/or arterial streets.
   M.   “Street pavement width” means the horizontal distance of the roadway
measured from back of curb to back of curb, or to the edge of the pavement in
those cases where curb and gutter may not be required. (See “Traffic Surface”)
   N.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground,
attached to the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, billboards, and other similar
advertising signs, factories, sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage
tanks, hot tubs, whirlpools, swimming pools, and other similar uses.
   O.   “Subbase” means the layer or layers of specified or selected material
of designed thickness upon which a base course or pavement is constructed.
   P.   “Subdivider” means an individual, partnership, corporation, or other
legal entity or agent thereof which undertakes the activities covered by these
regulations. Inasmuch as the subdivision plan drawings are merely a necessary
means to the end of assuring satisfactory development, the term “subdivider”
includes “developer,” “owner,” or “builder,” even though the persons and their
precise interest may vary at different project stages.
   Q.   “Subdivision” means either:
      (1)   The division of land into three or more lots, sites, or parcels;
      (2)   The establishment or dedication of a road, highway, or street
through a tract of land regardless of area; or
      (3)   The re-plat or re-subdivision of land heretofore divided or platted
into lots, sites, or parcels, provided however, that the sale or exchange of
small parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners, where such sale
or exchange does not create additional lots, nor place said lots in
nonconformance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or this chapter,
will not be considered as a subdivision of land; or
      (4)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures, involving the
allocation of land for common use by owners, occupants, or lease holders.
   R.   “Subgrade” means the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement
structure and shoulders are constructed.
20.   Words beginning with “T.”
   A.   “Traffic surface” means the wearing or exposed surface of a roadway
used by vehicular traffic. Traffic surface may include prepared shoulders, but
the width is measured between the edge of the surfaced area intended for
vehicular traffic.
   B.   “25-year storm” means the equivalent of five and three-tenths inches of
rain falling in a one-hour period, or less.
21.   Words beginning with “U.”
   A.   “Utility or utilities” means and includes any gas, water, sewer,
electrical, or communication service and all persons providing the same.
22.   Words beginning with “V.”
23.   Words beginning with “W.”
24.   Words beginning with “X.”
25.   Words beginning with “Y.”
26.   Words beginning with “Z.”
175.06   PROCEDURES FOR THE REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS.
Pursuant to the authority granted in Section 354 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended, the City desires to review subdivisions within and outside of its
corporate limits as set forth herein. It is hereby required that no subdivision
of land within the City or land located outside of the corporate limits, but
within the following described area:
Beginning at the Northeasterly corporate limits where they intersect with the
State boundary line; thence continuing North along the State boundary line to a
point 1,000 feet North of the Northerly line extended of Section 23 of Township
79 North, Range 5 East, of the Fifth Principal Meridian; thence due West to a
point on the Westerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 67; thence Southerly
along said Westerly right-of-way line to the North line of Section 23 of said
Township; thence Westerly along said Northerly line of Section 23 and Section
22 to a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of 277th Avenue; thence
Southerly on said right-of-way line to a point of intersection with the center
section line of Section 22; thence Westerly on said center section line to a
point of intersection with the Westerly line of Section 21 of said Township;
thence South along the Westerly line of said Section 21 to its intersection
with the Northwest corner of Section 28 and the Northeast corner of Section 29
of said Township; thence West along the Northerly line of said Section 29 to
the centerline of 257th Avenue; thence South along said centerline to the
centerline of Territorial Road; thence West along said centerline to the
Westerly border of Section 29 of Township 78N R5E; thence South along the
Westerly borders of Sections 29 and 32 of said township to the centerline of
Indiana Avenue; thence East along said centerline; thence South along the
Easterly border of the Northeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of said
Section 32; thence West along the Southerly border of the Northeast quarter of
the Southwest quarter of said Section 32; thence South along the Westerly
border of the Southeast quarter of the Southwest quarter of said Section 32;
thence East along the Southerly border of the Southeast quarter of the
Southwest quarter of said Section 32; thence South along the Westerly border of
the Northeast quarter of Section 5 of said Township to the centerline of Forest
Grove Road; thence West along said centerline to the Westerly property line of
the Davenport Country Club; thence South along said property line to the
centerline of Wellsferry Road; thence South along said centerline to the
centerline of US Highway 67; thence East along said centerline to the
centerline of 181st Street; thence South along said centerline and extension
thereof to the Mississippi River; thence East following said river and the
meanders thereof to the Western corporate limits of the City; thence following
the City limits to the point of beginning,
shall be recorded in the County or have any validity until it has been approved
by the Council. Each person, firm, or corporation seeking the Council’s
approval of a map, plat, or subdivision will follow the procedures outlined
herein.
1.   In order to make the most of the opportunities related to the subdivision
and to conserve time, effort, and expense, the owner or subdivider should
consult with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to the
preparation of the tentative plan of the subdivision. The plan and its
component features shall be consistent with the City’s comprehensive land-use
and other long-range plans.
2.   Requirements of the master street development plan; school and
recreational sites; shopping centers, community facilities; sanitation; water
supply, drainage, and erosion; and relationship to other developments, existing
and proposed in the vicinity, should be determined in advance of the
preparation of the subdivision plan. Consultation should also be held with
those familiar with the economic factors affecting the subdivision. A thorough
estimate of the situation will result in sound decisions with respect to the
form, character, and extent of the proposed subdivision.
3.   Land, which the Planning and Zoning Commission finds to be unsuitable for
subdividing due to flooding or poor drainage characteristics, or topographic
features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, and general health of
future residents, will not be subdivided until the objectionable features have
been eliminated, or until adequate safeguards against such hazards are
provided.
In applicable cases, plats will be reviewed by the State Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) and their findings and recommendations incorporated in the
approval of such plats.
175.07   SKETCH PLAN DISCUSSION AND PRELIMINARY REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Pre-submission of Plans Required. Prior to the filing of an application
for a minor plat or a preliminary plat, the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer may require that the subdivider submit certain materials relating to
the proposed subdivision. These materials will include information relative to
the site, conditions of the site, existing community facilities and utilities
on and adjacent to the site, number, and size of lots proposed, etc. These
materials will include as a minimum:
   A.   Location Map. This is a plan showing the location and relationship of
the proposed subdivision to the City in general, streets, and other community
facilities serving it. This map will include:
      (1)   Subdivision name in bold letters, centered at the top of the plan.
      (2)   Bold, heavy outline of area to be subdivided.
      (3)   Existing streets and City utilities on/or adjoining the property.
      (4)   North point, graphic bar scale, and date.
      (5)   Outline of the Overlay Flood District area and elevation(s) as
described in Section
170.35 if the proposed subdivision lies within said district and contains three
acres or two lots, whichever is less.
   B.   Sketch Plan. This a plan showing the proposed layout of streets, lots,
and other features in relation to existing conditions, as well as existing
topographic data and schematic diagrams for proposed utilities.
The sketch plan discussion and review does not require formal application, fee,
or filing of the lat. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will submit
the sketch plan material to the Planning and Zoning Commission which will,
within 30 days from the date of submittal, make known its comments regarding
the proposed subdivision to the subdivider and the Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer
175.08   PLATTING PROCEDURES FOR MINOR AND/OR URBAN RENEWAL DEVELOPMENT PLATS.
The Planning and Zoning Commission and\or Council, may waive any or all of the
requirements relating to the preliminary platting process for proposed
subdivisions containing three or fewer lots, (or any proposed subdivision),
provided that:
1.   All of the lots within the proposed subdivision front on an existing
street;
2.   No public improvement construction is required;
3.   No variation of the requirements of this section are requested, and
4.   No site for a public facility is covered by any part of the plat, or, if
the plat and improvements are being considered under a T.I.F. Development
Agreement and/or Minimum Assessment Agreement within a designated Urban Renewal
Area.
175.09   PRELIMINARY PLAT - PREPARATION AND FILING REQUIREMENTS.
The subdivider will cause to be prepared a preliminary plat and will file
copies of said plat along with the Preliminary Plat Application, (See Appendix
Form A), for plats consisting of four or more lots, a computer generated and
reproduced copy of the proposed plat using “autocad” or some other compatible,
approved drafting software saved to an appropriate storage medium, (flash
drive, compact disk (CD), E-Mail, etc.), and other required materials with the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer at least 15 calendar days prior to the
scheduled meeting of the Planning And Zoning Commission at which the plat is to
be considered.
1.   The preliminary plat, (and accompanying plans), of the proposed
subdivision will be drawn to the scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger, but
will not exceed 30 inches by 42 inches in size, and one copy of the plat will
be reduced to fit on an 8-1/2 X 14 inch page and will include:
   A.   Name of the proposed subdivision in bold letters centered at the top of
the plat, (which said name will not duplicate that of any previously recorded
plat).
   B.   The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundary will be shown and
indicated by a solid heavy line.
   C.   Name and address of owner(s).
   D.   Name of person(s) who prepared the plat and owner's attorney.
   E.   North point, graphic bar scale, and date.
   F.   Location of the proposed subdivision by township, section, and range,
and detailed metes and bound legal description, including accurate distances
and bearings from the subdivision to some corner of the congressional division
of which the addition is a part. Reference corners shall be accurately
described on the plat.
   G.   Location, widths, and names of all existing or prior platted streets or
other public ways, lot lines, railroad and utility right-of-ways, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses, permanent
easements, and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract
and/or other relevant information required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   H.   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other underground facilities
within the tract or adjacent to the tract, indicating pipe sizes, grades,
elevations above MSL, manholes, and approximate locations.
   I.   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of land, showing ownership and zoning
classifications.
   J.   Layout of proposed blocks, (if used), and lots, including the
dimensions of each, and the lot and block number in alphabetical or numerical
order, and street addresses as provided by the City.
   K.   All zoning setback lines shall be indicated by dashed lines with the
appropriate labeling and all existing structures shall be shown as well.
   L.   Location, widths, other dimensions, and names of proposed streets,
alleys, and roads (with radii of all curves and length of tangents shown),
utility easements, parks, and other open spaces or reserved areas.
   M.   Zoning classification(s) of the subdivision.
   N.   Approximate grades of all proposed streets and alleys.
   O.   Typical cross sections of the proposed streets and alleys showing
roadway locations, type of curb and gutter, sub-base materials, surfacing
material to be used, and sidewalks to be installed, (preferably on another
sheet).
   P.   The layout of proposed water mains, sanitary sewer mains, and
appropriate service lines, (preferably on another sheet).
   Q.   The proposed drainage system of the subdivision, including storm
sewers, ditches, culverts, bridges, detention basins, and other structures,
(preferably on another sheet).
   R.   Boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the
subdivision and the source of information, if applicable.
   S.   If the proposed subdivision borders on a lake, stream, or the river,
the distances and bearings of a meander line established not less than 20 feet
back from the mean high water mark of the lake, stream, or river.
   T.   Location of any and all “Greenway District” boundaries, if applicable.
   U.   A statement, near the owner’s name, to read: preliminary plat, not to
be recorded.
   V.   A table of the following information:
      (1)   Total acreage of subdivision.
      (2)   Total number of lots, and each lot area.
      (3)   Acreage of public lands to be dedicated other than streets.
   W.   A complete listing, (preferably in a separate document), of all
existing covenants which apply to the land to be subdivided, and a complete
listing of all covenants which are proposed by the subdivider to apply to the
subdivided land and information as to any agreements which have been entered
into with the owners of other property within the neighborhood in which the
proposed subdivision is located, as to general plans for the entire
neighborhood. Reference should be made to the City’s Comprehensive Plan for
suggestions as to the general street pattern and design of the neighborhood.
Wherever possible, all of the property owners within the neighborhood should
endeavor to agree upon a general plan for its development, in order that such
subdivision may be designed as an integral part of a well-considered overall
plan.
   X.   The layout, (preferably on another sheet), of the proposed streets
showing approximate grades as being elevated to or above a 100-year flood level
if the proposed subdivision lies within the Overlay Flood District.
   Y.   The layout of drainage facilities designed to store and convey the flow
of surface waters and flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights and
without causing danger of life loss to persons and/or severe damage to
properties and drainage openings will be sufficient to discharge flood flows
without unduly increasing flood heights. if the proposed subdivision lies
within the Overlay Flood District, (preferably on another sheet).
   Z.   The layout of all proposed water systems and/or sanitary sewerage
systems designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from systems into flood waters, and waste disposal
systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from
them during flooding, (preferably on another sheet).
175.10   SITE PLAN.
A site plan, of the proposed subdivision, (based on the preliminary plat), will
be submitted on a separate sheet, and will be drawn to the scale of one inch to
100 feet or larger, but will not exceed 30 x 42 inches in size, and one copy of
the plat will be reduced to fit on an 8-1/2 x 14-inch page and will include at
least the following information:
1.   Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals where ground slope is
less than 10 percent, contours at five-foot intervals when ground slope is
greater than 10 percent.
2.   Areas having a slope greater than 10 percent will be highlighted or
specifically delineated in some fashion.
3.   Individual trees having a diameter of four inches or more and general
wooded areas will be indicated.
4.   Rivers, streams, ponds, marshes, other drainage courses, and rock
outcroppings.
5.   Floodplain limits existing and proposed.
6.   Analysis of site run-off characteristics, (including plan(s) and
calculations). Drainage areas shall be drawn showing the direction of flow of
all surface water.
7.   Provisions for control of erosion and sedimentation during construction
including, but not limited to, sedimentation basins, temporary diversions,
contour furrows, and such other provisions as may be required to reduce erosion
and excessive water drainage to downstream adjacent properties and to limit and
control soil losses to not exceed five tons per acre. (Erosion control
structures will be designed for 25-year storm frequencies at a minimum).
8.   A written plan which provides for:
   A.   Preservation of eight inches of topsoil, if available.
   B.   Prompt seeding following grading, including types and methods of
seeding used.
   C.   Seasonal restrictions on the plan.
   D.   Preservation of drainage in field tiles.
9.   The layout of the land contours of all proposed lots with elevation of
sufficient height to permit construction of the lowest habitable floor of a
building elevated to or above a 100-year flood level, if the proposed
subdivision lies within the Overlay Flood District.
10.   Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Commission.
Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and
ground water conditions; depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry at a
depth of five feet; location and results of soil percolation tests if
individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
11.   Photographs of the site, indicating camera location, directions of views,
and key numbers.
12.   Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate direction and gradient of
ground-slope, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and
location of buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby non-
residential land uses or adverse influences.
13.   Any other information as may be needed to help clarify the existing and
proposed site conditions or as may be required per the site plan criteria
listed in Section
170.57.
175.11   NOTICE OF POSSIBLE EFFECT TO DRAINAGE TILES.
The following is required of a subdivider developing any tract of land within
the boundaries of the City and for lands outside said boundaries and not within
the corporate limits of any other municipality for a distance of two miles:
1.   When filing the preliminary plat, the sub-divider will provide the
following, if tile exists or is reasonably expected to exist:
   A.   Evidence of written notification, given by the subdivider to all
adjacent landowners, of the subdivider plans and advising them that any
drainage tile entering the property that is the subject of the subdivision may
be affected by the development.
   B.   In the event that no field tile exists, or is reasonably expected to
exist, a sworn, certified affidavit must be filed in lieu of notification
documentation.
2.   The following methods of notification will be deemed sufficient compliance
with this subparagraph:
   A.   A return receipt for first class mail containing such notification
signed by the landowner or his representative, or;
   B.   A statement, signed by the subdivider, that after diligent search and
inquiry, the landowner cannot be located for the purpose of sending such
written notification.
3.   A true copy of all duly recorded drainage easements for the benefit of any
adjacent dominant landowners.
4.   A true copy of the pertinent portion of the drainage plat book kept by the
County Recorder pursuant to Section 468.624 of the Code of Iowa, (as amended)
showing all recorded drainage systems. Such pertinent portions will include all
lands contiguous and adjacent to the land that is the subject of the proposed
subdivision. In the event that an adjacent landowner has drainage tile
installed on the property affected by the subdivider’s proposed subdivision,
the subdivider will submit a written plan for continuation of existing drainage
tile to the City. As a condition for approval of the final plan by the Council,
such plan must be approved by the City Engineer, in writing.
175.12   PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
At the time of filing, an application will be accompanied by a list of names
and addresses of all those people owning property adjacent to and within 200
feet of any part of the proposed subdivision. The Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer will notify those property owners listed, by depositing
notices in the U.S. Mail, at least seven days prior to the scheduled date of
the regular Planning and Zoning Commission and Council meetings at which time
said plat is scheduled to be reviewed and considered. These notices will be
delivered by certified mail.
175.13   PREVIOUS SUBDIVISION REFERENCE LIST REQUIRED.
At the time of filing, an application will be accompanied by the subdivider’s
previous subdivision, (or other developmental), experience and reference
checklist. The subdivider’s checklist will include, as a minimum, the following
items:
1.   Name(s) of any previous subdivision or development work, (if any).
2.   Name of City or County in which work is located.
3.   Name, address, and phone number of governing body and contact person
overseeing and approving of any previous work.
4.   Date(s) previous work was undertaken.
175.14   PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBDIVISION FEE.
At the time of filing, an application will be accompanied by a certified check
or money order payable to the City to cover the cost of notification and
reviewing the proposed plat and accompanying plans. The following rate schedule
will apply:
 
Number of Lots Contained in Subdivision Fee Schedule
2 -10                                   $250.00
11 or more                              $500.00
 
175.15   PRELIMINARY PLAT - REVIEW AND CONSIDERATION.
1.   Review by City Engineer, Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, Public
Works Director, and County Board of Supervisors. Immediately upon the filing of
18 copies of the preliminary plat, the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer
will retain two copies for the City’s file (one copy is to indicate the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council action), and the remaining copies of
the preliminary plat will be distributed as follows:
   A.   One copy to the City Engineer, if applicable;
   B.   One copy to the Public Works Director, if applicable;
   C.   One copy to each Planning and Zoning Commission member;
   D.   One copy to each Council member and the Mayor.
and, where a proposed plat is outside the City limits but within the area of
subdivision jurisdiction, one copy to the Zoning Administrator of the County.
The City Engineer, if applicable, the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer,
the Public Works Director, if applicable, and where concerned, the Board of
Supervisors for the County, will review the plat and application materials to
assure that the proposed subdivision complies with the applicable regulations
and requirements and report upon such to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will determine if the proposed
subdivision complies with the zoning ordinance. The Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer will also report upon conditions of the site or adjacent
properties which, while not evident in the application materials, may affect
development upon the site. (Review by the Soil Conservation Services may be
sought where erosion or sedimentation control considerations are evident).
2.   Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission will review the preliminary plat and application materials to assure
compliance with the various comprehensive plans of the City. Particular note
will be made that any planned major streets or other planned public facilities
of the community falling in the area of the subdivision being reviewed are
accommodated in the proposed plat. They also will review the reports of the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, City Engineer, Public Works Director,
and County Zoning Administrator, where applicable, with regard to the proposed
subdivision. Within 30 days of the subdivider’s filing for preliminary plat
approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission will make known to the Council and
the Clerk that the preliminary plat has been:
   A.   Approved.
   B.   Approved, subject to modification.
   C.   Disapproved.
If disapproved, the Planning and Zoning Commission will submit to the
subdivider, with a copy to the Clerk, a statement setting forth reasons for the
disapproval, indicating particularly the aspects in which the proposed plat
fails to conform to ordinance requirements. Failure of the Planning and Zoning
Commission to act within 30 days of the filing of the plat application with the
Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will be deemed approval of the plat
unless, however, an extension of time is mutually agreed upon by the subdivider
and the Planning and Zoning Commission or as such extension of time is
otherwise provided for herein.
The Planning and Zoning Commission will maintain one copy of the preliminary
plat in its files with the Planning and Zoning Commission action noted upon it.
The above-referenced review process notwithstanding, any petitioned matter
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be withdrawn, amended, and/
or consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily postponed,
once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the originally
scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory, request from the
petitioner asking for said withdrawal, time extension, and/or amendment of said
petition is received by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer no later
than four working days prior to the originally scheduled meeting date. If such
a request is properly and timely filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission will
continue to meet as scheduled and, in the case of a request for a withdrawal of
the petition, the Planning and Zoning Commission will acknowledge the request
for the permanent record and grant the request. In the case of a request for a
temporary extension of time and/or an amendment to the original petition, the
Planning and Zoning Commission will continue to meet as scheduled and will
acknowledge the request for an extension and/or amendment for the permanent
record and consider and act upon the request(s) at the meeting.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant, deny, or conditionally grant or
deny the request for the full-time extension requested or some other time
extension as the Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate, but any
such extension will not exceed 30 days as spelled out above. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission denies a request for extension, then the meeting will be
conducted as scheduled at the specified time and place.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant, deny, or conditionally grant or
deny the request to consider and act upon an amended petition as the Planning
and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
Any additional expenses incurred by the City as a result of granting an
extension and/or amendment request which was submitted by the petitioner will
be borne by the petitioner and paid in full to the City prior to the date set
for the rescheduled meeting.
Further, consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily
postponed, once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the
originally scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory,
request for such action, signed by 20 percent or more of the property owners
whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of any and all public
and quasi-public right-of-way distances), of the boundaries of the property
upon which the proposed matter is to be considered, is received by the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer no later than four working days prior to the
originally scheduled meeting date. If such a request is properly and timely
filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission’s action(s) will be conducted as
spelled out above.
3.   Approval or Rejection by the City Council. The Council will, after being
notified of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s action on the plat, consider
and act on the preliminary plat within 30 days after the first regular Council
meeting following the date of action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the plat, the Council may
approve said plat and accompanying development proposals only by a four-fifths
vote of the entire membership of the Council.
4.   Action On Preliminary Plat to be Filed with the City Clerk. A certified
copy of the resolution approving the preliminary plat or disapproving the
preliminary plat and stating the reasons, therefore, will be attached to a copy
of the preliminary plat by the Clerk and filed in the office of the Clerk. (See
Appendix Form F.)
5.   Preliminary Plat Approval Not to Constitute Subdivision Approval and
Revocability. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Council does not
constitute approval of the subdivision, but is merely an authorization to the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat and any
preliminary plat, or any portion thereof, not final platted is revocable by the
Council.
6.   Time Limitation of Preliminary Plat Approval. Approval of the preliminary
plat will be effective for 12 months; except, however, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, upon written request of the subdivider and advice of the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer, may grant an extension of time, not to exceed
an additional 12 months. If the final plat is not filed with the Building and
Zoning Enforcement Officer within 12 months, or within an authorized extension,
the Council’s approval of the preliminary plat will become automatically null
and void. If only a part of a preliminary plat is approved as a part of a
larger final plat, the approval of the remaining portion(s) of the preliminary
plat shall automatically gain an extension of 36 months before another phase of
the plat must be submitted in final form.
175.16   FINAL PLAT - PREPARATION AND FILING REQUIREMENTS.
Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider will cause to be
prepared a final plat and other materials as required for final approval. The
filing for final approval will consist of a fully signed and stamped
reproducible final plat, the final plat application, (See Appendix Form C), for
plats consisting of four or more lots, a computer generated and reproduced copy
of the proposed plat using autocad or some other compatible, approved drafting
software saved to an appropriate storage medium (flash drive, compact disk
(CD), E-Mail, etc.), and such additional information as is outlined herein. All
required materials will be filed with the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer at least 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission at which the plat is to be considered.
1.   The final plat of the subdivision, (and accompanying plans), will be drawn
to the scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger, but will not exceed 30 x 42
inches in size, and one copy of the plat will be reduced to fit on an 8-1/2 x
14-inch page. The plat drawing will include as a minimum:
   A.   Name of the proposed subdivision in bold letters, centered at the top
of the plat.
   B.   Detailed, legal description of property subdivided showing its location
by distance and bearing to the nearest quarter section monument, including
accurate distances and bearings from the subdivision to some corner of the
congressional division of which the addition is a part. Reference corners shall
be accurately described on the plat.
   C.   Name and address of owner(s).
   D.   Name of person(s) who prepared the plat and owner’s attorney(s).
   E.   North point, graphic scale, and date.
   F.   Accurate exterior tract boundary lines, (indicated by a solid, heavy
line), with dimensions and angles which provide a survey tract, closing with an
error of not more than one foot in 5,000 feet for any lot and not more than one
foot in 10,000 feet for the subdivision.
   G.   All monuments, erected corners, and other points established in the
field in their proper places. (The material of which the monuments, corners, or
other points are made will be noted at the representation thereof, by legend.)
(See Section
175.34(1))
   H.   All proposed streets named and listed.
   I.   All curves supplied with complete and accurate curve notes. (Reference
table(s) may be used.)
   J.   The exact length and bearing of the boundary lines of all blocks,
public grounds, streets, all alleys, and all lot lines, except that when the
lines in any tier of lots are parallel, it will be sufficient to mark the
bearings of the outer lines on one tier thereof. Easements will be shown by
center line and width when lines are parallel to a boundary; otherwise,
boundary bearings and distances will be shown.
   K.   The exact width of all easements, streets, and alleys.
   L.   All blocks consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order.
(The blocks in numbered additions to a subdivision bearing the same name will
be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions.)
   M.   All lots in each block numbered consecutively, showing street addresses
as provided by the City.
   N.   All lake, stream, or river shore meander lines established by the
surveyor in accordance with the preliminary plat requirements, the distances,
and bearings thereof, and the distance between the point of intersection of
such meander lines with lot lines and the ordinary high-water mark, including
floodplain boundaries and elevations, if applicable.
   O.   All front, rear, and side setback lines, per the Zoning Code
provisions, and existing structures.
   P.   Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and any area to be
reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners in the
subdivision and, any public areas to be vacated as a part of the plat with
corresponding language.
   Q.   Where provisions are made for access from any subdivision to any lake,
stream, or river, the plat will show the area over which access is provided to
the lake, stream, or river.
   R.   The names of adjoining streets, State highways, and subdivisions shown
in their proper location, with property ownership and zoning classifications
shown.
   S.   Abutting street and State highway lines of adjoining plats shown in
their proper location by dotted lines. The width of these highways will be
given also.
   T.   Certification seal/stamp by a registered State land surveyor indicating
that they have surveyed the subdivision and that the plat conforms to said
survey. (See Appendix – Form K)
   U.   Final approval signature block of the Council and Planning and Zoning
Commission with signature and date spaces for Mayor, Clerk, and Planning and
Zoning Commission Chairperson. (See Appendix – Form G.)
   V.   All land contour, street storm drainage, and water and/or sewerage
system layouts provided in Section
170.27, as defined in the Overlay Flood District of the Zoning Code,
(preferably on another sheet).
   W.   Certification that the natural gas and electric company(s) have
received the final plat and found that the plat meets their minimum utility
requirements.
   X.   Certification that the telecommunication company(s), (telephone, cable
T.V., etc.), have reviewed the final plat and found that the plat meets their
minimum utility requirements.
   Y.   Certification that the County Health Department has reviewed and
approved the final plat, if said subdivision lies outside the corporate limits,
but within the area of subdivision jurisdiction, or if a subdivision
incorporates a private water supply system or a private sewage disposal system.
   Z.   Restrictive covenants, private restrictions, supplemental agreements,
and trusteeships and their periods of existence, if any. Should such
restrictive covenants, restrictions, supplemental agreements, and trusteeships
be of such length as to make the lettering of same on the plat impracticable
and thus necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, in an acceptable
form suitable for recording. Reference to the existence of such instrument(s)
will be made on the plat. (See Section
175.27(1))
2.   Other Required Documents.
   A.   A notarized “owner’s certificate” executed by the owner(s) of the
property and spouse(s), if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the plat
is with free consent and is in accordance with the desire of said owner(s) and
spouse(s), establishing the setbacks, declaring the limitations on easements,
and providing for any restrictive covenants needed or requested. (See Appendix
– Form H).
   B.   An attorney’s legal opinion placing the fee title in the owner and
certifying that the land is free from encumbrances, or free from encumbrances
other than those provided for in an encumbrance bond duly prepared, executed
and recorded by the owner as required by the Code of Iowa. (See Appendix – Form
L)
   C.   A certificate showing consent to platting by the mortgagee, if any.
   D.   Certification from the County Treasurer showing that all taxes and
special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in
full. (See Appendix – Form M)
   E.   A hold-harmless and waiver of liability agreement protecting the City
from any damages, claims, or suits resulting from the construction and
development by the owner and/or subdivider. Said agreement will be recorded
with the plat. (See Appendix – Form S)
   F.   A certification by a registered professional engineer licensed in the
State indicating that they have prepared the plans for all public improvements
proposed to be installed in the subdivision. (See Appendix – Form I)
   G.   Prior to any construction within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision, the subdivider will cause to be prepared complete construction
plans, specifications, and engineering drawings, including profiles, cross
sections, and all necessary and applicable details of all public improvements,
including streets, sidewalks, alleys (where applicable), water systems,
sanitary sewerage systems, gas, electric, and communications systems and storm
drainage systems which will conform to the preliminary plat requirements. This
submission will be in accordance with the Standard Public Works Improvements
Specifications. Four full sets of these plans will be submitted to the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer not less than 30 days prior to the commencement
of any construction activity or the scheduled meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission at which the plat is to be considered, whichever is
applicable.
These plan sets will include, as a minimum, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   A copy of the most recent, current, preliminary plat and site plan
for the area showing the exact area(s) covered by the construction plans and
any proposed revisions to the preliminary plat which are to be considered as a
part of the construction plan approval.
      (2)   A tentative draft, final plat, (or a stamped, recorded, final
plat), for the entire area upon which improvements are to be proposed for
acceptance. Where improvements are to be made or where utility extensions will
be required outside of the final plat limits, easements covering those areas
will be provided.
      (3)   Specific plans related to the site plan which are to ensure that
desirable features are retained, topsoil and tile drainage are preserved and
erosion is limited.
      (4)   Detailed State I.D.N.R. approved plans for sanitary sewerage
facilities in accordance with the Standard Public Works Improvements
Specifications. Where public sewers are not a part of the plan, a certification
by the County Board of Health that the area can be adequately served by other
means will be required.
      (5)   Detailed State I.D.N.R. approved plans for water service will be
provided, including the location of hydrants, valves, service lines, and other
appurtenances.
      (6)   Detailed plans, etc., for streets, storm sewers, culverts, and such
other drainage and/or erosion control facilities as may be required.
      (7)   Grade sheets, including street cross-sections at 50-foot intervals
will be supplied by the sub-divider's engineer prior to any work being done.
These sheets will be reviewed by the City and their issuance will be the
contractor’s authority to proceed.
      (8)   All changes to the approved plans will be submitted to the City in
the form of change orders after said changes have been prepared by the
subdivider’s engineer, and have been approved by the subdivider and the
subdivider’s contractor. The City Administrator is hereby authorized to approve
change orders on behalf of the City, provided the change orders do not
represent a material change from the plans that are approved by the Council.
      (9)   The subdivider’s detailed estimate of the cost, (including unit
prices, quantity estimates, etc.), of the minimum improvements required, and a
statement from the City concurring with the subdivider’s estimate.
      (10)   Where a subdivision within the City limits is to contain sewers,
sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas or other physical
facilities which will not be maintained by existing public agencies, provisions
will be made by a supplemental agreement which will become a part of the deed
restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies, for
jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation, and
reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision.
      (11)   A written, signed agreement or contract between the City and the
subdivider specifying the exact nature of the improvements to be installed or
work to be done, the time period in which the work is to be completed, and any
other pertinent provisions regarding the particular subdivision improvements.
(See Appendix – Form N)
      (12)   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications
as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Council in
the enforcement of these regulations.
      (13)   A surety bond in double the amount of the lien shall be secured
and recorded, if a lien exists on the land included in a subdivision plat, and
the required consent of the lienholder is not attached for one of the following
reasons: the lienholder cannot be found, in which case an affidavit by the
proprietor stating that the lienholder could not be found shall be recorded
with the bond; or the lienholder will not accept payment or cannot, because of
the nature of the lien, accept payment in full of the lien, in which case an
affidavit by the lien holder stating that payment of the lien was offered but
refused shall be recorded with the bond. The bond shall run to the City and be
for the benefit of purchasers of lots within the plat, and shall be conditioned
for the payment and cancellation of the debt as soon as practicable, and to
hold harmless purchasers or their assigns and the City from lien.
175.17   GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
The final plat submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval
will be accompanied by a notice from the Clerk stating that there has been
filed a certificate by a registered professional engineer stating that all
improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval
have been made or installed in accordance with the City specifications, (See
Appendix – Form J), a complete set of detailed, as constructed drawings, have
been received; and a maintenance bond or bonds, from the subdivider,
guaranteeing the improvements for a period of two years against defective
materials and workmanship have been received. (See Appendix – Form P)
175.18   INSTRUMENTS THAT MAY BE FILED IN LIEU OF THE FINAL COMPLETION OF
IMPROVEMENTS.
In lieu of final completion of the improvements before the final plat is
approved by the Council, the subdivider may file one or more of the following
instruments with the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer:
1.   A performance bond with the City and/or the County, depending upon the
location of the subdivision, of sufficient amount, which will insure to the
City or County that the required improvements will be completed by the
subdivider within two years from the date of acceptance of the final plat by
the Council and/or County Board of Supervisors; and
2.   An assessment waiver which will provide that the City may, without notice,
construct and install the improvements and assess the total cost thereof
against the subdivided property in accordance with City and State requirements
regarding special assessments, and that the subdivider(s), for themselves,
their heirs, their grantees, their assigns, and all subsequent owners of any
part of the subdivided area, waive all formalities, rights of protest, and
rights of appeal to the construction and installation of the improvements by
the City and to the assessment of the total cost thereof against the subdivided
area, even though the cost may exceed the amount that can legally be assessed
against the subdivided area by the City.
The assessment waiver will further provide that the subdivider and the persons
who own the property benefited by the improvements at the time construction and
installation of the improvements is initiated by the City will be jointly and
severally liable for any difference between the cost of the improvements and
the amount which can be legally assessed by the City against the subdivided
area. (See Appendix – Form Q)
   A.   The filing of an assessment waiver for a particular improvement, in
lieu of final completion of the improvement, will not be permitted if:
      (1)   The abutting property which would be assessed for the cost of the
improvement pursuant to the City’s regular assessment procedures is not
included within the platted area; or,
      (2)   The past performance of the subdivider in installing subdivision
improvements within or without the City indicates, or other circumstances exist
which indicate, that the improvement may not be installed within two years from
the date of Council approval of the final plat; and/or
3.   A Tax Increment Financing (TIF) development agreement and/or a Minimum
Assessment Agreement guaranteeing the completion of improvements, if the
subdivision is located within an Urban Renewal Area within the City.
175.19   PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
At the time of filing, an application will be accompanied by a list of names
and addresses of all those people owning property adjacent to and within 200
feet of any part of the proposed subdivision. The Building and Zoning
Enforcement Officer will notify those property owners listed, by depositing
notices in the U.S.
Mail, at least seven days prior to the scheduled date of the regular Planning
and Zoning Commission and Council meetings at which time said plat is scheduled
to be reviewed and considered. These notices will be delivered by certified
mail.
175.20   FINAL PLAT SUBDIVISION FEE.
At the time of filing, an application will be accompanied by a certified check
or money order, payable to the City, to cover the cost of notification and
final review of the proposed plat and accompanying plans. The following rate
schedule will apply:
 
Number of Lots Contained in Subdivision Fee Schedule
                                        $250.00 (If classified as a minor plat,
2 - 10                                  only one $250.00 filing fee is
                                        required)
11 or more                              $500.00
 
175.21   FINAL PLAT - REVIEW AND CONSIDERATION.
1.   Review by City Engineer, Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer, Public
Works Director, and County Board of Supervisors. Immediately upon the filing of
the reproducible final plat, the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer will
retain one copy for their own files, (on which is to be indicated Council
action), and they will distribute the remaining copies of the final plat, as
follows:
   A.   One copy to the City Engineer, if applicable.
   B.   One copy to the Public Works Director, if applicable.
   C.   One copy to each Planning and Zoning Commission member.
   D.   One copy to each Council member and the Mayor.
and, where the proposed plat is outside the City limits, but within the area of
subdivision jurisdiction, one copy to the Zoning Administrator.
2.   Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission will review the comments of the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Public Works Director, (if applicable), the City Engineer, (if
applicable), and where concerned, the County Board of Supervisors and, make its
own study to assure compliance with these regulations and substantial
conformity to the approved preliminary plat or conditionally approved plat
subject to any modifications requested. The Planning and Zoning Commission will
approve or disapprove the final plat within 30 days after submission of the
final plat materials by the subdivider to the Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within 30 days
will be deemed to be approval; unless, however, the subdivider and the Planning
and Zoning Commission have mutually agreed to an extension of time, or as such
extension of time is otherwise provided for herein. The Planning and Zoning
Commission will make known immediately to the Clerk and the Council its action
upon the final plat.
The above referenced review process notwithstanding, any petitioned matter
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be withdrawn, amended, and/
or consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily postponed,
once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the originally
scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory request from the
petitioner asking for said withdrawal, time extension, and/or amendment of said
petition is received by the Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer no later
than four working days prior to the originally scheduled meeting date. If such
a request is properly and timely filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission will
continue to meet as scheduled and, in the case of a request for a withdrawal of
the petition, the Planning and Zoning Commission will acknowledge the request
for the permanent record and grant the request. In the case of a request for a
temporary extension of time and/or an amendment to the original petition, the
Planning and Zoning Commission will continue to meet as scheduled and will
acknowledge the request for an extension and/or amendment for the permanent
record and consider and act upon the request(s) at the meeting.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant, deny, or conditionally grant or
deny the request for the full-time extension requested or some other time
extension as the Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate, but any
such extension will not exceed 30 days as spelled out above. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission denies a request for extension, then the meeting will be
conducted as scheduled at the specified time and place.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant, deny, or conditionally grant or
deny the request to consider and act upon an amended petition as the Planning
and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
Any additional expenses incurred by the City, as a result of granting an
extension and/or amendment request which was submitted by the petitioner, will
be borne by the petitioner and paid in full to the City prior to the date set
for the rescheduled meeting.
Further, consideration and action upon said matter may be temporarily
postponed, once, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the
originally scheduled meeting, providing a detailed, written, explanatory
request for such action, signed by 20 percent or more of the property owners
whose property boundaries lie within 200 feet, (inclusive of any and all public
and quasi-public right-of-way distances), of the boundaries of the property
upon which the proposed matter is to be considered, is received by the Building
and Zoning Enforcement Officer no later than four working days prior to the
originally scheduled meeting date. If such a request is properly and timely
filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission’s action(s) will be conducted as
spelled out above.
3.   Approval or Rejection by the City Council. The Council will, after being
notified of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s action on the plat, consider
and act on the final plat within 30 days after the first regular Council
meeting following the date of action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the plat, the Council may
approve said plat and accompanying development proposals only by a four-fifths
vote of the entire membership of the Council.
4.   Action on Final Plat to be Filed with the City Clerk. A certified copy of
the resolution approving the final plat, or disapproving the final plat and
stating the reasons, therefore, will be attached to a copy of the final plat by
the Clerk and filed in the office of the Clerk. (See Appendix – Form T)
5.   Appeal of Review or Disapproval. If the plat is disapproved or approved,
subject to condition(s) by the City, the applicant has the right to appeal,
subject to the provisions of Section 354.10 of the Code of Iowa, to the
District Court within 20 days after the date of the denial of the application
or the date of the receipt by the applicant of the requirements for approval of
the subdivision.
6.   Time Limitation for Recording of the Final Plat. An approved final plat
will be filed with the County Recorder within 45 days of the date of approval
by the Council, and the County Board of Supervisors, where applicable, and if
not filed within such time, will have no validity, and will not be recorded
without reapproval by the Council and recertification by the Clerk. Before it
is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, the provisions of Chapter 354
of the Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto, will be complied with. Within five
working days after recording, the duly certified copy will be filed with the
Clerk. No building permits will be issued until verification of such recording
is on file in the office of the Clerk, or unless such provisions are waived, in
writing, by the Council.
7.   Release, Expiration, or Extension of Bond. Prior to the release or
expiration of any bond, the Council will request that the City Engineer certify
that they were notified by the subdivider to witness the installation of the
required improvements at key times so as to be able to certify that all
required improvements were properly installed and that neither the subdivision
as constructed, nor improvements installed, deviate from the approved final
plat.
Should the required improvements not be completed within the duration of the
bond, the subdivider may request of the Council an extension of time for the
installation of the balance of the improvements. Should such a request be
granted, the subdivider will deposit with the City, a performance bond for the
length of time extension is granted. The bond format to be used will be that
form shown in the Appendix – Form O and will be approved as to adequacy of
amount by the City Engineer.
175.22   STREETS AND STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY CRITERIA.
1.   Streets to be Continued. Streets in new subdivisions shall be designed and
adjusted to the contour of the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of
reasonable gradient and to provide for the continuation of existing and planned
streets. In addition, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Council may
require the provision of right-of-way for the connection of the proposed
subdivision to any adjoining unsubdivided land. The street and alley right-of-
way arrangements shall also be such as to cause no hardship to owners of
adjacent property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for
convenient access to it. Whenever a street or alley right-of-way abuts the
tract to be subdivided, the plat will include the additional right-of-way which
is necessary to make the width of the entire right-of-way conform to the
requirements of this Code. The width of right-of-ways will be no less than the
width required by this section except where:
   A.   The owner of the abutting property agrees, in writing, to dedicate
sufficient right-of-way to make a full width right-of-way and the subdivider
agrees to construct a full width street or alley on said right-of-way; or,
   B.   The City owns the abutting property and agrees to the use of it for
right-of-way purposes and the subdivider agrees to construct a full width
street or alley on said right-of-way.
2.   Street Construction. Those streets contained within the boundaries, and
the extensions thereof, and those non-developed, platted streets immediately
adjacent to and abutting any subdivision for a distance greater than 100 feet
will be constructed or reconstructed of concrete or asphalt. All such streets
will be constructed/reconstructed to those minimum standards as set forth
herein and as more specifically alluded to in the City’s Standard Public Works
Improvement Specifications.
3.   Discourage Through Traffic on Local Streets. Local streets will be laid
out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
4.   Streets to Intersect at Right Angles. Intersection of streets will be as
nearly right angles as possible. No street will intersect any other street at
an angle less than 80 degrees, or greater than 100 degrees.
5.   Not More than Two Streets to Intersect. Intersection of more than two
streets at a point will be prohibited.
6.   Intersection Corners to be Rounded. Property lines at street intersections
will be rounded with a radius of not less than 25 feet. Comparable cut-offs or
chords in place of such rounded corners are acceptable.
7.   Obstruction to Visibility at Intersections Prohibited. There will be no
obstruction of any type to visibility at street intersections within the sight
triangle formed by the center of the intersection and two points 75 feet
distant, each point being on the centerline of any intersecting street.
8.   Minimum Centerline Offsets. Offset streets are to be avoided. Where they
are deemed necessary, a minimum horizontal distance of 150 feet will be
maintained between the centerline of the offset streets.
9.   Connecting Street Lines to be Joined by Curves. Connecting street lines,
deflecting from each other at any one point by more than 10 degrees, will be
joined by curves, the inner radius of which will be not less than 350 feet for
arterial streets, 250 feet for a collector street, and 100 feet for sub
collector and local streets.
10.   Reverse Curves to be Connected by Tangent. A tangent or portion of a
street in a straight alignment and of not less than 100 feet in length will be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
11.   Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. Right-of-way widths and pavement widths
measured between the back of the curbs or to the edge of the pavement where
curbs may not be required, will be provided as follows:
 
Street Classifications                          Right-of-Ways Pavement Widths
Arterial                                        80 feet       48 feet
Collector                                       80 feet       45 feet
Sub-collector                                   60 feet       31 feet
Local (Drives, lanes, places, and cul-de-sacs)  60 feet       31 feet
(Without Parking Restrictions)
Local (Drives, lanes, places, and cul-de-sacs)  60 feet       31 feet
(With Parking Restrictions)
 
12.   Maximum and Minimum Street Grades. Street grades as measured along the
centerline will be not less than one-half of one percent and not greater than:
 
Arterial                          5 percent
Collector                         5 percent
Any cul-de-sac                    6 percent
Sub-collector                     6 percent
Local (drives, lanes, and places) 8 percent
 
13.   Cul-De-Sac and Loop Streets. Cul-de-sac streets will meet all the
requirements for a local street and, in addition, will be constructed to
provide a turnaround with a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet and a
pavement radius of not less than 40.5 feet. No cul-de-sac will exceed a six
percent grade. No cul-de-sac will exceed 600 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs and
loop streets will only be allowed on local classified streets. Exception: The
Council may determine a different street turnaround standard or classification
within a planned unit development based upon the applicable land use and the
number of lots served. All measurements will be made along the center line of
the cul-de-sac or loop street right-of-way. Lengths will be determined by
measuring from the center line of an intersecting street to the center line of
the intersecting street for a loop street or circle drive, or from the center
line of the intersecting street to the termination of the right-of-way for a
cul-de-sac.
Cul-de-sacs with islands will have a minimum island radius of 30 feet. Paving
width will be uniform around the island. Design of non-concentric or irregular
shaped islands may be approved by the City after consideration of the effects
of the design on water drainage, snow removal, garbage collection, and street
sweeping, etc.
14.   Change in Street Grade. All changes in street grades will be connected by
vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 25 times the algebraic
difference in percents of grade. In no case will the vertical curve be less
than 100 feet in length. Final decision on the above to be made by the City.
15.   Half Streets. Half streets will be prohibited.
16.   Buffer Treatment Between Subdivisions and Adjacent Uses. Where a proposed
subdivision contains an existing or proposed arterial street or abuts such a
street or land use which may have an adverse effect on a subdivision, the
Planning and Zoning Commission or Council may require some buffer treatment
such as frontage roads, reverse frontage with screen planting along the rear
lot lines, deep lots, or any other such treatment which may protect the
proposed subdivision from these outside influences. (See Sections
170.43 and
170.55).
17.   Access to Highways Under State Jurisdiction. If the tract of land
proposed to be subdivided, or any part thereof, lies adjacent to a highway over
which the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT) has jurisdiction with
respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an entrance or entrances are
desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadways, or alleys in such
proposed subdivision, the subdivider will submit to the Planning and Zoning
Commission an approved permit from the IDOT, granting permission to obtain and
construct such an entrance or entrances. Whenever the proposed subdivision
contains or is adjacent to a highway designated as a controlled-access highway
by the IDOT, provisions will be made for a marginal-access street, a parallel
street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the
highway and such parallel street, or the limiting of access, where possible and
practical, to said street by restrictive covenants.
Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a street
designated as an arterial street or as a collector street in the master street
development plan, provisions may be made for limiting access, where possible
and practical, to said street by restrictive covenants.
18.   Street Names. Streets will be named in accordance with the present naming
system. Streets, that are obviously in alignment with others already existing
and named, will bear the name of the existing street. Otherwise, names will not
duplicate existing street names, and names similar to existing street names
will not be permitted.
19.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks of at least four feet in width will be provided on
both sides of all streets and the edge most distant from the curb will be
placed a distance of one foot from the property line, or as otherwise specified
by the City. The City reserves the right to require additional width depending
on the character of the development. The extra width is to be provided at the
subdivider’s expense. Materials, location, widths, and construction methods
will be determined by the City in accordance with the minimum standards set
forth in the City’s Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications.
175.23   ALLEYS AND ALLEY RIGHT-OF-WAY CRITERIA.
1.   Alleys in Commercial or Industrial Districts. Alleys may be provided in
commercial and industrial districts, except that the Planning and Zoning
Commission or Council may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provisions are made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking, consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
2.   Alleys Prohibited in Residential Districts. Alleys are prohibited in
residential districts.
3.   Width of Alleys. Alleys will have right-of-way and pavement widths of not
less than 24 feet, and 18 feet, respectively.
4.   Alignment of Alleys. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment
will be avoided, but where necessary, corners will be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.
5.   Dead-End Alleys to be Avoided. Dead-end alleys will be avoided where
possible, but if unavoidable, will be provided with adequate turn-around
facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission
or Council.
175.24   BLOCKS.
1.   Shape of Blocks. No specific rule concerning the shape of blocks is made,
but blocks must fit easily into the overall plan of the subdivision and their
design will show consideration of topography, lot planning, traffic flow, and
public areas.
2.   Length of Blocks. Block length will not exceed 1,200 feet. Where a
subdivision adjoins an arterial street, the greater dimension of the block will
front upon such arterial street to avoid unnecessary access or egress, except
upon approval by the City.
3.   Width of Blocks. The width of blocks will not be less than 220 feet and
not more than 350 feet, except upon approval by the City.
4.   Blocks in Commercial or Industrial Areas. Blocks intended for commercial
or industrial use will be designated as such, and the plan will show adequate
off-street areas to provide for parking, loading docks, and such other
facilities that may be required to accommodate motor vehicles.
5.   Pedestrian Cross Walks. The Planning and Zoning Commission or Council may
require the construction of pedestrian crosswalks in blocks which exceed 800
feet in length. Crosswalk easements not less than 10 feet in width will be
provided where deemed necessary at the approximate center of the block. The use
of additional crosswalks, in any instance, to provide safe and convenient
access to schools, parks, or other similar destinations, may be required by the
City.
175.25   LOTS.
1.   Lot Size, Width, Depth, Shape, and Orientation. The lot size, width,
depth, shape, and orientation will be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and the type of development contemplated, and will be established
on all lots; providing, however, that such setback lines are not less than the
applicable requirements of the appropriate underlying zoning district. The
depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of a lot will be at a maximum of 3.0 :
1.0.
2.   Building Setback Lines to be Established. Building setback lines,
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the type of development
contemplated, will be established on all lots; providing, however, that such
setback lines are not less than the applicable requirements of the appropriate
underlying zoning district.
3.   Lot Lines to be at Right Angles to Street Lines. Side lot lines will be
substantially at right angles or radial to the center line of the street or
center of a cul-de-sac turn-around.
4.   Corner Lots to be Extra Width. Corner lots for residential use will have
extra width to permit appropriate building setback from both streets.
5.   Every Lot to Have Frontage On and Access to a Public Street. Every
subdivision of land will be such as to provide, by means of a public street,
each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. No lot will
have a frontage width of less than 40 feet, or that as specified for the
underlying zoning district, whichever is larger.
6.   Reverse Frontage and Double Frontage Lots Not Normally Allowed. Double
frontage and reverse frontage lots will be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries, or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, or except where
desired, along arterial, limited access highways or streets, lots may face on
an interior street and back on such thoroughfares.
7.   Land Remnants (Outlots). All land within a subdivision shall be
encompassed into platted lots or dedicated public right-of-ways and no
undesignated land remnants will be permitted.
8.   Reserve Strips Not Allowed. Reserve strips created by the platting of
property lines, several feet inside the property line/street right-of-way line,
with the objective being the receiving of remuneration for access to an
improved street will not be allowed.
9.   Acre Subdivision. Whenever an area is divided into lots containing one to
three acres, inclusive, and there are indications that such lots will
eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots, consideration will be
given to the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision so as to
allow the opening of additional streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent
local streets which will permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots. Land
dedications and easements provided for the future opening and extensions of
such streets may, at the discretion of the Council, be made a requirement of
the original plat.
10.   Subdivision On or Overlapping City Limits. Should a subdivision be on or
overlap the City limits, it will be platted so the City limit boundary, will be
also a street right-of-way line or will be a lot line. In no case will a lot be
platted so as to be bisected by the City limit boundary line.
11.   Shopping Centers. Wherever possible, unit shopping centers, based upon
sound development standards, should be designed in contrast to the platting of
lots for unrestricted commercial use.
12.   Additional Width for Lots Abutting a Water Course. Lots abutting a water
course, drainageway, channel, or stream will have additional minimum width or
depth as required to provide an adequate building site and afford the minimum
usable area required for front, rear, and side yards while not restricting the
water course.
175.26   EASEMENTS.
1.   Utility Easements to be Provided. Easements across lots or centered on
rear or side lot lines will be provided for utilities and will be at least 10
feet wide on each side of all rear lot lines and side lot lines where
necessary.
Easements of greater width may be required where needed. Easements will be at
final grade before any utilities are provided for the property and the
subdivider, contractor, or builder will keep all easements free of any
excavation dirt, construction material, or any other obstacles during
construction.
2.   Utility Service Easements. A blanket easement will be provided to allow
individual utility service lines to be extended from utility trunk service
lines, providing that the individual service line traverse only that parcel on
which the structure to be served is located.
3.   Maintenance and Flowage Easements Provided for Natural Water Courses.
Whenever any stream or important surface watercourse is located in an area that
is being subdivided, the subdivider will, at their own expense, make adequate
provisions for straightening or widening the channel so that it will properly
carry the surface water and will also provide and dedicate to the City an
easement along each side of the stream, which easement will be for the purpose
of widening, improving, or protecting the stream and for recreational use. The
width of such easement will not be less than 20 feet on either side from the
watercourse centerline and the total width of the final easement will be
determined by the amount needed to adequately provide for any necessary channel
relocations and straightening. The subdivider will notify adjacent properties/
communities, the Corps of Engineers (C.O.E.), if applicable, and the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse, if the stream or watercourse drains an area in excess of 10
square miles, and a “401 Water Quality Permit” application shall be made
directly to the IDNR and (C.O.E., if applicable), in these instances. For
drainage areas less than 10 square miles, any changes in the stream or
watercourse as a result of the subdivision will be considered and acted upon by
the City during the subdivision review process.
If the outlet for surface drainage is outside of the boundaries of a
subdivision, the sub-divider shall also provide drainage easements and/or
flowage agreements from abutting property owners to said approved outlet.
4.   Free Access of Authorities to Easements. No tree, shrub, or structure will
be placed or erected in any easement for purposes of preventing the proper
authorities free access to and use of such easements at any time.
5.   Access Control. Each lot in a subdivision will have access to a local,
sub-collector, or collector street, except lots having a minimum of 150 feet
frontage on an arterial street may be granted direct access to that street,
provided that design standards for sight and stopping distances are met.
6.   Land for Public Purposes. Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds, or
other public uses are located within the subdivision area as shown on the
City’s Comprehensive Plan, or where such sites appear to be desirable, the City
may request their dedication for such purposes, or their reservation for a
period of one year following the date of the approval of the plat. In the event
a governmental agency concerned passes a resolution expressing its intent to
acquire the land so reserved, the reservation period shall be extended for an
additional six months.
175.27   CHARACTER OF DEVELOPMENT.
1.   Generally. The Planning and Zoning Commission or Council will have the
right to require that certain minimum regulations, and restrictive and
protective covenants regarding and controlling the type and character of
development, be incorporated in the final platting process.
Such regulations will be intended to protect the character and value of the
surrounding development and will also tend to secure the most appropriate
character of development in the property which is being subdivided.
In addition to other approved regulations, stipulations, conditions, and
covenants provided by the subdivider, the following shall be incorporated into
each subdivision plat as a minimum:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit and the actual occupancy
of any structure, any disturbed areas of a lot not otherwise landscaped or
paved, located between the rear building line and the front street curb line
(s), will be sodded. All other disturbed areas of the lot will be hand-seeded
or hydro-seeded.
   B.   With the exception of non-storage, recreational-related buildings or
uses, (i.e., swimming pools, gazebos, children’s playhouses, etc.), no detached
accessory building or use will be allowed on any lot within the subdivision.
   C.   Parking provisions relating to recreational vehicles and/or trucks will
be subject to those provisions contained within the Section
170.52
2.   Protection of Natural Vegetation Cover. Whenever a wooded site is to be
developed, no more than 15 percent of the naturally occurring canopy-tree cover
will be removed due to surface earth grading, roadway construction, building
site clearance, or any other improvement. Whenever removal of more than 15
percent of the naturally occurring vegetation cover is deemed necessary and
unavoidable, a mitigating, replanting measure will be implemented. Such
mitigation will require re-establishment of two native trees of a similar
species to those removed, for every three trees of four inch caliper or greater
removed or fatally damaged within two years after the acceptance of the
improvements.
3.   Open Space Requirement. In all residential subdivisions of 15 lots or more
there will be a minimum of 10 percent or a minimum of 6,000 square feet,
whichever is greater, of the subdivision dedicated or reserved as usable common
open space land. The land will be within or contiguous to the subdivision.
Common open space land will be clearly designated on the subdivision plan as to
character of use and development, be intended for the public use of all
citizens, and will not include: (i) areas reserved for the exclusive use or
benefit of an individual tenant or owner; (ii) dedicated streets, common wells,
sewage treatment facilities, and other public right-of-ways; or, (iii)
vehicular drives, parking, loading, and storage areas.
   A.   Large lot subdivisions, provided that at least 90 percent of all lots
have lot areas of one acre or more, will be exempt from the open space
requirements of this section, provided that adequate deed restrictions will
limit subsequent lot re-subdivisions. Exemptions may be provided if within one-
quarter of a mile to an existing public park or designated greenway.
   B.   Guidelines for designating open space land will be as follows:
      (1)   Areas may include environmentally sensitive land, such as stream
beds, marshes, and steep slopes, however, a minimum of 50 percent of the land
must be level ground that is within or contiguous to the subdivision and
suitable for active recreation.
      (2)   The length will not be more than five times the width, (except in
the case of a bikeway proposal).
      (3)   It will be easily accessible to the public.
      (4)   It must have topsoil and be able to grow grass.
      (5)   May include enclosed drainage easements that are compatible for
intended usage.
      (6)   May include land in a high power transmission line easement, but
only a maximum of 20 percent of the open space requirement may fall within this
type of area.
   C.   Bikeways constructed according to the following standards may be
included as a part of the reserved open space: (a) right-of-way at least 12
feet wide; and (b) a permanently paved surface of asphaltic cement concrete or
Portland cement concrete (ACC or PCC) at least eight feet wide, four inches
thick, on a well-drained subsoil base. As an incentive for the development of
bikeways, the land area occupied by the bikeway will be counted as double
towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement, provided that at least
10,000 square feet of other open space has been set aside for active and
passive use.
   D.   Suitable provisions for the maintenance and upkeep of open space shall
be provided through a homeowners association, deed covenants, or through other
similar approved means as approved by the City.
4.   Perimeter Fences. Any subdivision boundary adjoining an existing
agricultural land use will be fenced with lawful fences to prevent livestock
and horses from entering the other property. Where no fence exists or where an
existing fence is in need of repair, the cost will be assigned to the
appropriate landowner. Future repair and maintenance will be done by the
agricultural landowner with the cost prorated according to length of fence
between the homeowners and the agricultural landowner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 359A)
175.28   GENERAL INFORMATION.
All public or private utilities or improvements, including, but not limited to,
public and private sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water systems, and streets,
shall be constructed as set forth on the approved final subdivision plans, in
accordance with the City’s Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications and
standard drawings for construction in effect at the time of the subdivision
construction, and the provisions of Section
175.33.
1.   Construction Plans Prepared by a Registered Engineer. Construction plans
for all public improvements to be installed will be prepared by a registered
state professional engineer. (See Appendix – Form I)
2.   Construction to City Specifications. The type of materials and
construction for improvements in subdivisions will be in accordance with the
City’s Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications and standard drawings
for construction in effect at the time of construction. Said specifications and
standard drawings will be revised at such time as the City deems appropriate
and become effective on the following January first and remain in effect until
revised. Revisions to the City’s standard specifications and standard drawings
will be approved by the Council on or before November first of each year and
will take effect the following January. Subdivisions receiving final approval
after November first, but before January first, will use the new approved
standard specifications and standard drawings. Changes in the City Standard
Public Works Improvement Specifications will be incorporated into actual
construction at the earliest possible time prior to the approval of the final
plat or expiration of the performance bond.
Construction drawing review, construction observation, inspection, and testing
of the improvements will all be performed under the direction of the City, or
by a qualified engineer, or inspection and testing laboratory, as approved by
the City. The City may consult with the Soil Conservation District on erosion
control.
The inspecting agency, if different than the City, will submit daily reports to
the City on forms approved or furnished by the City, certifying compliance of
all construction performed under the City’s Standard Public Works Improvement
Specifications.
3.   Completion of Improvements. No public improvement will be considered as
completed until officially approved and formally accepted by the City.
4.   Improvement Costs to be Paid by Subdivider. Any and all costs associated
with the platting, development, and installation of improvements in connection
with a subdivision created under these provisions shall be paid for by the
subdivider, unless otherwise provided for by a formal agreement between the
City and the subdivider. (i.e., T.I.F. Development Agreement, Minimum
Assessment Agreement, etc.)
5.   Payment of City-Related Engineering and Inspection Fees. The cost of any
City related engineering and inspection of the improvements, based upon the
amount of time devoted to the project, will be paid for by the subdivider to
the City prior to the release of any bond and prior to the City’s acceptance of
the final plat, and/or improvements.
6.   Improvement Credit: Procedure Established. Upon the installation of
improvements required by this Code which may provide benefits to other
properties in the vicinity of the land to be subdivided, which cross or adjoin
other properties and can be used by such properties, the subdivider and the
City may, by contract, agree that upon the connection or use of the
installations made by the subdivider by others, within a period of 10 years
following their installation, the new user or users will pay to the City a fee
in an amount agreed upon by the subdivider and the City, the amount of such fee
to be credited to and paid to the subdivider.
175.29   STREET AND ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS.
1.   All Streets Constructed to Standards. The construction of all streets and
alleys will be in accordance with the design standards set forth in this Code
and in accordance with the City’s Standard Public Works Improvement
Specifications.
2.   Curb and Gutters. Curb and gutters will be required on all streets and
alleys and the design and construction will be in accordance with the City’s
Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications. The minimum grade of any
street gutter will not be less than four-tenths percent.
3.   Curb Corners. Curb corners of all streets will have radii of not less than
25 feet.
4.   Street Pavement Widths. The subdivider will be responsible for providing
street pavement widths in accordance with those provisions of Section 175.29
(5).
5.   Paving Requirements. The surface and pavement dimensions and
characteristics, including thickness and base courses, shall follow the
guidelines of the City Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications Manual.
6.   Stormwater Inlets. Stormwater inlets will be provided within the street
improvements at points specified by the City.
7.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks and crosswalks will be paved and constructed in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section
175.22(19) and the City Standard Public Works Improvement Specifications.
8.   Traffic Control Devices. All traffic control devices and other associated
street signs for intersections and/or other features as designated by the City,
will be paid for and/or provided by the subdivider and said devices, signs, or
other features, will be in conformance with the Manual on U.T.C.D.
9.   Street Lighting. Provisions will be made by the subdivider to pay for and
furnish streetlights in the number and types so designated to comply with the
standards set by Illuminating Engineering Society of North America in ANSI/IES
RP-8-18 and the Department of Transportation or as designated in the approved
street lighting plan for the City. Any additional, special, or ornamental
streetlights, not otherwise provided for in the City’s master street lighting
plan, requested by the subdivider, will be paid for by the subdivider.
10.   Acceptance of Street Dedications. No street in any subdivision that has
been approved by the City after July 1, 1983, will be officially accepted by
the City for the improvement and maintenance thereof until the minimum
improvements required by this Code have been made either by the subdivider(s)
or by the abutting property owners. Private streets, not dedicated to the City,
may be approved by the City where adequate covenants or other legal documents
ensure that the City will not have or need to assume any maintenance or other
responsibility for such street, unless or until it is brought up to full City
standards required by this and other City ordinances. In this regard, building
setback lines should accommodate the layout of such public streets in case of
future conversion.
11.   Driveways. All driveways, approaches, and associated appurtenances
constructed within the public right-of-way will be constructed in accordance
with the provisions enumerated in the Municipal Code.
12.   Designating Street Addresses. Street addresses will be assigned to each
lot in the subdivision by the City according to the City’s master addressing
guidelines and regulations, and shall be shown on each lot on the final plat or
in tabular form. Any variation from these procedures must be approved by the
Council.
175.30   SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
1.   Connection to Public Sewer System. Connection to the public sanitary sewer
is required for every lot in a proposed subdivision located within the
corporate limits. Whenever a subdivider can provide conclusive evidence to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Council that public sanitary sewers are
not readily and reasonably available, the subdivider will design the
subdivision to be served by private sewers accessible to each lot in the
subdivision and connected to a private treatment facility other than a septic
tank, approved by the City and the County Board of Health. All sewers will be
constructed to standard City specifications and will have prior approval of the
City that said private sewer system will be compatible for connection to public
sanitary sewer facilities when available. Maintenance of private sanitary
sewers and treatment facilities will be the responsibility of the subdivider or
a duly constituted homeowners association, until such time as it is connected
to public sewers. Sanitary sewer mains will be televised and inventoried with
GPS locations and depths to the City’s specifications immediately prior to
being dedicated and accepted by the City. The sewers will then be dedicated to
the City and thereafter be maintained as part of the public sanitary sewer
system. (A duly constituted homeowners association will be one whose articles
of incorporation have been approved by the City.)
Private or quasi-public sewage treatment and disposal systems and water well
systems allowed in any subdivision will be designed and constructed in
accordance with standard State and County Board of Health laws, rules, and
regulations.
Construction observation and testing of improvements mentioned will be
performed under the direction of the County Board of Health.
2.   Sewage Disposal Outside of the City Limits. Lots outside of the corporate
limits, but within the area of subdivision jurisdiction which cannot be served
by a central sewerage system, will have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured
at the building line, and a minimum area of 20,000 square feet, unless poor
percolation conditions exist in the area.
In this case, a minimum of one acre will be required, subject to the County
Health Department requirements.
3.   Sewer Installed to Comply with Specifications. Sanitary sewers will be
installed to comply with specifications established by the City and with the
approval of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR).
175.31   WATER SUPPLY.
1.   Connection to Public Water Supply System. Connection to the public water
supply system is required for every lot in a proposed subdivision located
within the corporate limits when a public water supply system is reasonably and
readily available.
2.   Water Supply Outside of the City Limits. Lots outside of the corporate
limits, but within the area of subdivision jurisdiction, may be served by a
public or quasi-public private well system.
3.   Water Supply Installed to Comply with Specifications. Water supply systems
will be installed to comply with specifications established by the City and the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR).
4.   Connection to Private Community Water Supply System Beyond Available
Public Water Supply. Any subdivision which is located within the City limits
and beyond a reasonable distance from the public water system, and if connected
to the public system would yield 15 or more water hook-ups and/or 25 or more
water users, may be allowed to use its own quasi-public water supply system.
This quasi-public water supply system will be installed in accordance with this
section and in compliance with specifications established by the City, Iowa
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR), County Health Department, and all other
applicable State agencies and in compliance with the Safe Drinking Water Act of
1974, as amended.
This system will be so designed so that, at such time as the public water
supply, in the judgment of the City, passes within a reasonable distance of the
subdivision, it may be connected to the private supply and become a part of the
public water supply. No private water supply will be interconnected with any
public water supply.
5.   Lots Not Served by Public Sanitary Sewer and Water Supply Systems. In a
proposed subdivision located within the corporate limits, all lots served by
both individual subsurface sewage treatment facilities and individual water
supply systems will have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured at the building
line, and a minimum area of 30,000 square feet.
6.   Installation Of Dry Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Systems. If the
proposed subdivision is to be constructed within an area of the City that is
not presently being served by the Municipal Water Supply and/or Sanitary Sewer
Systems, but is reasonably expected to be accessed by said systems within a
period of time not exceeding five years, then the Council may require the
subdivision improvements to include “dry” in-place, but inoperable conveyance
facilities and all associated appurtenances necessary to furnish each lot of
said subdivision with a public water supply and sanitary sewer services, when
they become available. Each such case in this matter will be evaluated and
considered on the merits of that case.
175.32   STORM DRAINAGE.
1.   Land Subject to Flooding or Containing Poor Drainage Characteristics. No
plat of a subdivision will be approved which is subject to periodic flooding or
which contains extremely poor drainage facilities, or where conditions are such
that adequate drainage of the streets, and the entire subdivision, is
impossible.
However, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Council, make the area
completely safe for occupancy and provide adequate street drainage, the
preliminary and final plat of the subdivision may be approved.
2.   Installation Of Storm Drainage Systems. The entire subdivision will be
served by one or more storm drainage systems which will be separated and
independent from the sanitary sewer system and which will provide adequate
outlets to other downstream storm drainage systems. All lots and internal
streets shall be adequately drained. The storm drainage system for the
subdivision will be composed of two distinct systems, one to handle low
intensity storms (the minor system) and another (the major system) which comes
into use when the minor system has insufficient capacity or becomes inoperable
due to temporary blockage.
The minor system will consist of closed and open conduits and their
appurtenances. The minor system will have the capacity and detention facilities
needed to capture and convey runoff from a 25-year storm occurring throughout
the drainage area served by this system and, in a way, which will cause only
minor public inconvenience. The release rate out of any stormwater collection,
conveyance, and/or detention facility shall be restricted so as not to exceed
the pre-development volume and conditions produced by a five year storm. The
velocity of water leaving the subdivision shall be reduced so as not to cause
erosion.
The major system is the route followed by runoff waters when the minor system
is inoperable or inadequate. The major system will have a capacity to convey
runoff from a 100 year storm occurring throughout the drainage area served by
this system. The major system will be designed so that no damage is caused to
private structures due to flooding. Surface flows on streets will be kept
within reasonable limits, and will not exceed the gutter capacities at any
time.
All storm drainage system designs will utilize runoff calculations based on all
tributary areas considered fully developed in accordance with the City
Comprehensive Land-Use Plan or other more intense development, when required by
the City.
All storm drainage system designs will consider and accommodate backwater
effects caused by the receiving storm drainage systems as such systems
currently exist. All storm drainage collection and conveyance system plans will
be designed and sealed by a professional engineer, licensed to practice within
the State.
175.33   UTILITIES.
1.   Underground Utilities. All utilities provided as new installations to any
area subdivided will be provided underground, except those utility services
which are listed under Subsection A as exceptions. All utilities provided as
new installations to any areas subdivided for industrial purposes will be
installed underground within any portion of the subdivision lying within 100
feet of a residentially zoned area that is already served by underground
utilities, except those utility services which are listed under Subsection A as
exceptions. The subdivider will be responsible for making the necessary
arrangements with appropriate utility companies for the proper installation of
underground utilities in accordance with the utility company's rules and
regulations.
   A.   The following instances, with the conditions listed for each of them,
may be considered exceptions to this section:
      (1)   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric
transmission circuits will not be required to be installed underground.
      (2)   Any service which is considered by the utility company to be
unfeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and
unjustified cost, can be provided overhead, upon approval by the City.
      (3)   In the instance where topographic or soil conditions cause the cost
of underground installations to be extremely and unjustifiably high, these
services can be provided overhead, upon the approval of the City; however,
utility companies may provide services aerially on a temporary basis until
approval of the City is acquired for installation of permanent underground
facilities, but said utility companies will file with the building inspection
department, notice both of the installation of temporary services and their
termination.
      (4)   Where a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an
existing development, and in such a way as the new development would normally
share primary feeder lines that have already been installed, and when those
feeder lines have been installed overhead, the new development can use those
feeder lines which do exist, providing that the service lines to the structures
in the new development are installed underground, and providing that all
additional necessary feeders are installed underground or in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
      (5)   Developments having preliminary plat approval prior to the
effective date of this section will not be subject to the requirements of this
section.
   B.   The following specific facilities will not be subject to the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Poles used exclusively for police and fire alarm boxes, or any
similar municipal equipment installed under the supervision of and to the
satisfaction of the City.
      (2)   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
      (3)   When authorized by the City, poles and overhead lines and
associated overhead structures crossing or entering any portion of a district
from which overhead wires have been prohibited and originating in an area in
which these structures are allowed.
      (4)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a
bracket or similar device and extending from one location on the building to
another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street or right-of-way.
      (5)   Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for
furnishing communications service.
      (6)   Service terminals, and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment,
installed above ground used to distribute communication and electric services
in underground systems.
   C.   All underground electric distribution circuits installed by the utility
company for the purpose of distributing electrical current within the City will
be installed in accordance with the Safety Rules for the Installation and
Maintenance of Electric Supply and Communication Lines, U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Bureau of Standards.
175.34   MONUMENTS.
1.   Monuments. Unless otherwise specified by the City, monuments will be iron
rods, pipes, or steel bars at least 36 inches long and not less than five-
eighths inches in diameter.
Monuments will have a cap affixed to the top of same that is capable of being
detected by magnetic or electronic equipment and is made of a reasonably inert
material, bearing an embossed or stencil-cut marking of the State registration
number of the registered land surveyor that prepared the survey. These
monuments will be placed not more than one quarter mile apart in any straight
line and at all lot corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a
curve changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line, except when such
corners or points fall within a street or proposed future street, the monuments
shall be placed in the sideline of the street.
175.35   OVERLAY FLOOD DISTRICT.
1.   Land Contours. Land contours of all lots with elevation of sufficient
height to permit construction of the lowest habitable floor of a building at or
above the base flood level as defined in the Overlay Flood District of the City
Zoning Code, will be provided.
2.   Streets. Streets with grades being at or above the base flood level as
defined in the Overlay Flood District of the City Zoning Code, will be
provided.
3.   Drainage Facilities. Facilities designed to store and convey the flow of
surface waters and flood flows, without unduly increasing flood heights and
without causing danger of life loss to persons and/or severe damage to
properties, will be provided.
4.   Water and Sewer Systems. Water systems and/or sanitary sewerage systems,
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into flood waters and required waste disposal
systems located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during a flood, will be provided.
175.36   EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
1.   Generally. For areas of the subdivision that may have ground cover,
removed at any one time, the subdivider will provide a plan including, but not
limited to, the following provisions:
   A.   The type of soil comprising the premises and the physical properties of
each type;
   B.   The type of temporary vegetation and/or mulching that will be used in
these areas to control soil losses from the construction site so as not to
exceed five tons per acre. Erosion control structures will be designed for 25-
year storm frequencies at a minimum. Both measures will maintain soil losses to
a minimum during:
      (1)   The construction period for any type improvement thereon; or,
      (2)   The changes being made in the land contours thereof; or,
      (3)   The removal or destruction of topsoil, trees, and other vegetation
located thereon.
   C.   The location, construction, and maintenance program of temporary
sediment basins (debris basins, de-silting basins, or silt traps) or other
control measures in the subdivision.
A statement of the time period within which temporary control measures will be
removed after construction ends and be replaced by permanent measures.
   D.   The type of permanent and final vegetation and structures that will be
planted or installed on the described premises.
A statement of the time period within which all vegetation and structures are
to be planted or installed.
   E.   In those instances where five or more acres of any subdivision will be
disturbed at any one time, the subdivider will acquire a National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and submit a copy to the City prior
to receiving authorization to proceed with site development.
2.   County Soil Conservation District Recommendations. The submitted plan from
the subdivider will incorporate the appropriate recommendations, if any, of the
County Soil Conservation District.
If any of the Soil Conservation District’s recommendations are not incorporated
into the plan, the subdivider will set forth, in writing as part of the
platting procedure, the reasons for the deletion, and the City will determine
their inclusion or exclusion.
A copy of the approved soil conservation plan will be filed with the County
Soil Conservation District and the City.
175.37   ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE AND APPOINTMENT OF A BUILDING AND ZONING
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
1.   Establishment of Position. The position of Building and Zoning Enforcement
Officer has been established in which is vested the duty of the administration
of these regulations as specified herein, and such other related regulations as
are assigned to that office.
2.   Appointment to Office. The Building and Zoning Enforcement Officer is
appointed by the City Administrator and shall be a person who is qualified by
professional or practical training and experience to conduct the affairs of
that position.
175.38   STANDARDS AND MINIMUMS.
These land subdivision regulations are adopted and enforced only as minimum
standards, and all developers may develop their subdivisions at higher
standards. The subdivider is encouraged, at any time, to surpass these
regulations.
175.39   AMENDMENTS TO AND REQUIRED OF THIS CHAPTER.
This chapter will be reviewed, in its entirety, not less than once every 10
years by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Amendments to this subdivision
chapter may be made by the Council as provided by statute. No amendment will be
adopted without first referring the proposed amendment to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and receiving a written recommendation therefrom. However, if
no recommendation is received within 90 days, the amendment will be deemed to
be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
175.40   BUILDING PERMITS.
No building permit will be issued by the City for the construction of any
building or structure, within a subdivision as defined herein, which has been
approved for platting or re-platting, until the required utilities have been
installed and made ready to service the property, and streets providing access
to the subject lot or lots have been reconstructed or are in the process of
being constructed, or unless specifically approved for issuance, in writing, by
the Council.
175.41   OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
No occupancy permit will be granted by any governing official for the use of
any building or structure within a subdivision approved for platting or re-
platting until the required utilities have been installed and made ready to
service the property, and streets providing access to the subject lot or lots
have been reconstructed or are in the process of being constructed, or unless
the provisions of Section
170.38 have been met in full, or unless specifically approved for issuance, in
writing, by the Council. Notwithstanding the provisions enumerated above,
occupancy permits may be granted where a cash bond is filed with the City for
incomplete subdivision improvements. The cash bond will be on a form approved
by the City and will be in the amount of 150 percent of the cost of completing
the remaining improvements. The exact amount of the cash bond and the date the
bond may be called by the City, if improvements are not completed, will be
determined by the City at its sole discretion. In addition, a waiver of
liability will be executed by the subdivider, which will hold the City and the
public harmless for any damages that may be caused to yet unaccepted
improvements by their use of incomplete facilities, and will be filed with the
City along with the cost of recording said waiver. No occupancy permit will be
granted where the total estimated cost of the incomplete subdivision
improvements necessary to serve the lot(s) exceed $20,000.00 or when, in the
determination of the City, the streets are inadequate to allow City services to
be provided to the lot.
175.42   APPROVAL REQUIRED - RESTRICTIONS ON UNAPPROVED PLATS.
1.   No plat of any subdivision will be recorded in the County Recorder’s
Office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner prescribed
in this Code.
2.   Any subdivision or resubdivision platted after the adoption of this Code,
which has not been approved in accordance with the provisions contained in this
title, will be subject to the following:
   A.   No building or repair permits will be issued for any structure located
therein.
   B.   No public improvements will be allowed therein.
   C.   No public funds will be expended for any public improvements or
activities therein.
   D.   It is unlawful to offer for sale, sell, trade, or otherwise convey any
parcel or tract platted therein.
175.43   PENALTIES.
Any person, firm or corporation, agent, employee, or contractor who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists
enforcement of, any provision of this Zoning Code commits a municipal
infraction and as such will be subject to the penalties and remedies specified
in the
Chapter 3. In the event that any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained; or any building,
structure, or land is used in violation of this Zoning Code, the Council, in
addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunctive relief or
any proper action or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land, or to prevent
any act, conduct, business, or use; in or about such premises in violation of
this Zoning Code. Any building erected, raised, or converted, or land; or
premises used in violation of any provisions of this Zoning Code or the
requirements thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and as such,
in addition to the remedy provided above, may be abated in such manner as
nuisances are now, or may hereafter, be abated under the Municipal Code.
175.44   REPEALER.
All ordinances and resolutions or any part thereof, in conflict with all or any
part of this Zoning Code, are hereby repealed.
175.45   CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE DEEDS, COVENANTS, AND AGREEMENTS.
The provisions of this Zoning Code are not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant, or any other private agreement. In case of any conflict between this
Zoning Code or part thereof, and the whole or part of any existing or future
private covenants, and the whole or part of any existing or future private
covenants or deeds, the most restrictive provision(s) will apply.
