MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-12 Supplement, current through:
Ordinance 15107, passed 6-23-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
14983
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN,
IOWA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MARSHALL TOWN, IOWA, DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the CITY OF
MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA, are inadequately arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the
proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of IOWA empower and authorize
the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA, has
authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances
of the CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA, of a general and permanent nature and
publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE CITY OF
MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA,
Section 1. The general ordinances of the CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA, as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the CITY OF
MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA.
Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
      TABLE OF CONTENTS                TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS         90. Animals
      10. Rules of Construction; General Penalty      91. Fire Prevention and
Protection
      11. Boundaries                  92. Hazardous Conditions and Substances
      TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION            93. Parks and Recreation; Leisure
      30. General Provisions               94. Human Rights; Non-Discrimination
      31. Officers and Organizations            95. Public Nuisances
      32. Fire Department                  TITLE XI:. BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      33. Police Department               110. Licenses and Permits
      34. Civil Emergencies               111. Airports and Aircraft
      35. Council Manual                  112. Alcoholic Beverages
      TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS             113. Amusements and Recreation
      50. Garbage and Refuse               114. Cable Television
      51. Solid Waste Management Assessment      115. Gas and Plumbing
      52. Sewers and Sewage Disposal            116. Hotels   
      53. Storm Water                  117. Junk Dealers and Pawnbrokers
      54. Illicit Discharges to Storm Sewer System      118. Peddlers and
Solicitors   
      55. Erosion and Sediment Control for         119. Public Sales
      Construction Sites                  120.Tree Trimmers
      56. Post-Construction Storm Water         TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
         Management                  130. Offenses Against Peace and Safety
      57. Streets and Sidewalks               131. Offenses Against Property
      58. Vegetation                  132. Offenses Against Persons
      59. Mailboxes                   133. Offenses Concerning Minors
      TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE             TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      70. General Provisions               150. Planning
      71. Traffic Regulations               151. Building Regulations;
Construction
      72. Parking Rules                  152. Housing Code
      73. Recreational Vehicles               153. Plumbing Code
      74. Public Transportation               154. Electricity
      75. Pedestrians                  155. Swimming Pools
      76. Traffic Schedules               156. Zoning
      77. Parking Schedules
      TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES         PARALLEL REFERENCES
      I. Franchises                     References to Iowa Code Annotated
      II. Zoning Map Changes               References to 2013 Code
                              References to Resolutions
                              References to Ordinances
                              INDEX
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the CITY OF
MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA, is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Section 7. The public hearing on this code is set for June 10, 2019 at the
regular meeting of the City
Council.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN,
IOWA, on the 10th day of June, 2019.
                                    CITY OF MARSHALLTOWN, IOWA
                                     Joel Greer /s/
                                     Joel Greer, Mayor
                                     Shari L. Coughenour /s/
                                     Shari L. Coughenour, CMC, City Clerk
I, Shari L. Coughenour, CMC, City Clerk of the City of Marshalltown, Iowa, do
hereby certify that the foregoing ORDINANCE was passed and approved by the City
Council of the City of Marshalltown, Iowa, on the 10th day of June, 2019, and
was published in the Marshalltown Times-Republican, a newspaper of general
circulation in the City of Marshalltown, Iowa on the 17th day of June, 2019.
Shari L. Coughenour /s/
Shari L. Coughenour, CMC, City Clerk
CHARTER
Section
   
1   Purpose
   
2   Charter
   
3   Form of government
   
4   Powers and duties
   
5   Number and term of Council
   
6   Term of Mayor
   
7   Copies on file
   
8   When effective
SECTION 1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Charter is to provide for a charter embodying the form
of government existing on June 30, 1975, for the City of Marshalltown, Iowa.
SECTION 2 CHARTER.
   This Charter may be cited as the Charter of the City of Marshalltown, Iowa.
SECTION 3 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of City of Marshalltown, Iowa, is the Mayor-Council
form.
Cross-reference:
   Form of government, see §
30.001
SECTION 4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council and Mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Marshalltown,
Iowa.
Cross-reference:
   Mayor, Council and officers; powers and duties, see §
31.015
SECTION 5 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of two Councilmen elected at large and one Councilman
from each of six wards as established by ordinance, elected for terms of two
years.
Cross-reference:
   Council; number and term, see §
31.016
SECTION 6 TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
Cross-reference:
   Mayor; term, see §
31.016
SECTION 7 COPIES ON FILE.
   The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of this Charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
Secretary of State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the Charter available at
the City Clerk’s office for public inspection.
SECTION 8 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
   This Charter is in effect after its final passage, approval and publication
as required by law.
   Signed this 16th day of July, 1975.
                                                                             
                           WESTIN JACOBSON, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                               
A. E. MINNER, City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   Designation and citation of code
   
10.002   Rules of construction; definitions
   
10.003   Catchlines, titles, headings and notes
   
10.004   Severability of parts of code
   
10.005   Effect of repeals
   
10.006   Altering code
   
10.007   Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
   
10.008   Payment of fees, fines or unsatisfied judgments; permit, license
issuance
   
10.009   Minimum insurance requirements
 
   
10.999   Penalty
§ 10.001 DESIGNATION AND CITATION OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections constitute
and are designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Marshalltown, Iowa” and may
be so cited.
(2013 Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Codification of ordinances, see I.C.A. § 380.8
§ 10.002 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of this code, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
City Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions. For the purpose of
this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Marshalltown, Iowa, and extends to its several officers,
agents and employees.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The chief legal officer of the city.
   CLERK. The Clerk of the city.
   COUNTY. The County of Marshall in the State of Iowa.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision or section appears requiring
an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be
construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless
the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
   GENDER. Words of one gender include the other genders.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words giving a joint authority to three or more public
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of them, unless it is otherwise expressed.
   LAND and REAL ESTATE. Land, tenements, hereditaments and all rights thereto
and interest therein, equitable as well as legal.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any unlawful violation of any city ordinance, upon conviction
thereof, there is prescribed a punishment.
   MONTH and YEAR.
      (1)   The term MONTH means a calendar month.
      (2)   The term YEAR means a calendar year.
   NUMBER. Words importing the singular number may be extended to several
persons or things, and words importing the plural number may be applied to one
person or thing.
   OATH and AFFIRMATION. The word OATH includes AFFIRMATIONS in all cases where
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and, in like cases, the word
SWEAR includes AFFIRM.
   OFFICIALS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officials, boards and commissions by title only (i.e., “Council”, “Clerk”, the
“Mayor” and the like), they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards
and commissions of the city.
   PERSON. Includes and shall be applied to corporations, associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, municipalities and bodies politic and corporate
as well as to individuals.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt and
things in action.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   STATE. The State of Iowa.
   STREET. Any public street, highway, boulevard, avenue, alley, parkway,
public place, plaza, mall or publicly owned right-of-way of easement within the
limits of the city.
   TENSE. Words used in the present of past tense include the future as well as
the present and past.
   WORDS AND PHRASES. Construed according to the context and the approved usage
of the language; technical words and phrases, and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed
according to such meaning.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Any mode of representing words and letters in
general use, except that signatures, when required, must be made by the writing
or mark of the person.
(2013 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 4.1
§ 10.003 CATCHLINES, TITLES, HEADINGS AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface
type, titles, headings, chapter heads, section and division heads or titles,
editor’s notes, cross-references and statutory references, unless set out in
the body of the section itself, contained in this code, do not constitute any
part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.
(2013 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.004 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   The sections, divisions, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, division or section of this
code shall be declared invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by the valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity,
unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, divisions and sections of this code.
(2013 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.005 EFFECT OF REPEALS.
   The repeal of an ordinance does not revive an ordinance previously repealed,
nor does it affect, any rights, which have accrued, any duty imposed or any
proceedings commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed.
(2013 Code, § 1-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 4.1(26)
§ 10.006 ALTERING CODE.
   It is unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages or portions
thereof or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever causing
the law of the city to be misrepresented.
(2013 Code, § 1-6) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 10.007 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of ordinances,
which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion in
this code.
      (2)   When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division
or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this code
by omission from reprinted pages.
      (3)   The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until such time as this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are
readopted as a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in substantially the following language: “That section                of
the code of ordinances, City of Marshalltown, Iowa, is hereby amended to read
as follows: . . . .” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
   (C)   If a new section not existing in this code is to be added, the
following language may be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of
Marshalltown, Iowa, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
                , which said section reads as follows: . . . .” The new section
shall then be set out in full as desired.
(2013 Code, § 1-7)
§ 10.008 PAYMENT OF FEES, FINES OR UNSATISFIED JUDGMENTS; PERMIT, LICENSE
ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a license or permit by the city, the City
Clerk shall make a diligent search of city records to determine if the
applicant owes any fines or fees to the city, or has an unsatisfied judgment in
favor of the city. If there are fines or fees due and owing, such fines or
fees, or both, shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a license or
permit.
   (B)   If the applicant has an unsatisfied judgment in favor of the city,
that judgment must be satisfied with evidence of such presented to the City
Clerk, prior to the issuance of the license or permit.
(2013 Code, § 1-12) (Ord. 14542, passed 6-10-1996)
§ 10.009 MINIMUM INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Individuals obtaining a license or permit requiring insurance shall
have the following minimum liability and submit the certificate of insurance
with the license or permit application prior to approval of such license or
permit.
      (1)   Automobile liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage.
      (2)   General liability insurance:
         (a)   $1,000,000 each occurrence (combined bodily injury and property
damage) - premises/operations and products/completed operations;
         (b)   $1,000,000 personal and advertising injury; and
         (c)   $2,000,000 general aggregate.
      (3)   Workers compensation (statutory) and employers liability: $500,000
per accident/$500,000 per disease/$500,000 policy limit.
   (B)   All licenses and permits issued requiring a certificate of insurance
shall expire annually on the month and day indicated on the expiration date of
the certificate of insurance.
   (C)   The certificate of insurance shall specifically evidence the amount of
insurance coverage, which shall remain in effect for the term of the license,
and shall provide that written notice be given to the City Clerk 30 days prior
to any change of coverage or termination of policy.
   (D)   Individuals contracting directly with the city shall submit a
certificate of insurance with at least the above stated minimum coverages and
add the city as additional insured.
§ 10.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by this code or any technical code
adopted in this code by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act
or duty required by this code or any technical code adopted in this code by
reference is, unless another penalty is specified, punishable by a fine in a
sum not exceeding the maximum punishable under state law for commission of a
simple misdemeanor, in addition to applicable surcharges and costs.
(2013 Code, § 1-8)
   (B)   Violations - definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. Any violation of this code, any ordinance or code
adopted by reference or the Zoning Ordinance of the city or the omission or
failure to perform any act or duty required thereby is a MUNICIPAL INFRACTION,
except a provision specifically provided under state law as a felony, an
aggravated misdemeanor, a serious misdemeanor or a simple misdemeanor under
I.C.A. Chs. 687 through 747, and is punishable by civil penalty as provided in
this section.
      OFFICER. Any employee or official authorized to enforce this code, any
ordinance or code adopted by reference or the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
      REPEAT OFFENSE. A recurring violation of the same section of this code,
any ordinance or code adopted by reference or the Zoning Ordinance of the city,
if the prior offense was committed not more than 12 months prior to the
recurring violation.
(2013 Code, § 1-9)
   (C)   Civil penalties for municipal infractions, continuing violations and
alternative relief.
      (1)   A municipal infraction is punishable by a civil penalty as provided
in the following schedule, unless a specific schedule of civil penalties is
provided for specific offenses elsewhere in the code:
 
Schedule of Civil Penalties
First offense       Not to exceed $750
All repeat offenses Not to exceed $1,000
 
      (2)   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the
violator constitutes a separate offense.
      (3)   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not
preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action.
      (4)   Municipal infractions may be initially brought upon simple notice
and if the person charged admits the violation, upon payment of the penalty to
the City Clerk and the performance of any other act required by law to be
performed, such person shall not be further prosecuted or assessed any costs or
other expenses for such violation, and the city shall retain all penalties thus
collected. Where a municipal infraction is not admitted upon simple notice by
the person charged or where the person charged fails to perform any other act
required to be performed, or both, an action seeking a penalty may be brought
in state court as provided by I.C.A. § 364.22, and by the method as set out in
division (D) below. Any action seeking a penalty for a municipal infraction,
with or without additional relief, may be initially brought in the state court.
This section does not impose a duty to initially charge all municipal
infractions upon simple notice.
(2013 Code, § 1-10)
   (D)   Civil citations.
      (1)   Any officer may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a
municipal infraction.
      (2)   The citation may be served by personal service or by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
      (3)   A copy of the citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District
Court.
      (4)   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has
been committed and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the defendant;
         (b)   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation;
         (c)   The location and time of the infraction;
         (d)   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both;
         (e)   The manner, location and time in which the penalty may be paid;
         (f)   The time and place of court appearance; and
         (g)   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
(2013 Code, § 1-11)
(Ord. 14308, passed 12-11-1989; Ord. 14885, passed 5-9-2011; Ord. 14933, passed
9-8-2014; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty prescribed, see I.C.A. § 364.3
CHAPTER 11: BOUNDARIES
Section
Wards and Precincts
   
11.001   Division of city
   
11.002   First Ward; precincts
   
11.003   Second Ward; precincts
   
11.004   Third Ward; precincts
   
11.005   Fourth Ward; precincts
   
11.006   Annexed areas; inclusion
WARDS AND PRECINCTS
§ 11.001 DIVISION OF CITY.
   The city is divided into four election wards with two precincts in each.
(2013 Code, § 10-16) (Ord. 14363, passed 11-12-1991)
§ 11.002 FIRST WARD; PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the First Ward, First Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Third Avenue and Linn Street; thence south along 3rd Avenue to its intersection
with Nevada Street; thence east along Nevada Street to its intersection with
Eighteenth Avenue; thence north along Eighteenth Avenue to its intersection
with Main Street; thence east along Main Street to east city limits; thence
north along the east city limits to Marion Street; thence west along Marion
Street to its intersection with Eighth Avenue; thence south along Eighth Avenue
to its intersection with Lee Street; thence west along Lee Street to its
intersection with Third Avenue; thence south to the point of beginning.
   (B)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the First Ward, Second Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Third Avenue and Linn Street; thence north along Third Avenue to its
intersection with Lee Street; thence east along Lee Street to its intersection
with Eighth Avenue; thence north along Eighth Avenue to its intersection with
Marion Street; thence east along Marion Street to the east city limits; thence
following the northeasterly and northerly city limits, west to its intersection
with Center Street; thence south easterly to its intersection with Third
Street; thence south along Third Street to its intersection with Fremont
Street; thence west along Fremont Street to its intersection with Fourth
Street; thence south along Fourth Street to its intersection with Boone Street;
thence east along Boone Street to its intersection of Center Street; thence
north along Center Street to its intersection with Linn Street thence east to
the point of beginning.
(2013 Code, § 10-17) (Ord. 14678, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 14888, passed 8-22-
2011; Ord. 15034, passed 12-13-2021; Ord. 15038, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 11.003 SECOND WARD; PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Second Ward, First Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Nevada Street and Ninth Street; thence east along Nevada Street to its
intersection with Sixth Street; thence north along Sixth Street to its
intersection with Boone Street; thence east along Boone Street to its
intersection with Fourth Street; thence north along Fourth Street to its
intersection with Fremont Street; thence east along Fremont Street to its
intersection with Third Street; thence north along Third Street to its
intersection with Center Street; thence in northwesterly direction along Center
Street to the city limits; thence southwesterly along the northerly and
westerly city limits to its intersection with Summit Street; thence east along
Summit Street to its intersection with Ninth Street; thence south to the point
of beginning.
   (B)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Second Ward, Second Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Nevada Street and Ninth Street; thence north along Ninth Street to its
intersection with Summit Street; thence west along Summit Street to the
westerly city limits; thence south along westerly city limits to its
intersection with Lincoln Way; thence east along Lincoln Way to its
intersection with Twelfth Street; thence north along Twelfth Street to its
intersection with Nevada Street; thence east to the point of beginning.
(2013 Code, § 10-18) (Ord. 14678, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 15034, passed 12-13-
2021)
§ 11.004 THIRD WARD; PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Third Ward, First Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Center Street and Meadow Lane; thence north along Center Street to its
intersection with Boone Street; thence west along Boone Street to its
intersection with Sixth Street; thence south along Sixth Street to its
intersection with Nevada Street; thence west along Nevada Street to its
intersection with Twelfth Street; thence south along Twelfth Street to its
intersection with Lincoln Way; thence westerly along Lincoln Way to the
westerly-southwesterly city limits to its intersection with Westwood Drive;
thence east along Westwood Drive to its intersection with Sixth Street; thence
north along Sixth Street to its intersection with Meadow Lane; thence east to
the point of beginning.
   (B)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Third Ward, Second Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Center Street and Meadow Lane; thence west along Meadow Lane to its
intersection with Sixth Street; thence south along Sixth Street to its
intersection with Westwood; thence west along Westwood Drive to southwesterly
city limits; thence southwesterly, south and southeasterly along the city
limits to its intersection with Iowa Avenue West; thence east along Iowa Avenue
West to its intersection with Center Street; thence north to the point of
beginning.
(2013 Code, § 10-19) (Ord. 14678, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 15034, passed 12-13-
2021)
§ 11.005 FOURTH WARD; PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Fourth Ward, First Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Olive Street and Center Street; thence east along Olive Street to the easterly
city limits; thence north along the easterly-northerly city limits to its
intersection with Main Street; thence west along Main Street to its
intersection with Eighteenth Avenue; thence south along Eighteenth Avenue to
its intersection with Nevada Street; thence west along Nevada Street to its
intersection with Third Avenue; thence north along Third Avenue to its
intersection with Linn Street; thence west along Linn Street to its
intersection with Center Street; thence south to the point of beginning.
   (B)   The area enclosed within the following described boundaries shall
constitute the Fourth Ward, Second Precinct: commencing at the intersection of
Olive Street and Center Street; thence south along Center Street to its
intersection with Iowa Avenue West; thence west along Iowa Avenue West to the
westerly city limits; thence southeasterly along the city limits to the
intersection of Center Street; thence south-southeasterly along the city limits
to its intersection of the easterly city limits; thence north along the
easterly city limits to its intersection with Olive Street; thence west to the
point of beginning.
(2013 Code, § 10-20) (Ord. 14678, passed 8-27-2001; Ord. 15034, passed 12-13-
2021)
§ 11.006 ANNEXED AREAS; INCLUSION.
   Any area annexed to the city upon voluntary petition shall be included in
the voting precinct of the ward to which it becomes a part without further
amendment to this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 10-23) (Ord. 14129, passed 2-8-1982)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   OFFICERS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.001   Form of government
   
30.002   Cash Flow Reserve Fund
§ 30.001 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the city is the Mayor-Council form.
(2013 Code, § 2-1) (Ord. 12723, passed 6-16-1975)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor-Council form of government, see I.C.A. § 372.4
§ 30.002 CASH FLOW RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   Established. The city hereby establishes a Cash Flow Reserve Fund for
the purpose of setting aside moneys to be available during periods of low cash
flow so as to have available moneys to cover normal and usual expenses as well
as emergency needs.
   (B)   Fund balance. Moneys shall be set aside in the Cash Flow Reserve Fund
until the balance thereof has reached a sum equal to 20% of the current year’s
operating budget for the General Fund. This means that the 20% shall fluctuate
based upon each budget year and the requirements for the respective General
Fund thereunder. The Council shall review annually during the budget process.
   (C)   Exclusive uses. The balance of the Cash Flow Reserve Fund shall not be
invaded for any purposes not recited in division (A) above without a repeal or
amendment of this section.
   (D)   Required procedure. No expenditure of cash flow reserve funds shall
occur without the City Council first publishing a notice of the proposed uses
and holding a public hearing thereon.
(2013 Code, § 2-6) (Ord. 14547, passed 7-8-1996)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Compensation
   
31.002   Vacancy in office
   
31.003   City Administrator
Mayor and Council
   
31.015   Mayor, Council and officers; powers and duties
   
31.016   Council; number and term
   
31.017   Mayor; term
Appointive Officers
   
31.030   Offices enumerated
   
31.031   Terms
   
31.032   Duties
Organizations
   
31.045   Board of Library Trustees
   
31.046   Water Works Board of Trustees
   
31.047   (Reserved)
   
31.048   Park and Recreation Advisory Committee
 
   
31.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Elected officers. The annual compensation of elected officers of the
city, as set forth in this section, shall be as follows and paid bi-weekly:
      (1)   The Mayor: $11,000.
      (2)   Each Council Member: $5,500.
   (B)   Appointed officers and employees. The salaries or compensation of all
other officers and employees shall be in such amounts and payable at such times
as shall from time to time be provided by ordinance or resolution of the
Council.
(2013 Code, § 2-16) (Ord. 16, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 10722, passed 4-13-1965;
Ord. 10842, passed 12-15-1965; Ord. 12749, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 14089, passed
10-26-1981; Ord. 14165, passed 10-10-1983; Ord. 14264, passed 12-14-1987; Ord.
14345, passed 3-25-1991; Ord. 14759, passed 2-28-2005; Ord. 14995, passed 4-27-
2020)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 14995, as it amends § 31.001 and is codified herein, takes effect on 1-
1-2022.
§ 31.002 VACANCY IN OFFICE.
   If a vacancy occurs in any office, the office shall be filled as provided by
law.
(2013 Code, § 2-18) (Ord. 1, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 31.003 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Statement of intent.
      (1)   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to establish the
position of City Administrator and to empower that position with the duties and
responsibilities of overall management, direction and co-ordination of all city
services, while retaining in the City Council its role as a policy making body;
in enacting, implementing or modifying recommendations of the City
Administrator; and in fulfilling its legal obligations.
      (2)   The Mayor shall continue to be the Chief Executive Officer of the
city, shall, without additional compensation, act as the City Administrator
when the office is vacant and shall continue his or her other duties as set
forth in the Code of Iowa and the code of ordinances, except as modified
hereinafter.
   (B)   Position established. The position of City Administrator is hereby
established. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Administrator shall be
qualified by education and experience as shall be established by the Council.
As a minimum qualification, the City Administrator shall have graduated from a
college or university of recognized standing with a Masters degree in Public
Administration or a closely related field. In addition to this educational
requirement, the City Administrator shall have extensive experience as a City
Manager or City Administrator, which experience is preferably in the state. In
lieu of the above experience requirement, the City Administrator can have any
equivalent combination of experience and training, which provides the
knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the work.
   (C)   Duties. The City Administrator shall:
      (1)   Be the Chief Administrative Officer of the city;
      (2)   Supervise enforcement and execution of all laws, rules, and
regulations of the city and the state and United States of America as they
pertain to this city;
      (3)   Carry out the policies of the City Council and attend all meetings
of the City Council unless excused by the Mayor or by a majority of the
Council;
      (4)   Make studies of city organization, procedures, policies and
facilities and recommend fiscal and other policies to the Mayor and City
Council as may be expedient for efficient operation of the city;
      (5)   Co-ordinate and direct all city services provided through the
various departments; supervise the overall activities of said departments and
delegate appropriate duties and responsibilities to the supervisors of said
departments;
      (6)   Appoint, discipline and discharge for proper cause, subject to
Council approval, and in accordance with the personnel policies of the city,
the department heads of the city, except where such powers are delegated by
state law. Supervise, direct and evaluate the department heads in accordance
with the personnel policies of the city; appoint such assistants as may be
authorized by the Council and direct their activities;
      (7)   Plan and supervise with the department heads the construction,
improvement, repair, maintenance and management of all city property, capital
improvements, and the undertakings of the city, except those managed by the
Utility Board of Water Works Trustees, the Board of Library Trustees, the Board
of Community Center Trustees and the Coliseum Commission;
      (8)   Co-operate with any other agencies or units of government or Boards
of Trustees;
      (9)   Investigate the offices and conduct of any city department, agency,
officer or employee and compel the production of records and the attendance of
witnesses;
      (10)   Establish planning and goal setting procedures for the city;
      (11)   Co-ordinate all activities and interactions of the Council and the
departments of the city;
      (12)   Assume such other duties as directed by the Council of the whole;
      (13)   Devote full-time to performances of duties as City Administrator
and shall not engage in other employment, self-employment or other office
except with the approval by a majority vote of the Council;
      (14)   As a condition of employment, reside within the corporate limits
of the city; and
      (15)   Not hold any position as officer or director of, nor hold
ownership of more than 5% of outstanding stock in any for-profit corporation
conducting business in or with the city.
(Ord. 14315, passed 4-9-1990; Ord. 14712, passed 5-28-2003)
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
§ 31.015 MAYOR, COUNCIL AND OFFICERS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Council and Mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law, this code and
other ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city.
(2013 Code, § 2-2) (Ord. 12723, passed 6-16-1975)
§ 31.016 COUNCIL; NUMBER AND TERM.
   The Council consists of three Council members elected at large and one
Council member from each of four wards as established by ordinance, elected for
terms of four years.
(2013 Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 12723, passed 6-16-1975; Ord. 12750, passed 8-15-1975;
Ord. 14353, passed 8-26-1991)
§ 31.017 MAYOR; TERM.
   The Mayor is elected at large for a term of four years.
(2013 Code, § 2-4) (Ord. 12723, passed 6-16-1975; Ord. 12750, passed 8-15-1975)
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
§ 31.030 OFFICERS ENUMERATED.
   The following officers shall be appointed by the City Administrator with the
approval of the City Council:
   (A)   Director of Public Works/City Engineer;
   (B)   Fire Chief;
   (C)   Police Chief;
   (D)   Parks and Recreation Director;
   (E)   Human Resources Director;
   (F)   City Clerk;
   (G)   City Attorney;
   (H)   Finance Director/City Treasurer; and
   (I)   Housing and Community Development Director.
(2013 Code, § 2-34) (Ord. 14369, passed 1-13-1992; Ord. 14870, passed 3-10-
2010)
§ 31.031 TERMS.
   Appointment of officers shall be made by the City Administrator with the
approval of the City Council; the appointment of officers shall be for an
indefinite duration of time. Removal of an appointee from office shall be
pursuant to I.C.A. § 372.15.
(2013 Code, § 2-35) (Ord. 14369, passed 1-13-1992; Ord. 14417, passed 3-22-
1993)
§ 31.032 DUTIES.
   The appointees under this subchapter shall perform such duties as required
by law, statute, ordinance, position description and as directed by the City
Administrator. The Mayor shall continue to be the chief executive officer of
the city, without additional compensation, shall act as the City Administrator
when the office is vacant and shall continue his or her other duties as set
forth in the state code and this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 2-36) (Ord. 14369, passed 1-13-1992; Ord. 14315, passed 4-9-1990)
ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.045 BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Composition of Board; appointment. The Board of Trustees of the
Marshalltown Public Library, hereinafter referred to as the “Board”, shall
consist of seven members. All Resident Trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. The Non-Resident Trustee member shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the county’s Board of Supervisors.
(2013 Code, § 2-151)
   (B)   Qualifications of members. Six Trustees of the Board shall be bona
fide citizens and residents of the city. For purposes of this section, these
Trustees shall be called “Resident Trustees of the Board”. One Trustee of the
Board shall be a resident of rural Marshall County. For purposes of this
section, this Trustee shall be called a “Non-Resident Trustee of the Board”.
(2013 Code, § 2-152)
   (C)   Terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
      (1)   Terms of office. All appointments to the Board of Library Trustees
shall be for six years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on
July 1. Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total
number, as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
      (2)   Vacancies. The position of a Resident Trustee shall be vacant if a
Resident Trustee moves permanently from the city. The position of Non-Resident
Trustee shall be vacant if the Non-Resident Trustee moves permanently from the
county, or moves permanently to the city. The position of Trustee shall be
vacant if a Trustee is absent six consecutive regular meetings of the Board,
except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city by a Resident
Trustee, or except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the county
by a Non-Resident Trustee. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled as provided
in division (A) above and the new Trustee shall serve for the unexpired term
for which the appointment is made.
      (3)   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(2013 Code, § 2-153)
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Board of Library Trustees shall have and
exercise the power and duty to:
      (1)   Meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary and such
other officers as it deems necessary;
      (2)   Have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the library;
      (3)   Direct and control all the affairs of the library;
      (4)   Employ a librarian and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library and fix their compensation; provided, however, that, prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting
in favor thereof;
      (5)   Remove, by a two-thirds vote of the Board, the librarian and
provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetence or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of
I.C.A. Ch. 35C;
      (6)   Select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within
budgetary limits set by the Board;
      (7)   Authorize the use of the library by non-residents of the city and
fix charges therefor;
      (8)   Make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations;
      (9)   Have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated
for library purposes by the Council and of all moneys available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings and of all other moneys
belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected, under the rules
of the Board;
      (10)   Accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; take the title to such
property in the name of the library; execute deeds and bills of sale for the
conveyance of such property; and expend the funds received by them from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library;
      (11)   Keep a record of its proceedings;
      (12)   Enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises
and bequests accepted by the city by action against the City Council; and
      (13)   Have authority to make agreements with the local county historical
associations, where such exist, and set apart the necessary room and care for
such articles as may come into the possession of the associations. The Trustees
are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the
preservation and protection of such articles as are, in its judgment, of a
historical and educational nature and pay for the preservation and protection
out of funds allocated for library purposes.
(2013 Code, § 2-154)
   (E)   Power to contract with others for use of library.
      (1)   Contracting. The Board of Library Trustees may contract with any
other boards of trustees of free public libraries; any other city, school
corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher
learning, township or county; or with the trustees of any county library
district for the use of the library by their respective residents.
      (2)   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a
majority vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties.
Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the
governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than 5%
in number of the electors who voted for Governor in the territory of the party
at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the governing
body not less than 40 days before the election. The proposition may be
submitted at any election provided by law that is held in the territory of the
party who is seeking to terminate the contract.
(2013 Code, § 2-155)
   (F)   Non-resident use of the library. The Board of Library Trustees may
authorize the use of the library by non-residents in any one or more of the
following ways by:
      (1)   Lending the books or other materials of the library to non-
residents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city or upon
payment of a special non-resident library fee;
      (2)   Establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to non-residents;
      (3)   Establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or
other library materials may be loaned to non-residents; and/or
      (4)   Establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library
materials to non-residents.
(2013 Code, § 2-156)
   (G)   Library account. All money appropriated by the Council from the
General Fund for the operation and maintenance of the library shall be set
aside in an account for the library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on
orders of the Board of Library Trustees signed by its President and Secretary.
The warrant writing officer is the city’s Finance Officer.
(2013 Code, § 2-157)
   (H)   Annual report. The Board of Library Trustees shall make a report to
the City Council immediately after the close of the municipal fiscal year. This
report shall contain statements of the condition of the library, the number of
books added thereto, the number of books circulated, the amount of fines
collected and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the library
during the year, together with such further information required by the
Council.
(2013 Code, § 2-158)
(Ord. 1, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 9025, passed 2-27-1956; Ord. 12716, passed 7-8-
1975; Ord. 14700, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 31.046 WATER WORKS BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the operation
of the municipally- owned water utility by a Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Appointment of Board trustees. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the Council, three persons to serve as trustees. The appointment
shall provide for six-year terms for the Board of Trustees. The current Board
shall serve until their terms, as originally established, shall expire. No
public officer or salaried city employee may serve on the Utility Board.
   (C)   Vacancies. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Water Works Board
of Trustees shall be made in the same manner as an original appointment except
that the appointment shall be for the balance of the unexpired term.
   (D)   Compensation. The Council shall by resolution set the compensation of
the Board members. The current compensation shall be $300 per year payable
quarterly.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Water Works Board of Trustees may exercise all
powers of the city, city utility or combined utility system it administers,
with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Taxes. The Board may not certify taxes to be levied, pass
ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special assessment
bonds.
      (2)   Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the city but
the Board has full control of the property subject to the limitations imposed
by law.
      (3)   Reports to Council. The Board shall make an annual report to the
Council including a complete financial statement.
      (4)   Proceeding published. Immediately following a regular or special
meeting, the Board shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city a condensed statement of proceedings including
a list of all claims.
   (F)   Control of revenues. The Board shall control moneys derived from
operations of the utility.
   (G)   Accounting. Utility moneys must be held in a separate utility fund,
with moneys to be paid out of the utility account only at the direction of the
Board.
   (H)   Discrimination in rates. A city utility may not provide use or service
at a discriminatory rate, except to the city or its agencies, as provided in
I.C.A. § 384.91.
   (I)   Discontinuance. A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt
of a petition, to discontinue a utility board is subject to the approval of the
voters of the city, except that a board may be discontinued by resolution of
the Council when a city utility, city utilities or combined utility system it
administers is disposed of or leased for a period of over five years.
   (J)   Right of entry. The General Manager of the Water Works Board of
Trustees and other duly authorized employees of the water utility bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, meter reading and
testing between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of each workday and have
authority to inquire into the use, placement, operation, readings and
connections of meters, pipes or other fixtures to the water system as well as
the consumption of water.
(2013 Code, § 2-169) (Ord. 17, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 15028, passed 11-8-2021)
§ 31.047 (RESERVED)
§ 31.048 PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Created. There is created and established a Park and Recreation
Advisory Committee consisting of seven members, being seven citizen members,
who have an interest in park and recreation matters and who have attained the
age of 18 and shall reside within the corporate limits of the city. Members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the Council.
Committee members shall serve without compensation, but may receive
reimbursement for expenditure of personal funds related to Committee business
upon approval of the city’s Finance Director. Reimbursement may require advance
approval. Two of the seven members shall be veterans, regardless of affiliation
with a veteran’s organization.
(2013 Code, § 2-201)
   (B)   Terms of office.
      (1)   All Committee members shall be appointed for two years, commencing
January 1 of the year of appointment.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (F) below, the first meeting of this
Committee shall be called by the Mayor.
(2013 Code, § 2-202)
   (C)   Reappointments. Any member appointed to a term on the Park and
Recreation Advisory Committee may be reappointed for successive terms without
limitation.
(2013 Code, § 2-203)
   (D)   Election of officers. The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall
meet and shall elect from its own membership a Chairperson to serve for one
year, and may provide for such other subcommittees as may be deemed necessary
to fully exercise its functions, subject to final control of the entire
membership of the Committee.
(2013 Code, § 2-204)
   (E)   Regular meetings. The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee shall
hold during a year at least six regular meetings at a time and place fixed by
its rules and may hold special meetings upon call of the Chairperson or by four
members joining in such call upon at least one day’s written notice prior
thereto. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any
matter of business coming before it.
(2013 Code, § 2-205)
   (F)   Duties and functions. The Park and Recreation Advisory Committee
shall:
      (1)   Work in harmony with the City Council and the Park and Recreation
Director to develop a five-year master plan of park development and
maintenance;
      (2)   Evaluate trends in recreation activities to be carried out by the
Park and Recreation Director;
      (3)   Report to the Council from time to time regarding developments; and
      (4)   Make recommendations for operation of the city park system,
recreation programs, trails, swimming programs and municipal band, including
the setting of fees for use of facilities, including rental shelters which were
previously set by City Council resolution.
(2013 Code, § 2-206)
(Ord. 14457, passed 3-28-1994; Ord. 14823, passed 1-28-2008; Ord. 14897, passed
2-27-2012; Res. 2018-155, passed 8-29-2018)
§ 31.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Anyone violating the provisions of §
31.046 of this chapter for any offense, as is set forth in §
31.046(J) of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 2-190) (Ord. 11621, passed 1-12-1969; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
CHAPTER 32: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
False Alarms
   
32.001   Definitions
   
32.002   Application
   
32.003   Excessive false alarms; service fee
Fire Department
   
32.015   Composition; appointment of members
   
32.016   Suspension or discharge of Fire Chief
   
32.017   Interfering with fire officer or firefighter in performance of duty
   
32.018   Fire Chief; administration and powers
   
32.019   Service beyond corporate limits
 
   
32.999   Penalty
FALSE ALARMS
§ 32.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM MONITORING SERVICE. A business providing the function of receiving on
a continuous basis, through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm
systems and, thereafter, relaying a message by line voice to the Fire
Department.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device, whether mechanical, electrical or otherwise, which
creates, produces, generates or relays any sound signal or message, whether
audible or not, in order to detect any fire or other emergency which summons
the Fire Department.
   ALARM USER. The person, firm, corporation or entity of any kind in control
of any building, structure or facility that purchases, leases, contracts for or
otherwise contains an alarm system other than a burglar or holdup alarm system.
   ANNUNCIATOR. The part of an employee system that communicates the fact that
the system has been triggered or activated.
   AUDIBLE OR VISUAL ANNUNCIATOR. An annunciator which gives alarm by means of
a bell, siren, buzzer, flashing light or similar sound- or light-producing
device when activated, which is mounted at some location which is clearly
visible when observed or clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more
outside of any building in which it is mounted. ANNUNCIATORS can communicate
directly with the Fire Department or indirectly through the use of an alarm
monitoring service or remote monitoring point.
   FALSE ALARM. An occasion that has resulted in a response by the Fire
Department to the activation of any alarm system because of malfunction,
mechanical or electrical defect, improper installation or improper operation or
procedure by any person and no actual fire or other emergency occurred
requiring an immediate or emergency response by Fire Department personnel. The
term FALSE ALARM does not include an alarm system activated as a result of: any
malfunction of equipment owned or operated by the telephone company or
resulting from the authorized servicing, testing, maintenance, adjustments,
alterations or installations of such alarm system; a power outage; or utility
construction; provided that, the respective permittee or authorized agent
thereof notified the Chief of the Fire Department prior to commencement of any
of such activities. The term FALSE ALARM does not include an alarm signal
caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. The term FALSE ALARM does not
include activation of an alarm system caused by an unauthorized activation in a
public building of an alarm required by law to be located in an area open to
the public or students of an educational institution; provided, such alarm
system is in conformity with all applicable laws and regulations. The burden of
proving that such alarm was not a FALSE ALARM shall be on the alarm user.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the city’s Fire Department or any person designated
by him or her and authorized to administer this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 12-96) (Ord. 14253, passed 4-27-1987)
§ 32.002 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all automatic alarms that are responded to by
the city’s Fire Department.
(2013 Code, § 12-97) (Ord. 14253, passed 4-27-1987)
§ 32.003 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS; SERVICE FEE.
   (A)   Where an alarm system malfunctions and/or produces chronic or
excessive false alarms and the Fire Chief has determined that such malfunctions
or false alarms are in excess of the number of such false alarms allowed under
this subchapter, the Chief shall assess a service fee for such excess alarms.
EXCESS FALSE ALARMS shall mean more than five per calendar year.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever an alarm system has been determined by the Fire Chief
to transmit an excessive number of false alarms and a service fee has been
charged, the service fee may be waived by the Fire Chief upon demonstration by
the alarm user that the alarm user has caused correction of any problem or
equipment which was the basis for the service charge in a manner satisfactory
to the Fire Chief.
      (2)   The fee for excessive false alarms shall be determined by the
following table:
 
False Alarms Per Calendar Year Amount Per False Alarm
6 to 9                         $50
10 to 14                       $75
15 or more                     $100
 
(2013 Code, § 12-98) (Ord. 14253, passed 4-27-1987; Ord. 14514, passed 11-13-
1995)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.015 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief, a Deputy Chief, and a
Fire Marshal and such number of Captains, Lieutenants, and firefighter/EMT’s,
as the Council shall fix.
(2013 Code, § 12-24) (Ord. 11, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8048, passed 3-28-1951)
§ 32.016 SUSPENSION OR DISCHARGE OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The City Administrator may suspend or discharge for cause, the Chief of the
Fire Department and select the Deputy Fire Chief to act in the capacity of
Chief of the Fire Department during such suspension or vacancy and until the
Chief is restored or a successor is appointed.
(2013 Code, § 12-27) (Ord. 11, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8142, passed 7-10-1951)
§ 32.017 INTERFERING WITH FIRE OFFICER OR FIREFIGHTER IN PERFORMANCE OF DUTY.
   It shall be unlawful to hinder or interfere with any officer or firefighter
in the performance of his or her duty as a member of the Fire Department.
(2013 Code, § 12-28) (Ord. 11, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.018 FIRE CHIEF; ADMINISTRATION AND POWERS.
   As Chief of the Fire Department, the following duties and powers shall be
assumed:
   (A)   Shall act as the authority having jurisdiction and shall enforce all
ordinances, laws and orders of the State Fire Marshal dealing with precautions
against fire;
   (B)   Shall provide general supervision of the Fire Department;
   (C)   Shall have command, control, and direction of all members and
equipment of the Fire Department;
   (D)   Shall prescribe entry limits in the vicinity of any fire;
   (E)   Shall, when it becomes necessary to check or control any fire, have
power to order any fence, building, or structure of any kind to be cut down or
removed;
   (F)   Shall have the power, with consent of the City Administrator, to tear
down any portion of any building that may be standing after a fire, which, in
his or her judgment, may be dangerous to persons or property;
   (G)   Shall have the power to cause the removal of all wires or the turning
off of all electrical power whenever firefighter safety is in jeopardy;
   (H)   Shall have the power to enter any house, building, or yard weekdays
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or any time agreed upon with a property owner,
for the purpose of making an inspection;
   (I)   Shall have the power, when dangerous conditions exist, to order the
removal of combustibles such as rubbish, wood, hay, straw, paper, or other
products liable to ignite from the building or property. A written order shall
be issued with a time frame for compliance; and
   (J)   Shall prepare and present an annual report of Fire Department activity
to the Council.
(2013 Code, §§ 12-41 - 12-44, 12-46 - 12-50) (Ord. 9, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 32.019 SERVICE BEYOND CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   Fire service of the city is extended to all city-owned property lying
outside the city limits, including property of the city waterworks and airport.
   (B)   Fire service of the city is extended to outside fire departments in
which a 28E Agreement for mutual aid has been executed. On request, one
apparatus with equipment requested shall respond. Off-duty personnel shall be
called back to ensure minimum staffing requirements.
(2013 Code, §§ 12-60 - 12-64) (Ord. 12, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8463, passed 1-
26-1953; Ord. 8764, passed 1-24-1955; Ord. 14233, passed 6-23-1986)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Anyone violating any of the sections of §§
32.015 through
32.019 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 12-31) (Ord. 11, passed 8-14-1950)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Police Department
   
33.001   Extension of services outside city limits
   
33.002   Department composition
   
33.003   Assistant Chief of Police; appointment; qualifications; removal
   
33.004   Rules and regulations
   
33.005   Police officers; general duties
   
33.006   Service of warrants and other processes
   
33.007   Special police
Alarm Systems
   
33.020   Definitions
   
33.021   Alarm system standards
   
33.022   False alarms
   
33.023   Service availability for system malfunction
   
33.024   Responsibility for alarm response
   
33.025   Alarm devices terminating at city facilities
   
33.026   Business license tax unaffected
Reserve Police Force
   
33.035   Establishment
   
33.036   Membership; bylaws, rules and regulations
   
33.037   Terms; removal of members
   
33.038   Supervision by Police Department
   
33.039   Employee status of members
   
33.040   Grounds for dismissal
   
33.041   Carrying firearms
   
33.042   Conflicting rules, regulations or bylaws
   
33.043   Other rules
 
   
33.999   Penalty
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.001 EXTENSION OF SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   Police services of the city are extended to all city-owned property lying
outside of the city limits, including the property of the city’s Water Works
and the Airport.
(2013 Code, § 24-1) (Ord. 14233, passed 6-23-1986)
§ 33.002 DEPARTMENT COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A Chief of Police, who shall be the principal law enforcement and
administrative officer of the Police Department;
      (2)   An Assistant Chief of Police, who shall act for the Chief of Police
when he or she is unable to perform his or her duties as Chief and who shall be
appointed by the Chief of Police as provided by law and Department regulations;
      (3)   Captains, who shall be appointed by the Chief of Police as provided
by law and Department regulations. The Chief of Police and the City Council
shall establish the number of captains by resolution from time to time as
required;
      (4)   Lieutenants, who shall be appointed by the Chief of Police as
provided by law and Department regulations. The Chief of Police and the City
Council shall establish the number of lieutenants by resolution from time to
time as required;
      (5)   Sergeants, who shall be appointed by the Chief of Police as
provided by law and Department regulations. The Chief of Police and the City
Council shall establish the number of sergeants by resolution from time to time
as required; and
      (6)   Police officers, who shall be appointed to the Police Department as
provided by law and Department regulations, and the authorized number shall be
as the Council may set by resolution.
   (B)   All members of the Police Department, regardless of rank or rating,
shall be subject to such duty assignments as shall be directed by the Chief of
Police or by the Mayor, so as to promote efficiency and elasticity in the
functioning of the Police Department.
(2013 Code, § 24-12) (Ord. 10, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8597, passed 1-27-1954;
Ord. 12240, passed 5-3-1973; Ord. 12786, passed 9-22-1975; Ord. 13033, passed
12-13-1976; Ord. 13352, passed 5-22-1978; Ord. 14176, passed 3-12-1984)
§ 33.003 ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Chief of
Police from the qualified members of the Police Department from the standing
civil service promotion list and shall have not less than five years continuous
service and shall be subject to competitive tests or examinations under the
Civil Service Commission.
(2013 Code, § 24-14)
   (B)   The Assistant Chief of Police shall hold his or her position at the
pleasure of the Chief of Police and may be removed at any time by written
order, stating the reasons therefor and filed with the City Clerk. There shall
be no appeal from such removal order.
(2013 Code, § 24-15)
   (C)   The Assistant Police Chief shall be second in rank and position in the
Police Department and, in the absence of the Chief of Police, shall be in full
charge and control of the Police Department and shall perform all functions and
duties of the Chief of Police and be responsible to the Chief of Police for the
performance of his or her duties.
(2013 Code, § 24-17)
(Ord. 10860, passed 12-29-1965)
§ 33.004 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules and regulations
for the Police Department as it may deem needful and proper, not inconsistent
with state law or with the provisions of this subchapter. The Chief of the
Police Department is authorized and directed from time to time, subject to the
approval of the City Council, to make such rules and regulations or amend such
rules and regulations, as may be necessary, to carry out the intent of this
subchapter and to govern the affairs and conduct of the Police Department in
all respects and particulars.
   (B)   The Chief of the Police Department is authorized and directed to make
rules, subject to the approval of the City Council, to:
      (1)   Dispose of surplus equipment items with an estimated value of
$7,500 or less;
      (2)   Dispose of property seized in criminal cases;
      (3)   Close streets temporarily up to 72 consecutive hours;
      (4)   Approve of temporary parking on the wrong side of the street for up
to 72 consecutive hours; and
      (5)   Approve of in-state travel for employees of the Police Department.
(2013 Code, § 24-19) (Ord. 10, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12786, passed 9-22-1975;
Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-1998)
§ 33.005 POLICE OFFICERS; GENERAL DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
promptly obey and carry out all lawful demands or commands of his or her
superior, and any member of the Department who may be suspended, as by law
provided, shall receive no pay or compensation during the period of suspension.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of each member of the police force to lawfully
arrest all persons in the city found in the act of violating any law or
ordinance, or aiding or abetting an any such violation, or any person whom the
officer has reasonable grounds for believing has committed a public offense and
who is likely to escape before a complaint can be filed and a warrant issued
for his or her arrest.
(2013 Code, § 24-21) (Ord. 12786, passed 9-22-1975)
§ 33.006 SERVICE OF WARRANTS AND OTHER PROCESSES.
   Each member of the police force shall have power and authority, in the city,
to serve and execute warrants and other processes for the apprehension and
commitment of persons charged with any crime held for examination or trial or
taken in execution or the commission of any crime or misdemeanor. No member of
the Police Department shall serve any civil process, except where the city is a
party, or do any other business or service that will interfere with his or her
duties as a police officer.
(2013 Code, § 24-22) (Ord. 10, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12786, passed 9-22-1975)
§ 33.007 SPECIAL POLICE.
   (A)   The Mayor, in cooperation with the Chief of Police, may, from time to
time, when it appears necessary and proper in the detection or solution of
crime or in the apprehension of suspected offenders, appoint not to exceed
three persons at any one time to act as special police. Such appointments shall
be in writing and shall fix the term of appointment to be not more than 30
days, and the Mayor may terminate such appointment without notice.
   (B)   The compensation of such special police shall be fixed by the Mayor,
but shall not exceed the sum of $10 per day.
   (C)   All special police officers shall be casual employees only and shall
not be under civil service or entitled to any of the rights or privileges of
the civil service law.
(2013 Code, § 24-25) (Ord. 10, passed 8-14-1950)
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 33.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM BUSINESS. The business of selling, leasing, maintaining, inspecting,
serving, repairing, replacing, altering, moving or installing any alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Either a burglar or holdup alarm system.
   AUDIBLE ALARM. An alarm system which, when actuated, generates an audible
sound on the premises. This AUDIBLE ALARM may or may not be combined with a
method of transmitting a signal to a remote point.
   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. A method of detecting and signaling the presence,
entry or attempted entry of an intruder into protected premises.
   CENTRAL STATION. Premises, usually maintained by an alarm company, equipped
to receive and display signals from intruder alarm systems.
   CITY. This city or such officers or employees as may be designated by this
chapter to have specific duties in relation to this chapter.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal necessitating response by police or other
public safety agency where an emergency situation does not exist.
   PROTECTED PREMISES. The part of a building to which protection is afforded
by an alarm system.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An individual, corporation or organization having an
ownership interest in or control over an alarm system.
   SILENT ALARM. An alarm signal transmitted in such a manner that any intruder
into the premises is not aware of the signal.
(2013 Code, § 17-219) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
§ 33.021 ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   Under this chapter, residential and business alarms may be connected to the
Police Department through commercial alarm companies or through self-dialing
systems. Such connections shall be at the owner’s expense.
(2013 Code, § 17-220) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
§ 33.022 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Each alarm having its alarm terminate at the police station, either
silent, telephonic or having an outside audible (local) alarm on the premises
within the meaning of this chapter will be allowed no more than two false
alarms in any calendar year. For every false alarm over two during the calendar
year, the responsible party shall be billed a service fee at a rate established
by the City Council by resolution. Such billing shall be made monthly by the
city. An authorized test of the alarm system shall not be considered a false
alarm, providing notice of such test has been relayed to the Police Department
and approved by the Police Department prior to such testing. The service fee
shall be assessed against the occupant of the address protected by the alarm.
The Police Chief shall have discretion to waive the service fee for good cause.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally cause a false alarm. If any
alarm business, alarm agent or owner, operator, proprietor or employee of a
premises where an alarm system is installed causes a false alarm intentionally,
the Police Chief may revoke or suspend the privilege of the alarm connection to
the Police Department.
   (C)   The Police Chief shall have authority to determine if an excessive
number of false alarms are resulting from the operation of any alarm system.
When such a determination is made, the Police Chief shall inform the subscriber
or the proprietor, owner or operator of the alarm system that an excessive
number of false alarms have occurred. If, in the opinion of the Police Chief,
excessive numbers of false alarms continue to occur, the Chief shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke the service provided. It shall be unlawful to
intentionally cause a false alarm punishable as provided in §
33.999 of this chapter and, if a false alarm is caused intentionally by any
alarm business, alarm agent or the owner, operator, proprietor or employee of a
premises where an alarm system is installed, the Police Chief may revoke or
suspend the service at once. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit testing of a system with notice given to the Police Chief.
(2013 Code, § 17-221) (Ord. 14626, passed 6-28-1999) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.023 SERVICE AVAILABILITY FOR SYSTEM MALFUNCTION.
   Under this chapter, each alarm is the property and responsibility of the
owner, not the city. If a system malfunction occurs, it shall be the owner’s
responsibility to either disable or repair the alarm system within a reasonable
time period. Failure to comply may result in assessment of a service fee
determined by Council, plus the cost the city may incur to disable the alarm.
(2013 Code, § 17-222) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
§ 33.024 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALARM RESPONSE.
   Under this chapter, every responsible party having control or ownership of
an alarm system, audible or silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm
system is giving or has given a signal, proceed immediately to that premises
and render all necessary service; provided, however, that, the owner or person
in control of the premises may enter into an agreement with an alarm business,
licensed private detective agency or watch service to assume the duty to
respond instead. The responsible party or agent shall, upon installation or
activation of the alarm system, notify the Police Department in writing as to
the alarm type, address and planned response. Failure to respond to an alarm or
to notify the Police Department of the installation activation or change in an
alarm may cause the Police Chief to assess a service fee of $25 for each
failure or for any changes in the alarm system to which the Police Department
is not notified.
(2013 Code, § 17-223) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
§ 33.025 ALARM DEVICES TERMINATING AT CITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   A burglar or holdup alarm may terminate and give a signal at the
police station.
   (B)   Any alarm company having such alarm panel terminating at the police
station shall be billed $1,000 per year for the service.
   (C)   The Police Chief may set standards and rules and regulations governing
such equipment and may limit the number of alarm systems so terminating.
(2013 Code, § 17-224) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
§ 33.026 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX UNAFFECTED.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver or
exemption from any business license tax otherwise applicable.
(2013 Code, § 17-225) (Ord. 14459, passed 5-9-1994; Ord. 14508, passed 9-11-
1995)
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
§ 33.035 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is created and established the city’s Reserve Police Force as
provided by I.C.A. Ch. 80D, and subject to the regulations therein contained.
   (B)   The Reserve Police Force shall serve until abolished by the City
Council.
(2013 Code, § 24-61) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.036 MEMBERSHIP; BYLAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Membership in the Reserve Police Force shall be as prescribed in such
Reserve’s bylaws, rules and regulations. The Chief of Police may, from time to
time, prescribe such other bylaws, rules and regulations as he or she, in his
or her sole discretion, may deem to be desirable. The Mayor and the Chief of
Police shall approve all rules, regulations or bylaws of the Reserve.
(2013 Code, § 24-62) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.037 TERMS; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The members of the Reserve Police Force shall serve at the discretion
of the Chief of Police and shall be removed and discharged from the Reserve at
any time upon violation of any bylaw, rule or regulation prescribed or upon
recommendation of the Reserve Police Executive Committee.
   (B)   There is no appeal to a removal order from the Chief of Police.
(2013 Code, § 24-63) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.038 SUPERVISION BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The members of the Reserve Police Force shall be subject to lawful orders of
a member of the city’s Police Department.
(2013 Code, § 24-64) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.039 EMPLOYEE STATUS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the Reserve Police Force shall be considered city employees
during those periods when they are performing police duties as authorized and
directed by the Chief of Police or the Assistant Chief, in the absence of the
Chief, and they shall receive a salary of $1 per year.
   (B)   However, the reserve members shall not be entitled to any benefits or
obligations of police retirement benefits or civil service.
(2013 Code, § 24-65) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.040 GROUNDS FOR DISMISSAL.
   No member of the Reserve Police Force shall violate the city ordinances or
the laws of the state or the United States and such violation may be grounds
for summary dismissal.
(2013 Code, § 24-66) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.041 CARRYING FIREARMS.
   Members of the Reserve Police Force shall not, at any time, carry any
firearms, except as provided by I.C.A. § 80D.7.
(2013 Code, § 24-67) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.042 CONFLICTING RULES, REGULATIONS OR BYLAWS.
   Any rule, regulation, constitution or bylaw of the Reserve Police Force,
inconsistent with or in violation of this subchapter or the rules and
regulations of the city’s Police Department, is repealed.
(2013 Code, § 24-68) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.043 OTHER RULES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall determine the number of Reserve officers and
set their rank structure.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may also create other Reserve officer categories
beside those established by Iowa Code.
   (C)   Other categories of Reserves will not, however, be authorized to carry
weapons, nor make arrests.
(2013 Code, § 24-69) (Ord. 14130, passed 2-8-1982)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction punishable
as a civil penalty as provided in §
10.999(D) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 17-245)
CHAPTER 34: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
34.001   Purpose and declaration of policy
   
34.002   Mayor’s power during emergency
   
34.003   Effective date and termination of emergency powers
   
34.004   City Administrator as Director of Disaster Services
   
34.005   Emergency operations plan
   
34.006   Operational organization
   
34.007   Emergency procurements
 
   
34.999   Penalty
§ 34.001 PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   This chapter is enacted to set out and clarify the authority of the city and
its officers and employees with regard to emergency and disaster situations. It
is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory and
constitutional authority. This chapter does not preclude joint or cooperative
planning and response efforts with other city, county, state, regional,
national and international authorities and bodies.
(2013 Code, § 9-1) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.002 MAYOR’S POWER DURING EMERGENCY.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, when the Mayor
determines, in the Mayor’s sole discretion, that a state of public emergency
exists within the city, the Mayor, pursuant to I.C.A. § 372.14, may by
proclamation declare a state of emergency, govern the city by proclamation, and
exercise through the assistance of the City Administrator and in consultation
with the City Attorney all emergency powers, including, but not limited to, all
of the following:
   (A)   The power to direct emergency response activities by city departments,
including, but not limited to, the Police and Fire Departments, and by such
emergency services personnel as the Mayor may designate or appoint;
   (B)   The power to execute contracts for the emergency construction or
repair of public improvements, when the delay of advertising and public letting
might cause serious loss or injury to the city, upon following the procedures
of §
34.007 of this chapter;
   (C)   The power to purchase or lease goods and services the Mayor deems
necessary to the city’s emergency response or for the repair of city
facilities, or both, upon following the procedures of §
34.007 of this chapter;
   (D)   The power to lease real property, structures or both, that the Mayor
deems necessary for the continued operation of city government;
   (E)   The power to promulgate rules and orders to implement and clarify the
Mayoral proclamation exercising emergency power; and
   (F)   The power to delegate any or all of these duties to the City
Administrator, who may in turn delegate any or all of the duties.
(2013 Code, § 9-2) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.003 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY POWERS.
   Proclamations, rules and orders issued pursuant to §
34.002 of this chapter shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in
effect until withdrawn by the Mayor or issuing authority. However, these
proclamations, rules and orders shall be withdrawn by the Mayor or issuing
authority, and those acting pursuant to §
34.002 of this chapter shall cease to exercise emergency powers, at such times
as the conditions giving rise to the emergency cease and emergency conditions
resulting from the initial condition cease.
(2013 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.004 CITY ADMINISTRATOR AS DIRECTOR OF DISASTER SERVICES.
   (A)   (1)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for the performance
and supervision of performance of all duties in connection with coordinating
and carrying out the city’s part in furnishing services in the event of major
natural or human-made disasters, including, but not limited to, floods, fire,
drought, earthquakes, tornadoes, windstorms, epidemics, hazardous substance or
nuclear power plant accidents or incidents, insurrections, riots, looting and
persistent violent civil disobedience, which threaten the public peace, health
and safety, or which damage and destroy public or private property of the city.
Depending on the nature and scope of the disaster and nature and scope of
agreements with other public entities, the City Administrator may coordinate or
delegate, or both, the responsibility for the performance and supervision or
performance for such duties to other such entities.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall assist the Mayor in the exercise of
emergency powers under §
34.002 of this chapter.
      (3)   The City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, shall
act in coordination with the state, county and other governmental agencies as
may be necessary to plan and implement a joint jurisdiction emergency planning
and disaster services plan and mutual aid arrangements.
      (4)   The City Administrator shall consult with the City Attorney and the
county’s Emergency Management Director in the planning and exercise of
emergency powers.
(2013 Code, § 9-5)
   (B)   The City Administrator, when acting as Director of Disaster Services,
shall:
      (1)   Request the Mayor, when appropriate, to declare a state of
emergency as provided in §
34.002 of this chapter;
      (2)   Control and direct emergency training activities in coordination
with the county’s Emergency Management Director;
      (3)   Maintain a liaison with other municipal, county, state, regional
and federal disaster services agencies, including, but not limited to,
coordination through the county’s Emergency Management Commission and the Iowa
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Department;
      (4)   Marshal, after the declaration of a state of emergency, all
necessary personnel, equipment and supplies from any department of the city to
aid in carrying out the emergency operations plan;
      (5)   Prepare, under the direction of the Mayor and in consultation with
the City Attorney, all necessary emergency proclamations, rules and orders,
pursuant to §
34.002 of this chapter, and implement the emergency operations plan;
      (6)   Coordinate in consultation with the city attorney the drafting of
proposed mutual aid agreements;
      (7)   Serve as an operations officer for any joint or mutual emergency
operation administration; and
      (8)   Assume other emergency responsibilities as assigned by the Mayor or
City Council.
(2013 Code, § 9-7)
(Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.005 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, shall
recommend an emergency operations plan for the city and recommend for adoption
by the City Council mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential
for the plan in cooperation with the county’s Emergency Management Commission
and the Iowa Homeland Security and Emergency Management Department. The City
Administrator, or the City Administrator’s designee, shall make continuing
studies of the need for amendments and improvements in such plans.
(2013 Code, § 9-6) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.006 OPERATIONAL ORGANIZATION.
   The Operational Disaster Services Organization of the city shall consist of
municipal officers and employees who may be designated by the City
Administrator and all volunteer workers. Plans of the Organization shall
substantially conform to recommendations of the federal government and the Iowa
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Department. The Organization shall
coordinate with the county’s Emergency Management Commission when appropriate.
(2013 Code, § 9-8) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.007 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, the Mayor, upon
declaration of a state of emergency by proclamation as provided in §
34.002 of this chapter, may authorize the City Administrator, or the City
Administrator’s designee, to procure, by purchase or lease, such goods and
services as are deemed necessary for the city’s emergency response effort. This
emergency procurement of goods or services may be made in the open market
without filing a requisition or estimate and without advertisement for
immediate delivery or furnishing. A full written account of all emergency
procurements made during this emergency, together with a requisition for the
required materials, supplies, equipment or services, shall be submitted to or
provided by the City Administrator within 30 days after their procurement, and
shall be open to public inspection for a period of at least one year subsequent
to the date of the emergency purchases. The City Administrator shall, within
three months of the conclusion of the emergency, formally communicate these
emergency expenditures in a full written account to the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 9-9) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   The violation of a proclamation of emergency, a subsequent proclamation
exercising emergency powers, a rule or order, which proclamation, rule or order
is issued pursuant to §
34.002 of this chapter, or the violation of any order or directive given by a
peace officer or designated emergency services personnel pursuant to authority
resulting from §
34.002 of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 9-4) (Ord. 14622, passed 3-22-1999)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT
      
52.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
      
53.   STORM WATER
      
54.   ILLICIT DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
      
55.   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES
      
56.   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
      
57.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
58.   VEGETATION
      
59.   MAILBOXES
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Definitions
   
50.002   Reservation of city’s rights
   
50.003   Receptacles required; specifications
   
50.004   Preparation of refuse, recyclables, and yard waste for collection
   
50.005   Approved methods of disposal
   
50.006   Location of receptacle
   
50.007   Littering
Licensing and Collection Regulations
   
50.020   License to collect garbage or refuse, yard waste and recyclables
required
   
50.021   Application for license; approval
   
50.022   Insurance required of licensee; certificate; liability coverage
   
50.023   License fee
   
50.024   License renewal
   
50.025   License revocation
   
50.026   Frequency of collection
   
50.027   Collection vehicles; specifications, maintenance and loading
   
50.028   Pick-up service; servicing of complaints
   
50.029   Parking of collection vehicles in residential districts
   
50.030   Inspection of equipment
Volume-Based Garbage Collection; Specific Recyclables
   
50.045   Volume-based charges
   
50.046   Recycling required
   
50.047   Public education
   
50.048   Enforcement of chapter
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AREA. The legally defined boundaries of the city.
   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL UNITS/OCCUPANTS. All locations within the city
that are not considered residential units/occupants under this chapter. Mobile
home parks where single-meter water services are considered COMMERCIAL. All
rental units or complexes of four or more residential rental units are
considered COMMERCIAL UNITS. COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL UNITS are subject to
this chapter.
   COMMISSION. The Solid Waste Management Commission of the county.
   COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL. All yard wastes, except tree limbs, bark, or branches
from trees
or shrubs with any diameter of one-fourth inch or more.
   CONTAINERS or BINS. Those containers and bins for collection of garbage or
recyclables.
   CURBSIDE. The portion of the right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city
roadways contiguous to the frontage of properties in the city. The term
CURBSIDE also means at any point further than five feet from the front line of
any dwelling, structure, business, or building. See the definition of the term
“front” in this section.
   CURB SIDE COLLECTION. The collection of all garbage or recyclables placed
curbside or in front of the house as near to the street as possible if no curb
exists.
   FRONT. The operation of a dwelling, business, or other structure facing any
street, highway, or other place. A structure may have more than one FRONT if it
faces more than one street, highway, or other place; for example, a corner lot.
On a structure that has no lines parallel to the street, highway, or other
place, the FRONT shall be that portion most nearly parallel to the street,
highway, or place and, if the sides are equally parallel to the street, highway
or other place, the two sides shall both be the FRONT. Where the front line is
uneven, the term FRONT means the most forward portion of the structure.
   GARBAGE and REFUSE. Every waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable
matter, liquid
or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or
storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables. Dead animals are not
included in the term GARBAGE. The term REFUSE means all other miscellaneous
waste materials not specifically defined as “garbage” or specifically defined
as “recyclable”.
   MEMBER. The city.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust, or other
legal entity having a proprietary interest in premises or other legal entity
having responsibility for an act.
   RECYCLABLES. Those items defined as recyclables per the Solid Waste
Management Commission of Marshall County.
   RECYCLABLES HAULER. Any person desiring to pick up and transport for
processing any recyclable in the city. Anyone subcontracting to perform any
such recycling pick-up or transportation task is also considered a RECYCLABLES
HAULER under this definition.
   RECYCLABLES TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE or VEHICLE. A vehicle, as defined by
state
law, which is or is intended to be used to transport recyclables.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT/OCCUPANT. Each single-family home or multifamily dwelling
located within the corporate limits of the city and occupied by a person or
group of persons, except mobile home parks as described in the definition of
“commercial and industrial units” in this section. However, all residential
rental structures or residential complexes of four or more rental units are
considered commercial units. Any home occupation (Class 1 or Class 2) found in
areas zoned RR, RL, RM, and RH, all as defined by Ch. 156 of this code of
ordinances, shall be considered a RESIDENTIAL UNIT/OCCUPANT under this chapter
for purposes of disposal of garbage and recyclables generated by the home
occupation.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or
semi-solid materials, including, but not limited to, such materials resulting
from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
   TREE PROCESSING MATERIAL. Yard wastes which are not compostable material and
tree stumps.
   VOLUME-BASED GARBAGE SYSTEM. A system with an ever-increasing charge based
on the
number of containers utilized or upon the actual weight of garbage generated.
   YARD WASTE. Organic debris produced as part of yard and garden development
and maintenance, such as grass clippings, leaves, bark, branches, twigs,
flowers, fruit, vegetables, and trees.
(2013 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 11654, passed 4-22-
1970; Ord. 12788, passed 9-22-1975; Ord. 12797, passed 10-16-1975; Ord. 12993,
passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 14340, passed 12-27-1990; Ord. 14472, passed 8-25-1994;
Ord. 14473, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 14710, passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 15079, passed
12-22-2023)
§ 50.002 RESERVATION OF CITY’S RIGHTS.
   The city reserves the right to enter into a contract at any time with any
license holder or others for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse
within the city or may itself operate and maintain such service.
(2013 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 14710, passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.003 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided under §
50.004 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to deposit or place any garbage in any street; alley, lane, public
place, or private property outside of buildings within the city unless the
garbage is enclosed in a container or bin.
   (B)   Refuse containers for residential properties must meet the following:
      (1)   Owner-supplied refuse containers or bins shall be a water-tight
metal or plastic receptacle. The receptacle shall be provided with handles or
bales and a tight-fitting cover and with a capacity not exceeding 55 gallons.
      (2)   Hauler-supplied refuse containers or bins shall be pre-approved by
the city as part of the license application, and in general, have rolling
wheels; attached lids; clearly listed with the company name with phone number
displayed on the receptacle; have an identifiable code that the hauler keeps
records of which address has which receptacle; and be sturdy enough to
withstand typical wind event. Each licensed hauler shall provide some level of
consistency across offered containers to their customers.
   (C)   Refuse containers for commercial properties shall be hauler-provided
or approved and in general be commercial dumpsters or similar.
   (D)   Containers for recyclables shall be as provided or approved by the
recyclables hauler.
(2013 Code, § 13-3) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 14710, passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.004 PREPARATION OF REFUSE, RECYCLABLES, AND YARD WASTE FOR COLLECTION.
   Refuse, recyclables, and yard waste shall be prepared for pick up per the
requirements of the hauler.
(Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.005 APPROVED METHODS OF DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Garbage or refuse shall be disposed of by householders or the occupant
of any building or place of business by:
      (1)   Delivery to a licensed collection agency;
      (2)   Hauling to a state-approved landfill disposal area and dumping
there as directed by the custodian in charge; provided that, the containers are
covered and water-tight; and/or
      (3)   Disposal of garbage in a home garbage disposal unit.
   (B)   Yard waste shall be disposed of by householders or the occupant of any
building or place of business by:
      (1)   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant of the
premises from garbage and refuse, as defined in § 50.001, accumulated on the
premises and shall be composted on the premises, transported to a City Council-
approved composting/tree processing facility or otherwise be legally disposed
of, and no yard waste shall be deposited in a landfill. All yard waste
transported to City Council-approved composting/tree processing facilities
shall be separated into compostable material and tree processing material.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to place any material other than compostable
material in compostable paper yard waste bags.
      (3)   All tree processing materials shall be separated from all
compostable materials and bundled in a manner suitable for handling.
      (4)   Fees for the use of the city-owned composting/tree processing
facility shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      (5)   Hours of operation of the city composting/tree processing facility
shall be established by the City Council, and it shall be unlawful to dump or
dispose of yard waste at such facility, except during hours of operation, or
without specific approval by the city's Public Works Division.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage or refuse,
yard waste, or recyclables in any manner other than provided in this section.
   (D)   Garbage, refuse, or recyclables shall not be burned.
(Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.006 LOCATION OF RECEPTACLE.
   (A)   All garbage or refuse, yard waste, or recyclables, whenever practical,
shall be delivered by the householder or the occupant of any building or place
of business to the ground level for collection.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set, throw, or otherwise
put garbage or any paper, metal, plastic, or any other material receptacle
containing garbage between the line of any street, highway, or other place and
the front line of any dwelling, business or other structure, except as outlined
below:
      (1)   For residential units, all refuse and recyclable containers may be
set out no earlier than 8:00 p.m. the day prior to collection day and must be
retrieved by 2:00 a.m. the day after collection day.
      (2)   For collection of owner-provided residential containers, they shall
be placed no more than five feet in front of the front line of the dwelling,
business, or other structure. For purposes of this section, the front line
shall be extended from the structure corner to the side lot lines.
      (3)   For collection of hauler-provided residential containers, the
containers may be placed in accordance with owner-provided containers or
curbside, as designated by the hauler.
      (4)   Approved containers placed for curbside collection shall be placed
so the closest edge of the container is no closer than two feet, nor no further
than four feet from the edge of the traveled way. It shall be placed so there
is a four-foot clearance around all sides from any fixed object. Placement of
containers shall not impede visibility at any alley or street intersection.
      (5)   Containers shall not be placed on any sidewalk, unless, the
sidewalk is wide enough to maintain a four-foot wide clear sidewalk path around
the container.
      (6)   Any person setting a container curbside for collection during the
snow season shall be responsible for snow removal from the area two feet on
either side of the container and from the container to the curb/edge of the
street; it is recommended that containers ate placed as far back as allowed in
this chapter, to minimize the chance of plowed snow knocking over the
container.
      (7)   Placement of commercial containers shall be coordinated with the
hauler and be in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance.
      (8)   All garbage and refuse placed for collection under this chapter
must be placed within the collection container. Any items placed outside the
container may not be picked up by the licensed hauler. If haulers do pick up
items outside of the container, they may charge extra for providing the
service. Households that excessively violate this section shall be reported to
the city by the hauler for possible enforcement action.
   (C)   The city can provide a waiver, at the city's sole discretion, for the
placement of garbage receptacles or refuse in front of a dwelling, business, or
other structure if the placement of the receptacle or refuse is for the
community benefit, or a one-time occurrence.
      (1)   Examples may include receptacles placed or approved by the city for
public use, such as Downtown or 13 St District receptacles, for the city-
sponsored or approved cleanup days or a construction dumpster.
      (2)   Said waiver shall also allow for the lawful collection of said
material by the city or a licensed garbage or refuse hauler.
      (3)   One-time large garbage items can be arranged to be picked up but in
no case shall the garbage be placed in city right of way or outside more than
12 hours prior to the time of pick-up, as arranged by the owner.
(Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.007 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw,
or place any refuse or garbage in any street, alley, lane, public place, or
private property outside of buildings within the city unless the refuse or
garbage is to be hauled away and, pending hauling, is kept in such a manner as
in no way to constitute a nuisance, hazard or annoyance to others.
(Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
LICENSING AND COLLECTION REGULATIONS
§ 50.020 LICENSE TO COLLECT GARBAGE OR REFUSE, YARD WASTE AND RECYCLABLES
REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect garbage
or refuse, yard waste, or recyclables within the city, except from his or her
own residence or business property, without first obtaining a license from the
city unless it is for a one-time junk removal service.
(2013 Code, §§ 13-10, 13-53 and 13-83) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord.
12993, passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 14340, passed 12-27-1990; Ord. 14472, passed 8-
25-1994; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.021 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; APPROVAL.
   (A)   Application for a license to collect garbage or refuse, yard waste, or
recyclables shall be made at the office of the City Clerk on forms provided by
the Clerk. The applicant shall file with his or her application a certificate
or affidavit of insurance, as set forth in §
10.999 of this code, shall pay the required license fee and garbage haulers
present current proof of having passed inspection.
   (B)   Licensed haulers shall provide maps of their coverage area, indicating
which areas are to be picked up on what days. Information shall also be
provided on the company's plans or adjustments to pick-up days for holidays.
   (C)   Licensed haulers shall keep a record of the unique identifiers of each
hauler-provided receptacle and make that information available to the city upon
request.
   (D)   Upon receipt of such application and accompanying documents properly
executed and otherwise proper and accurate, including, but not limited to, the
certificate or affidavit of insurance, upon receipt of the license fee and
inspection approval, the City Clerk shall place the application on a City
Council agenda for approval.
   (E)   The City Council holds the right to limit the number of licensed
haulers operating within the city limits.
   (F)   Upon approval by the City Council, the City Clerk will issue the
license for no more than one year, as set forth in §
10.999 of this code.
(2013 Code, § 13-11) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-1998; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.022 INSURANCE REQUIRED OF LICENSEE; CERTIFICATE; LIABILITY COVERAGE.
   The garbage or refuse hauler, yard waste hauler, or recyclable hauler shall
not be permitted to commence work under this chapter until he or she has
obtained all required insurance and filed proof of such with the City Clerk,
pursuant to §
10.009 of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 13-12) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.023 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee for the license issued under this chapter shall be set by City
Council resolution.
(2013 Code, § 13-14) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.024 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   The annual license of all persons licensed under this chapter shall be
renewed from year to year upon the payment of the fee provided in this chapter,
filing of a certificate of proper insurance coverage, and filing of an approved
vehicle inspection for garbage haulers.
(2013 Code, § 13-15) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.025 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The City Council may, for a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
revoke any license granted in this chapter, after notice and public hearing,
upon compliance with the procedures set out in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 13-16) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.026 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Collections of garbage or refuse shall be made on average of one time
per week.
   (B)   Collections of garbage or refuse from commercial locations, where
considerable garbage is produced daily, may require collection on a more
frequent basis. Notice from the city of nuisances caused by untimely collection
of garbage shall result in the property owner setting up a more frequent
collection rotation.
(2013 Code, § 13-17) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.027 COLLECTION VEHICLES; SPECIFICATIONS, MAINTENANCE AND LOADING.
   (A)   All vehicles used in the transportation of garbage or refuse, yard
waste or recyclables within the city shall be kept in a sanitary and safe
condition and shall be so constructed as to prevent leakage in transit, wholly
enclosed and covered. The city may inspect any vehicle used by any hauler to
see that it complies with this chapter.
   (B)   All persons licensed under the terms of this chapter shall use packer-
type trucks for scheduled routine garbage or refuse collection purposes. Such
vehicles shall include a mechanical device for packing or compressing garbage
or refuse, which device shall be used and operated at all times in the
collection and disposal of garbage or refuse and kept in good working order.
All truck bodies used for the disposal of garbage and refuse shall be washed
out periodically to minimize odors.
   (C)   Recyclables and yard waste shall be transported in a vehicle, trailer,
bin, or container, which is enclosed, covered, leak-resistant, and of an easily
cleanable construction.
   (D)   If the city determines that a refuse hauler is responsible for the
loss of any refuse within the city, the hauler shall be responsible for the
pick-up and clean-up of the refuse. If the city is required to pick up or clean
up the refuse, the responsible hauler shall pay the cost of doing such.
(2013 Code, § 13-18, 13-20 and 13-115) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord.
12993, passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 14473, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 14876, passed 7-12-
2010; Ord. 14913, passed 11-26-2012; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.028 PICK-UP SERVICE; SERVICING OF COMPLAINTS.
   Each garbage or refuse collector shall maintain an adequate and prompt pick-
up service. He or she shall service all complaints from patrons on missed
service and improper handling. Such service shall be promptly available for
servicing complaints from the office of the City Clerk for any material
improperly deposited within the limits of streets or highways during transit.
(2013 Code, § 13-19) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.029 PARKING OF COLLECTION VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No vehicle used in the transportation of garbage and refuse within the
city shall be parked or left standing in any residential district, as defined
or delineated in Ch. 156, as amended, except for the loading or picking up of
garbage or refuse.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any such vehicle that is
disabled while in the residential district to such extent that it is impossible
to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such
district.
   (C)   In no event shall any such disabled vehicle remain over 12 hours.
(2013 Code, § 13-21) (Ord. 10761A, passed 5-24-1965; Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-
1976; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.030 INSPECTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Every application for a license required by this chapter or a license
renewal shall contain a certification by the applicant that the applicant has
inspected the equipment to be used in the transportation of garbage or refuse
and that the equipment is in good mechanical condition and free of leaks.
   (B)   It shall be a municipal infraction to operate equipment that leaks or
allows garbage or refuse to spill from the equipment.
(2013 Code, § 13-22) (Ord. 12993, passed 9-27-1976; Ord. 14310, passed 1-8-
1990; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
VOLUME-BASED GARBAGE COLLECTION; SPECIFIC RECYCLABLES
§ 50.045 VOLUME-BASED CHARGES.
    Any individual or entity holding a license to haul garbage and refuse in
the city shall charge based on the volume of garbage and refuse generated.
These volume-based charges may be made through the number of containers or bins
utilized or based on actual weight collected.
(2013 Code, § 13-77) (Ord. 14472, passed 8-25-1994; Ord. 14710, passed 3-24-
2003; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
§ 50.046 RECYCLING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each commercial, industrial, and residential unit/occupant in the city
shall recycle those items designated as recyclables by the Solid Waste
Management Commission of Marshall County. Those items designated as recyclables
shall not be disposed of, except by delivery by the commercial, industrial, or
residential unit/occupant or by a licensed recyclable hauler to an individual
or entity engaging in recycling of the item involved.
   (B)   No recyclables shall be disposed of by depositing the recyclables with
garbage or refuse, and no licensed hauler shall pick up any recyclable
commingled with garbage or refuse.
   (C)   Any licensed recyclable hauler making any scheduled recyclable pick-up
shall pick up items designated as recyclables on the same day as their refuse
pick-up.
   (D)   If a private recyclable drop-off site is not available to all city
citizens and within the city limits, individual recyclables haulers shall,
either individually or in conceit (one or more recyclables haulers) or by
contract with a private entity, provide a drop-off site for recyclables that
shall be available to all city citizens. If required to provide a drop-off
site, each person making an application for a recyclables hauler's license
shall file, in writing, a statement setting out the location and hours of
service for such voluntary drop-off site. The charge made for recyclables
received at the drop-off site is to be set by the recyclable hauler.
(2013 Code, § 13-78) (Ord. 14472, passed 8-25-1994; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-
2023)
§ 50.047 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
   (A)   The licensed hauler will develop a plan of education to inform their
clientele of the requirements of this subchapter imposed upon the collection of
garbage, refuse, and recyclables.
   (B)   As a part of this educational effort, the hauler will distribute, in
printed form, a statement of recyclable items and an explanation concerning how
the garbage/refuse and recyclable system is to operate. This printed statement
shall be distributed to existing and new customers in either English and
Spanish language form as required.
   (C)   Any cost associated with the educational effort shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the hauler.
   (D)   The city shall annually post educational information on the city
website and/or social media.
(2013 Code, § 13-106) (Ord. 14473, passed 8-8-1994; Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-
2023)
§ 50.048 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Licensed haulers shall assist the city in enforcement of the
requirements of the chapter where possible and provide information to their
customers that meets the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Property owners or persons contracting for refuse, recyclable, or yard
waste collection found in violation of this chapter may be subject to code
enforcement action, including violations and fines as adopted by Council
resolution or pursuant to §
10.999.
(Ord. 15079, passed 12-22-2023)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT
Section
   
51.001   Annual assessment
   
51.002   Exemptions
   
51.003   Appeal
   
51.004   Collection
§ 51.001 ANNUAL ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   Each industrial and commercial assessment amount in the annual total
amount, and each single- family and multiple-family assessment in the annual
total amount per individual family unit for a fiscal year shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   These annual totals shall be billed on a monthly or bimonthly basis,
as determined by the city, in a manner convenient to the city.
   (C)   This manner of billing and collection may include inclusion of this
amount on the water bill issued through the offices of the Board of Waterworks
Trustees.
(2013 Code, § 28-16)
   (D)   The assessment charge shall be applied as follows:
      (1)   Commercial property. All commercial properties shall pay a single
assessment charged against each water meter serving such commercial property.
(2013 Code, § 28-17)
      (2)   Industrial property. All industrial properties shall pay a single
assessment charged against each water meter serving such industrial property.
(2013 Code, § 28-18)
      (3)   Single-Family Residential. A single assessment shall be made
against each single-family residential unit served by a single water meter.
(2013 Code, § 28-19)
      (4)   Multiple-family units. Multiple-family units, whether each unit is
occupied or unoccupied, shall pay one assessment per individual living unit,
regardless of whether a single owner has title to the entire multi-unit
complex. The owner shall pay a single assessment amount for each such
individual living unit. MULTIPLE-FAMILY UNITS are defined as dwellings that are
designed for occupancy by more than one family or group of individuals. The
number of multiple units shall be measured by the number of families or
individual groups which may be housed in such a structure and not by the number
of water meters serving the multiple-family unit. The city may rely upon
current data or the records of the housing and inspection officials in the city
to determine the number of individual family units in any multiple-family unit
complex.
(2013 Code, § 28-20)
      (5)   Agricultural property. Property utilized for agricultural purposes
shall be assessed a single assessment charge against each water meter serving
such agricultural property. In addition, agricultural property that has a house
or other structure upon it shall be assessed a single assessment regardless of
whether there is a water meter serving such agricultural property.
(2013 Code, § 28-21)
      (6)   Trailer courts. Each individual lot of a trailer court shall be
considered a separate family unit for purposes of assessment in this chapter.
Trailer courts shall be assessed as multiple-family units pursuant to the other
sections of this chapter. Each individual trailer lot shall be subject to a
separate assessment, whether occupied or unoccupied.
(2013 Code, § 28-22)
      (7)   Property outside city limits. The city does provide some metered
water to individuals living outside of the corporate limits of the city. Such
metered users shall not pay an assessment to the city for solid waste purposes.
(2013 Code, § 28-23)
(Ord. 14571, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 14627, passed 4-12-1999; Ord. 14706, passed
2-24-2003; Ord. 14711, passed 3-24-2003)
§ 51.002 EXEMPTIONS.
   No property shall be exempt for any reason, which would otherwise qualify
for assessment under this chapter, based upon any status for tax exemption
purposes, historical designation or specific use. However, the city shall not
be liable for the charges made under this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-24) (Ord. 14571, passed 6-23-1997)
§ 51.003 APPEAL.
   Any citizen or entity desiring to appeal any assessment made under this
chapter may do so through the office of the City Administrator. Any such appeal
hearing shall be informal in all respects and shall be conducted by the City
Administrator whose decision can only be reviewed by the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 28-25) (Ord. 14571, passed 6-23-1997)
§ 51.004 COLLECTION.
   All owners of real property who do not pay the assessment required by this
chapter shall be subject to certification of any delinquency as a lien upon
such real property, which lien shall be collected in the same manner as general
property taxes. If the assessment amount is included as a part of the water
bill to be paid by the property owner, the water service may be terminated if
the assessment amount is not paid.
(2013 Code, § 28-26) (Ord. 14571, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 14711, passed 3-24-
2003)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Discharge of sewage into public streets prohibited
   
52.002   Sanitary sewer connections; authority of city to require
   
52.003   Sanitary sewer connections to properties outside city limits; plans
and specifications; notice to property owners; action by city when owner fails
to comply
   
52.004   Assessment of costs as tax when city required to make connection
   
52.005   Connection fees from non-assessed properties
   
52.006   Sewer deposit
   
52.007   Fee for connection to municipal sanitary sewer utility
Water Pollution Control and Sanitary Sewer System
   
52.020   Definitions
   
52.021   Responsibility for operation of water pollution control plant
   
52.022   Discharge of untreated wastes prohibited
   
52.023   Private disposal systems allowed
   
52.024   Private sewer connections to sanitary sewer system
   
52.025   Discharges into sanitary sewers
   
52.026   Power of city to control waste discharges to sanitary sewer system
   
52.027   Installation of sampling and metering equipment
   
52.028   Director’s right of entry
   
52.029   User charge system
   
52.030   Billing of charges, rates and rentals
   
52.031   Lien for bills
Transported Wastes
   
52.045   Definitions
   
52.046   Waste hauler license
   
52.047   Waste hauler license denial, suspension and revocation
   
52.048   Standards for vehicle and equipment
   
52.049   Disposal; standards
   
52.050   Discharge prohibitions
   
52.051   Disposal fee
Non-Residential Treatment Regulations
   
52.065   Purpose and policy
   
52.066   Definitions and abbreviations
   
52.067   General discharge prohibitions
   
52.068   Specific prohibitions
   
52.069   Federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.070   State requirements
   
52.071   City’s rights of revision
   
52.072   Excessive discharge
   
52.073   Accidental discharges (slug loads); plans
   
52.074   Fees
   
52.075   Wastewater discharger permits
   
52.076   Wastewater contribution permits
   
52.077   Reporting requirements for permittee
   
52.078   Analyses
   
52.079   Monitoring facilities
   
52.080   Inspection and sampling
   
52.081   Pretreatment
   
52.082   Recordkeeping
   
52.083   Publication of industrial users in significant non-compliance
   
52.084   Confidential information
   
52.085   Enforcement
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE INTO PUBLIC STREETS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge sewage
or liquid waste materials of any kind or nature into the public streets or
alleys of the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-27) (Ord. 61, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.002 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS; AUTHORITY OF CITY TO REQUIRE.
   The city shall have power to require the owner of any platted lot, out-lot,
subdivision of any lot or tract of ground or of any unplatted subdivision or
tract of ground to make sanitary sewer connections to the curb line adjacent
thereto from the main sanitary sewer in the street fronting such lot or other
tract before such street is permanently improved.
(2013 Code, § 28-28) (Ord. 8086, passed 4-24-1951)
§ 52.003 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS TO PROPERTIES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; PLANS
AND SPECIFICATIONS; NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS; ACTION BY CITY WHEN OWNER FAILS
TO COMPLY.
   (A)   In the event the owner of property located outside the city limits on
which a building or facility requiring drainage is situated within 200 feet of
an existing sanitary sewer main or sanitary sewer lateral, which is maintained
by the city, desires to have said property connected to the sanitary sewer
system maintained by the city, the following procedure is prescribed.
      (1)   The owner must make an application to the City Council to have said
property annexed to the city and become a part thereof. Said application shall
be reviewed by the Director of Public Works/ City Engineer, who shall approve
and recommend action on the application for annexation.
      (2)   The property owner shall pay all required costs, fees and charges
for connection to the city’s sanitary sewer system and upon approval of said
application, the owner shall be subject to all requirements contained in this
chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-28)
   (B)   The Director of Public Works/City Engineer shall prepare plans and
specifications for making sanitary sewer connections, prescribing the size and
kind of pipe to be used and the manner and method of installing the sewer
connection and shall file such plans and specifications with the City Clerk.
(2013 Code, § 28-29)
   (C)   A property owner shall be given notice to construct sanitary sewer
connections as provided by this chapter. Such notices shall be signed by the
City Clerk and shall be served by personal delivery to the property owner or by
mailing thereto by registered mail or by publication in one issue of a
newspaper published and having general circulation in the city. Proof of notice
shall be filed with the City Clerk. The notice provided for in this section
shall be addressed to the owner of record of the property affected and shall
contain a description of the property to which such sanitary sewer connection
is required to be made, a reference to the plans and specifications to be
observed and the time when such connection shall be completed, which shall be
not less than ten days after the completed service of such notice.
(2013 Code, § 28-30)
   (D)   If any property owner fails to make sanitary sewer connection in the
manner provided by the plans and specifications required by division (B) above
and within the time fixed by the City Council and as contained in the notice to
the property owner, the city may cause such sanitary sewer connections to be
made and assess the cost thereof against the property.
(2013 Code, § 28-31)
(Ord. 8086, passed 4-24-1951; Ord. 14944, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 52.004 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AS TAX WHEN CITY REQUIRED TO MAKE CONNECTION.
   The costs accruing as a result of action taken under §
52.003(D) of this chapter shall be the actual costs to the city as nearly as
can be determined and shall be assessed in one installment by resolution of the
Council. If not paid to the City Clerk within 30 days thereafter, it shall be
certified to the County Auditor as a special assessment to be placed on a tax
list against the property to be collected as a special tax thereon.
(2013 Code, § 28-32) (Ord. 8086, passed 4-24-1951)
§ 52.005 CONNECTION FEES FROM NON-ASSESSED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Before 1-1-1974. A connection fee or charge is established for
sanitary sewer service installed prior to 1-1-1974, to property not assessed
for the installation of a sanitary sewer abutting such property or available
for a sewer connection thereto of $5 per front foot of that portion of the
property being served by such connection.
   (B)   After 1-1-1974. A connection fee or charge is established for sanitary
sewer service installed after 1-1-1974, to property not assessed for the
installation of a sanitary sewer abutting such property or available for a
sewer connection thereto of the actual cost of construction as proportioned to
the property by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer. This amount shall
not exceed the cost of a ten- inch sewer. The Director of Public Works/City
Engineer shall prepare and file in the office of the City Clerk a statement of
such costs, and a connection permit from such property to the sanitary sewer
system shall not be issued until provisions for payment of such proportionate
cost to such property is made with the city.
   (C)   Sewer constructed under special assessment. When a sanitary sewer
improvement is constructed under special assessment procedure and property
abutting thereon is not assessed its proportionate share of the costs, the
Director of Public Works/City Engineer shall prepare and file in the office of
the City Clerk a statement of such costs, and a connection permit from such
property to the sanitary sewer system shall not be issued until provision for
payment of such proportionate cost to such property is made with the city. If
an easement is required for the construction of a sanitary sewer improvement
across such property, the Council may waive all or any part of the cost as
proportioned to the property by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer. The
cost of such waived fees shall be paid out of the city’s Water Pollution
Control Fund.
   (D)   Deferred payment of fee. If the fee for connecting to the sanitary
sewer is not made with the application for the permit for such connection, the
property owner may pay 25% of such connection fee and may sign a waiver for
deferred payments of the remaining balance of such cost, to be paid in five
annual installments, together with interest at a rate set by I.C.A. § 74A.4
computed to December 1 following with the September payment of general taxes,
and such property owner shall consent in writing for the filing of such
assessment cost with the County Auditor for collection as provided in this
section.
(2013 Code, § 28-33) (Ord. 12837, passed 12-26-1975)
§ 52.006 SEWER DEPOSIT.
   There is established a sewer deposit for customers using the city sanitary
sewer as follows.
   (A)   A deposit shall be required of any user who has not established a
credit record satisfactory to the Superintendent of the water pollution control
plant in an amount equal to the larger of the average quarterly sewer bill for
the type of customer requesting service or $40.
   (B)   Such deposit shall be refunded to the party posting it upon the
cessation of use by the depositor or upon two years’ satisfactory credit
performance. If there are delinquent charges upon cessation of use, the deposit
may be applied to the charges, and the balance, if any, shall then be refunded.
Nothing in this division (B) shall prevent the Director from certifying
delinquent sewer charges to the County Auditor for tax collection. Overdue
sewer charges shall incur a penalty of 5%.
(2013 Code, § 28-34) (Ord. 14047, passed 7-27-1981; Ord. 14252, passed 4-27-
1987; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-2010)
§ 52.007 FEE FOR CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER UTILITY.
   (A)   Sewer connection fee districts established. Sewer connection fee
districts are established for the purpose of collection within each such
district of a fee from those property owners who shall make application to
connect their properties to the municipal sanitary sewer utility of the city.
   (B)   District descriptions. The areas and properties included within the
sewer connection fee districts shall be as set forth in the sanitary sewer
preliminary connection fee schedule, dated 10-27-1997, referred to in this
section as the “schedule”, maintained in the office of the City Clerk, such
areas being described as follows:
      (1)   Area 2 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by Anson Street on the north, an extension of South 14th Avenue on the
west, the city limits on the east and the southern boundary approximately 1,320
feet south of Olive Street;
      (2)   Area 3 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by Anson Creek and an extension thereof on the west, approximately
1,320 feet south of the extension of Merle Hibbs Boulevard for the south
boundary, and including properties abutting both sides of Governor Road from
such south boundary to a point approximately 2,900 feet to the north of Merle
Hibbs Boulevard, and terminating at the southern property line of Fisher
Controls;
      (3)   Area 4 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by Highway 30 on the south, South Center Street on the west, 240th
Street on the north and Governor Road on the east, and also including the south
half of the southeast quarter of Section 11, the south half of the southwest
quarter of Section 12, all within Township 83 North, Range 18 West, of the
fifth principal meridian in the county;
      (4)   Area 5 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by Parker Avenue and the northerly extension thereof on the west,
Highway 30 on the south, on the east by the east line of the northwest quarter
of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 83 North, Range 18 West of the
fifth principal meridian in the county, and including the properties abutting
the north side of 240th Street from South 14th Street to South Sixth Street;
      (5)   Area 6 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by West Olive Street on the north, South Sixth Street on the east,
Westwood Drive on the south and the western boundary of Elmwood Acres
Subdivision on the west, and including the property located directly south of
Westwood Drive at its intersection with Timberline Road;
      (6)   Area 7 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by Highland Acres Road on the east, 218th Street on the north, the city
limits to the south and to the west line of the northeast quarter of Section 5,
Township 83 North, Range 18 West of the fifth principal meridian in the county,
including Milo Park Subdivisions and additions and properties abutting
Marshalltown Boulevard;
      (7)   Area 8 generally includes the lots and parcels abutting the west
side of Highland Acres Road from West Main Street to 218th Street, including
all of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 32, Township
84 North, Range 18 West of the county, but excluding the Pheasant Run
Subdivision. Area 8 also includes properties abutting Highland Acres Road at
its intersection with Arnold Drive, and the property described as Lot 1 of the
subdivision of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 33,
Township 84 North, Range 18 West, except the Williamsburg Addition to the city;
      (8)   Area 9 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by the city limits on the north and the west, including the southwest
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 28; the properties abutting the
south side of Summit Street from Union Pacific (C&NW) Railway to North 22nd
Street, excepting the properties abutting the west side of North 22nd Street.
Area 9 also includes the properties located within the subdivision of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 28, Township 84 North,
Range 18 West of the county, and the properties abutting West Main Street from
Valley View Drive to Highland Acres Road; and including the properties located
on the south side of West State Street at or near its intersection with North
21st Street;
      (9)   Area 10 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by West Lincoln Way on the south, West Main Street on the north, an
extension of Belaire Drive on the west and an extension of Orchard Drive on the
east, and including the properties abutting Ann Rutledge Road on the east at or
near its intersection with Reyclif Drive, and the properties abutting the north
side of West Lincoln Way between Orchard Drive and Brentwood Road;
      (10)   Area 11 generally includes the lots and parcels within an area
bounded by 233rd Street on the south from Highland Acres Road to its point of
intersection as extended to South 12th Street on the east; South 12th Street
from such point of intersection to West Lincoln Way being the east boundary,
the north boundary being West Lincoln Way and the west boundary being Highland
Acres Road; and
      (11)   Area 12 generally is described as the east 19 acres of the
northeast quarter of Section 26 and the west half of the northwest quarter of
Section 25, except the south 660 feet and the northwest one acre of such
northwest quarter.
   (C)   Sanitary sewer utility connection fee.
      (1)   A connection fee is imposed for each connection made to the
municipal sanitary sewer utility within the boundary of a sewer connection fee
district described in division (B) above or any other location in the city that
has not had a previous connection fee charged.
      (2)   The connection fee for all city-constructed sanitary sewers, no
matter where or when they were constructed shall be $3,200. This fee shall
include any lateral stub out costs incurred as part of the city-constructed
sewer project.
      (3)   Property owners subject to the connection fees are not mandated to
connect to the municipal sanitary sewer utility if they currently have a
properly operating private treatment system. If a property owner’s private
treatment system fails as determined by guidelines previously established by
the Director of Public Works/City Engineer, the property owner will then be
required to connect to the municipal sanitary sewer utility. If a property
owner does not choose to connect to the sewer mains constructed as part of the
a project, the property owner is not required to pay a connection fee until
such time as a connection is made.
      (4)   If a property owner is subject to the connection fee and desires to
connect to a sewer main constructed as part of the project, the connection fee
amount shall be paid entirely at the time a sewer connection permit is obtained
from the city by the property owner, or the property owner may pay 25% of such
connection fee and may sign a waiver for deferred payments of the remaining
balance of such cost, to be paid in five annual installments, together with
interest at a rate set by I.C.A. § 74A.4, computed to December 1 following with
the September payment of general taxes, and such property owner shall consent
in writing for the filing of such assessment cost with the County Auditor for
collection as provided in this section.
      (5)   Property owners may elect to pay the connection fee at any time,
although they do not desire to use the municipal sanitary sewer utility, until
such time as their private system is deemed to have failed.
      (6)   The connection fee for property owners connecting to a developer-
constructed sewer or previously constructed special assessment sewer shall be
$300, no matter where or when constructed.
      (7)   The property owner paying a connection fee will be responsible for
the cost of providing the service line from the house to the public main or
lateral stub out being constructed as part of the project.
(2013 Code, § 28-35) (Ord. 14731, passed 1-12-2004)
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 52.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any watercourse, dry run, lake or any area that drains into
any of such areas.
   NH3, NH3-N (AMMONIA). The portion of nitrogen in the form of protein or
intermediate decomposition products which is determined by standard laboratory
procedures for analysis of ammonia nitrogen, expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l).
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution and is a measurement of the intensity of the acidity or
alkalinity of the solution.
   PRIVY. Any area used for the act of human defecation and for the storage of
the products of this act that is not connected to an approved method of
disposal for the waste. This area may include the building housing such an area
or may include only the ground around such an area.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which public authority controls.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastes and to which storm waters,
surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SLUG. Excessive concentration; any discharge of water, sewage or industrial
waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm waters and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the city water pollution control
plant.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   USER. Any person, firm or company that discharges wastes of any kind into
the city’s sanitary sewer system.
(2013 Code, § 28-41) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010)
§ 52.021 RESPONSIBILITY FOR OPERATION OF WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   The policies for the operation of the Water Pollution Control Plant (WPCP)
shall be proposed by the Superintendent of the Water Pollution Control Plant
and supervised by the Public Works Director/City Engineer.
(2013 Code, § 28-42) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010)
§ 52.022 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED WASTES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to discharge to
any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent divisions of this section.
   (B)   Except as provided in this division (B), it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (C)   The owner of any house, building or property used for human
habitation, human employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there may be
located a public sanitary sewer is required at his or her expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with
the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division (C),
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that, the
public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
(2013 Code, § 28-43) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.023 PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS ALLOWED.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
52.022 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first comply with all building and engineering
requirements.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Sewer
Department Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for a permit shall
notify the city’s Sewer Department when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the city’s Sewer Department, except
on weekends and holidays.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the state’s Department of
Natural Resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 20,000 square feet (1,740 square meters). No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (F)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city’s Health
Officer.
   (G)   A private disposal facility shall be connected to a public sewer
within 90 days when, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works/City
Engineer, the facility is not working properly due to unsatisfactory soil
infiltration and requires renovation or replacement and he or she orders that
it be connected to a public sewer, provided a public sewer is available within
100 feet of the property line.
(2013 Code, § 28-44) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.024 PRIVATE SEWER CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works/City
Engineer.
   (B)   The design of all sanitary sewers shall be in accordance with the
city’s standard plans and specifications or with the approval of the Director
of Public Works/City Engineer. All sanitary sewers or building sewers shall be
approved by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer for construction prior
to work starting and inspected by city’s Sewer Department prior to the sewer
being covered.
   (C)   There shall be two classes of sewer users as follows:
      (1)   Residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   Service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (D)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the city for a building sewer permit. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works/City Engineer and the Director.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection,
disconnection, and repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
      (1)   In cases where it is determined by the city that repairs or
disconnection is needed to a building sewer, a written notice may be issued by
the Sewer Superintendent or the Director of Public Works/City Engineer to the
building sewer owner.
      (2)   Written notice shall be issued by personal delivery, sending a copy
of the notice by certified United States mail, or posting the notice in a
conspicuous place upon the premises where the building sewer exists. Notice
shall be addressed to the owner(s) of record of the property affected. Proof of
notice shall be maintained in city sewer records.
      (3)   The notice shall contain a description of the work required to
repair or disconnect the building sewer. The owner of the building sewer shall
obtain applicable permits and inspections through the engineering office and
repair or replace any damage to infrastructure as a result of the failed
building sewer, damaged building sewer, building sewer needing disconnected, or
work area utilized for performing such work including, but not limited to,
utilities, streets, alleys, signs, traffic signals, driveways located in right-
of-way or easements, and lawn or terrace areas.
      (4)   The notice shall contain a time frame when such repairs or
disconnection shall be completed, which shall be not less than ten days, nor
greater than 60 days, after the completed service of such notice. The time
frame shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Sewer Superintendent
or the Director of Public Works/City Engineer based upon the severity of and
impact to the public with considerations given such as safety concerns, road
closures, sidewalk closures, and the like.
      (5)   Failure by the building sewer owner(s) to make required repairs,
may result in the city causing such repairs or disconnections to be made and
assess the cost thereof against the property/building sewer owner.
      (6)   In cases, where a building sewer is shared jointly between multiple
property owners and the repairs or disconnections were not made, the assessment
shall be split equally between property owners.
      (7)   The costs accruing as a result of action taken under §
52.024(E) of this chapter shall be the actual costs to the city, including
repair/discussion costs for outsourced work, established city equipment rates,
city staff labor rates, and traffic control rental, as nearly as can be
determined and shall be billed in one installment. If not paid to the City
Clerk within 30-days thereafter, it shall accrue interest. Once 90 days past
due, it shall be eligible to be certified to the County Treasurer with any
additional established collection costs/administrative fees and shall then be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes pursuant to
I.C.A. Chapter 384.
      (8)   If it is determined that an emergency exists because of the damage
caused by a failed building sewer, the city may perform any action which would
be required under this subchapter without prior notice to the building sewer
owner after written certification from a competent licensed professional
engineer or licensed architect, which may be the City Engineer or other
licensed professional not employed by the city. These costs shall be collected
in the same manner as provided in §
52.024(E)(7).
   (F)   (1)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building.
      (2)   However, where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city’s Sewer Department, to
meet all requirements of this section.
   (H)   (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.
      (2)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (I)   (1)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground
water to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      (2)   This includes sump pumps designed to pump surface runoff or ground
water.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city’s
Sewer Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Sewer Department Superintendent.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-45) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 15070, passed 7-24-
2023) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.025 DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, industrial cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   (1)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the Director.
      (2)   Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the Director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solids or gas;
      (2)   Any slug of water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the water pollution control plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel at the water pollution control plant;
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the water pollution control plant, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the water pollution control plant exceeds the limits
established by the Director for such materials;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 11.0;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Director as necessary of state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; or
      (9)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with state or federal regulations.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Director, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantities or subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the water pollution control plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the
water pollution control plant and other pertinent factors. The substances
prohibited are as follows:
      (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104°F);
      (2)   Any garbage that has not been shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director; and
      (3)   Any waters or wastes constituting slugs, as defined in this
subchapter, as follows:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but
not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues or of dissolved
solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate;
         (b)   Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions; and
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the water pollution
control plant.
(2013 Code, § 28-46) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.026 POWER OF CITY TO CONTROL WASTE DISCHARGES TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
52.025 of this chapter and which, in the judgment of the Director, may have a
deleterious effect upon the water pollution control plant processes, equipment
or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the Director may:
   (A)   Reject the wastes;
   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   (C)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
   (D)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of §
52.030 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-47) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 52.027 INSTALLATION OF SAMPLING AND METERING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The city may require an industrial user of the POTW to provide and
operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that landscaping or parked vehicles will
not obstruct it.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.
   (D)   Installation of any metering and sampling equipment by the owner must
meet the approval of the Director.
(2013 Code, § 28-48) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 52.028 DIRECTOR’S RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director shall have the power to and shall cause an inspection to be
made from time to time of the premises of any and all factories, industries,
garages, dwellings and other places of business and places that come under the
jurisdiction of the city, the sewage or wastes from which are or may be
discharged deposited or find their way either directly or indirectly into the
Iowa River or any other watercourse within the city’s jurisdiction or into any
sewer or the city sewer system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether any
such factory, industry, garage or other place of business or the occupant or
owner of any dwelling is complying with the terms and provisions of this
subchapter or rules, regulations and requirements of the state’s Department of
Natural Resources and shall report from time to time to the City Council the
results of such inspections.
(2013 Code, § 28-49) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 52.029 USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to
collect charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the city’s
treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the
purpose of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt for such public
wastewater treatment works.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONTRIBUTOR. For the purpose of billing, the person or company
responsible for the metering device used to bill user charges.
      NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has BOD concentration of not
more than 200 mg/l, a suspended solids concentration of not more than 200 mg/
l and a total kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) concentration of not more than 75 mg/l.
      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All expenditures during the useful life of the
treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the capacity
and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
      PRETREATED WASTE. Pretreated wastewater requiring only secondary
treatment and disinfection.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances that are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
      RESIDENTIAL CONTRIBUTOR. Any contributor to the city’s treatment works
whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling
purposes only.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
      TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid
industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage
collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and
their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply
such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works,
including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment, including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such
compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment
systems before land BOD application; or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water
and sanitary sewer systems.
      USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which a treatment works will be
operated.
      USER CHARGE. The portion of the total wastewater service charge that is
levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
      WATER METER. A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished
and/or installed by the city, or furnished and/or installed by a user and
approved by the city.
   (C)   The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay
costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement and costs
associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the
treatment works that the city may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user
charge system. This section shall establish that portion of the user charge
that is designated for operation and maintenance, including replacement of the
treatment works.
   (D)   The portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for
operation and maintenance including replacement purposes, as established in
this section, shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the
operation, maintenance and replacement fund and will be kept in two primary
accounts as follows:
      (1)   An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying
operation and maintenance costs, excluding replacement, of the treatment works
(Operation and Maintenance Account); and
      (2)   An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring
replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (Replacement
Account). Deposits in the Replacement Account shall be made annually from the
operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in the amount required by the
capital improvement program.
   (E)   Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account and
the Replacement Account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the
subsequent fiscal year and shall be used for no other purposes than those
designated for these accounts. Moneys that have been transferred from other
sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance and
replacement. The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred
moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year
following the fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
   (F)   Each user shall pay for the services provided by the city based on his
or her use of the treatment works as determined by water meters acceptable to
the city.
   (G)   For residential contributors, user charges will be based on water
usage during a designated billing cycle as evidenced by meter readings. For
industrial and commercial contributors, user charges shall be based on water
used during a designated billing cycle. If a commercial or industrial
contributor has consumptive use of water or in some other manner uses water
which is not returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for
that contributor may be based on a wastewater meter or separate water meter
installed and maintained at the contributor’s expense and in a manner
acceptable to the city.
   (H)   Base charge and flow charge. Effective with the first billing after
January 1 of each year shown herein, each user shall pay the following user
charge rates of:
 
                                   2022   2023   2024
City contributors (except pretreated waste)
   Base charge per month per met$23.99 $24.23 $24.47
   Flow charge per 100 cubic fee$3.11  $3.14  $3.17
Pretreated wastes (requires only secondary treatment):
   Base charge per month per met$3.00  $3.03  $3.06
   Flow charge per 100 cubic fee$2.04  $2.06  $2.08
 
   (I)   Other charges.
      (1)   The base charge shall be charged on each meter being used to
register wastewater flow.
      (2)   Effective with the first billing after January 1 of each year shown
herein, a discharger of high strength waste greater than normal domestic (200
mg/l BOD, 200 mg/l SS and 75 mg/l TKN) shall pay the following charges:
         (a)   For each day the discharge permit is exceeded: $1,000 and/or a
single charge of $1,000 for exceeding the monthly average limit;
         (b)   A sampling charge for each day the city performs wastewater
sampling as spelled out in the user’s discharge permit, shall be at the sample
testing approved by resolution of the City Council; and
         (c)   For those contributors who contribute wastewater, the strength
of which is greater than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the
normal user charge will be collected. The surcharge for operation and
maintenance, including replacement and debt is as follows:
 
              2022   2023   2024
SS per pound  $0.364 $0.367 $0.371
BOD per pound $0.606 $0.612 $0.618
TKN per pound $0.394 $0.398 $0.402
 
   (J)   Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase
in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city’s treatment
works or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction
with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased
costs. The charge to each user shall be as determined by the responsible plant
operating personnel and approved by the City Council.
   (K)   The user charge rates established in this section apply to all users
of the city’s treatment works, regardless of their location, with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   All properties and facilities owned and operated by the City of
Marshalltown, which are used for general governmental purposes, including but
not limited to:
         (a)   City Hall and administrative buildings;
         (b)   Public safety facilities (police and fire stations);
         (c)   Public parks, trails, and recreational facilities;
         (d)   Public libraries and community centers;
         (e)   Public works and infrastructure maintenance facilities; and
         (f)   Other municipal facilities directly supporting government
operations, as indicated by the City Administrator.
      (2)   All properties and facilities owned by the City of Marshalltown and
leased or rented to a non-profit entity, which are used to provide public
recreational opportunities.
   (L)   Billing for surcharges will be done from laboratory tests performed by
the city water pollution control plant. Procedures used for these tests will
conform to those methods contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments.
   (M)   The city shall review the system’s revenues and expenditures every
year and shall revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system
generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance
including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement
costs among users and user classes.
(2013 Code, § 28-50) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14572, passed 6-23-
1997; Ord. 14691, passed 4-22-2002; Ord. 14780, passed 4-24-2006; Ord. 14855,
passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 14914, passed 12-10-2012; Ord. 14945, passed 3-14-2016;
Ord. 15020, passed 5-24-2021; Ord. 15106, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 52.030 BILLING OF CHARGES, RATES AND RENTALS.
   The bills to users for charges, rates or rentals established and maintained
in this subchapter or as adjusted and maintained in this subchapter shall be
due and payable and become delinquent at such times as shall coincide with the
due and delinquent dates of water bills of the city’s Waterworks Department.
However, for users having privately-owned water supplies, the due and
delinquent dates shall be at all times as shall be fixed by the Director. There
shall be an additional charge made and added to bills in all cases, if bills
are not paid when due, which shall be a penalty of 5% of the amount thereof.
Each bill shall show the net charge, which shall be the amount computed on the
basis established in this subchapter or as the charge may be adjusted, and
which charge shall be applicable and the amount payable and collectible up to
and including the due date. Each bill shall also show a gross charge that shall
be the net charge, plus the 5% penalty, and the gross charge shall be
applicable and be the amount payable and collectible after the due date. The
billing and collection of sewer bills by the city waterworks shall be done in
the same manner as handled for the collection of water bills, and as set forth
by the waterworks.
(2013 Code, § 28-51) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14914, passed 12-10-
2012; Ord. 14945, passed 3-14-2016)
§ 52.031 LIEN FOR BILLS.
   The sewage charges in this subchapter shall constitute a lien upon the
premises served by the water pollution control plant. Quarterly, or more often
if deemed appropriate, the Superintendent of the water pollution control plant
may either furnish to the City Clerk, the city’s Waterworks Department, or
submit on his or her own, a list of all sewerage rental charges that have
remained unpaid and delinquent for a period of 60 days prior to the end of that
quarter, together with the name of the owner and the legal description of the
property or premises for each separate bill, to be certified to the County
Auditor for collection in the same manner as taxes, and when so collected the
proceeds shall become a part of the Water Pollution Control Plant Rental Fund
of the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-52) (Ord. 14531, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010; Ord. 14914, passed 12-10-2012; Ord. 14945, passed 3-14-2016)
TRANSPORTED WASTES
§ 52.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GREASE TRAP WASTES. Grease solids collected from a device used to trap
grease resulting from food preparation.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The waste from industrial users.
   MUDPIT WASTE. Any waste collected in a properly designed interceptor
(clarifier) that handles wastes from private or public wash racks or floor
slabs used for cleaning or drying of vehicles or machinery.
   MUDPIT WASTE DISPOSAL AREA. The area set up and managed by the city for the
storage and disposal of mudpit wastes.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212
of the Clean Water Act, owned by the city. This definition includes any devices
and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
wastewater or industrial wastes of a liquid nature or that convey wastewater to
the wastewater treatment plant, regardless of ownership.
   SEPTAGE WASTE. Human excreta, water, scum, septage and food waste from
public and private wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks, impervious
vaults, portable or chemical toilets.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the city water pollution control plant
or his or her authorized representatives.
   WASTE. In general, any or all of grease trap waste, mudpit waste or septage
waste.
   WASTE HAULER. A person or firm engaged in the business of cleaning or
disposing of waste from public or private waste facilities, including a person
or firm that owns and rents or leases portable toilets.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW that is designed to
provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation, of wastewater and
industrial wastes.
(2013 Code, § 28-61) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010)
§ 52.046 WASTE HAULER LICENSE.
   No waste hauler shall collect wastes from within the corporate limits of the
city or shall dump or dispose of wastes, whether from a source inside or
outside the corporate limits of the city, into the city POTW or mudpit waste
disposal area without first obtaining a waste hauler’s license from the city.
   (A)   Issuance criteria; minimum requirements. The waste hauler’s license
shall be issued by the City Clerk upon approval by the Wastewater Treatment
Plant Director after review of a written application, which shall consist of
the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Application form. An application form developed and furnished by
the Director shall be completed and submitted by the waste hauler for each
vehicle to be licensed.
      (2)   Inspection. The wastewater treatment plant, upon application,
should inspect the waste hauling vehicle and associated equipment and determine
if it meets the minimum qualifications for complying with the conditions of
this subchapter. Vehicles with a rated capacity in excess of 2,500 gallons will
be approved only upon special authorization of the Director.
      (3)   License fee. An application for a waste hauler’s license shall
require the payment of a fee of $50 for each vehicle used by the applicant.
      (4)   Bond. A bond of $10,000 shall be posted in cash or by a bonding
company authorized to do business in the state and shall be conditioned upon
lawful performance by the licensee with the city ordinances and the rules and
regulations of the water pollution control plant Superintendent and shall be
subject to liability of any licensee for damage to the POTW or mudpit waste
disposal area by discharging waste of a nature that is hazardous to the POTW or
sludge, river or mudpit waste disposal area.
      (5)   The waste hauler shall submit a certificate or insurance with the
application as proof of coverage, pursuant to §
10.009 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Renewal. A waste hauler’s license shall expire pursuant to §
10.009 of this code next after its issuance. Renewal applications must be made
in the same manner as the initial application and must be received at the water
pollution control plant 14 days prior to expiration. Failure to apply 14 days
prior to expiration may result in an interruption in the license and the
privileges of such license.
   (C)   Transferability of license. A waste hauler’s license is not
transferable. Waste haulers shall inform the water pollution control plant when
vehicle ownership is transferred.
(2013 Code, § 28-62) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010)
§ 52.047 WASTE HAULER LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may suspend, revoke or deny a waste hauler’s license for any
of the following reasons:
      (1)   A material misstatement of facts in a license application or
submission of an incomplete application;
      (2)   Failure to pay fees or costs as allowed by this code;
      (3)   Violation of the rules governing waste haulers;
      (4)   An inspection shows deficiencies in equipment; and
      (5)   The waste hauler’s license has been suspended by the city due to
non-compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   No revocation shall be issued, except upon notice delivered to the
licensee by mailing the notice through the regular mail addressed to the
licensee at the address listed on the license application a minimum of ten days
prior to the date set for the hearing before the City Administrator. Such
notice shall inform the licensee of the time, date and place of the hearing;
the purpose of the hearing; and shall set out the reasons therefor. However, if
a violation of this subchapter is of such nature that the violation is deemed
to be an immediate hazard by the Director of the wastewater treatment plant,
the Director shall be authorized to temporarily suspend the license until
notice can be given and hearing held.
   (C)   If, after such hearing, the City Administrator makes a finding based
on substantial evidence that a violation of this subchapter did in fact occur
as alleged, and City Administrator may continue suspension of, suspend or
revoke the license; the determination of whether to revoke such license shall
be in the discretion of the City Administrator and shall be dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the violation and its severity.
   (D)   The decision of continued suspension, suspension or revocation made by
the City Administrator may be appealed to the City Council. In order to appeal
such decision, written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within three days after receipt of the decision. Failure to file such written
notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the decision
of continued suspension or revocation of the City Administrator.
   (E)   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing of
such appeal shall be scheduled at the next regular Council meeting, if such
notice is received by 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday before the next regular
Council meeting. If notice is not received by such designated time, the hearing
will be scheduled for the next following Council meeting. The hearing may be
continued for good cause. The hearing shall be confined to the record made
before the City Administrator and the arguments of the parties or their
representatives, but no additional evidence shall be taken. After such hearing,
the City Council may affirm or reverse the order of the City Administrator.
Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed
with the City Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued
session thereof.
   (F)   If the City Council affirms the action of the City Administrator
continuing the suspension or revocation, the City Council shall so state and
order in its written decision.
   (G)   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for
another waste hauler’s license for a period of two years.
(2013 Code, § 28-63) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994)
§ 52.048 STANDARDS FOR VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT.
   For all vehicles and equipment used by waste haulers, the licensee shall:
   (A)   Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling or discharging
onto roads or rights-of-way;
   (B)   Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow
cleaning;
   (C)   Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust free and
sanitary condition and appearance; and
   (D)   Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler’s license
in three-inch or larger letters on the left and right sides of the vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 28-64) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994)
§ 52.049 DISPOSAL; STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. Waste haulers shall dispose of hauled wastes permitted by
this subchapter according to rules for land application as found in state law
or at a location designated by the Director. Waste haulers may also dispose of
hauled wastes at municipal wastewater treatment plants outside the city where
such wastes are accepted. Hours for disposal at the city facilities shall be
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except as pre-approved with
the Director. Waste haulers shall maintain the designated disposal location in
a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and unsanitary conditions.
(2013 Code, § 28-65)
   (B)   Standards for disposal.
      (1)   Under this subchapter, disposal of wastes to the POTW or mudpit
waste disposal area shall be carried out in accordance with all federal, state
and local laws, including the city’s Industrial Pretreatment Ordinance. The
Director may reject wastes from any waste hauler who does not comply with this
section or with any section of this subchapter.
      (2)   Waste haulers shall deliver wastes in accordance with the
following.
         (a)   No industrial/commercial waste other than grease trap waste
shall be delivered to the POTW unless it can be shown that the waste is only
domestic septage or mudpit waste.
         (b)   No hazardous wastes, as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 261 or I.C.A.
Ch. 455B, shall be delivered.
         (c)   Mudpit wastes shall be delivered to the mudpit waste storage
area in accordance with the mudpit waste disposal program.
         (d)   No mudpit wastes shall be delivered to the mudpit waste storage
area that would cause the city to be in non-compliance with the state’s rules
on petroleum-contaminated soils.
         (e)   Domestic septage and grease trap wastes shall be delivered to
the POTW in accordance with the septage and grease trap waste disposal program.
         (f)   No wastes shall be delivered from an animal confinement
facility.
         (g)   No wastes shall be delivered from a vehicle also used to
transport hazardous or toxic wastes detrimental to the POTW or mudpit waste
disposal area.
(2013 Code, § 28-66)
(Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.050 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance or pass through of the POTW.
   (B)   In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into the
POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at
any point in the system, be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10%, of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and in no case pollutants with a
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C);
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause interference with the
operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to,
animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, diapers, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt
resides, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud
or glass grinding or polishing wastes. Discharge of petroleum oil, non-
biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through is prohibited;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 11.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process or to constitute a hazard to humans or
animals;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life;
      (6)   Any substance that may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-
compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under § 405 of the Act being 33 U.S.C. § 1345; any criteria,
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air
Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act being 15
U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or state criteria applicable to the sludge management
method being used;
      (7)   Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104°F);
      (10)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a hazard to humans;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
      (13)   Any wastewater containing any medical or infectious wastes;
      (14)   Any trucked or handled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with this subchapter; and/or
      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
(2013 Code, § 28-67) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994)
§ 52.051 DISPOSAL FEE.
   When wastes are disposed of at the city treatment facilities, a treatment
and disposal fee shall be set per unit of volume of hauled waste. This fee
shall be equal to the cost of treatment and disposal.
   (A)   Septage waste.  
      (1)   The fee shall be a minimum charge of $0.118 per gallon will be
placed on all septage wastes collected.
      (2)   All rates are based on and charged for a full truckload of waste,
unless the collection vehicle has a calibrated electronic volume meter approved
by the city’s Water Pollution Control Department. Vehicles with an electronic
volume meter shall either be charged by the gallon shown on the meter, plus a
$10 meter reading fee per load or a full tank load volume fee.
   (B)   Grease trap wastes.  
      (1)   The fee shall be a minimum charge of $0.135 per gallon will be
placed on all grease trap wastes collected from within the city and two times
the rate or $0.270 per gallon for disposal and treatment of grease trap wastes
collected outside the city.
      (2)   All rates are based on and charged for a full truckload of waste,
unless the collection vehicle has a calibrated electronic volume meter approved
by the city’s Water Pollution Control Department. Vehicles with an electronic
volume meter shall either be charged by the gallon shown on the meter, plus a
$10 meter reading fee per load or a full tank load volume fee.
      (2)   If grease trap waste is co-mingled with septage, the full load or
metered load will be charged at the higher rate for grease trap waste.
   (C)   Mudpit facility registration. Any owner of a mudpit wishing to dispose
of the mudpit waste at the city mudpit waste disposal facility shall pay a
registration fee of $100 per calendar year and shall provide cleaning of the
pit at least once per year.
   (D)   Mudpit waste. A minimum charge of $50 per vehicle load will be placed
on all mudpit wastes collected from within the city and an additional $25 per
cubic yard in excess of two yards per vehicle load. Mudpit wastes shall not be
accepted from outside the city limits.
   (E)   Other wastes. The Water Pollution Control Plant Superintendant may
accept other large volumes of trucked waste, if he or she feels the treatment
plant can handle the waste loading. The charge for such waste would be twice
the current rate charged per this chapter or as set by Council resolution, but
at no time less than $0.03 per gallon. The trucked waste discharger is
responsible for all costs associated with the sampling and testing of the waste
as required by the Director.
(2013 Code, § 28-68) (Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994; Ord. 14564, passed 4-14-
1997; Ord. 14690, passed 4-22-2002; Ord. 14852, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 14870,
passed 3-8-2010)
NON-RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT REGULATIONS
§ 52.065 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws including the Clean Water Act and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40
C.F.R. part 403.
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are to:
      (1)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city’s wastewater
system that will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
      (2)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system that will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;
      (3)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
      (4)   Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
   (C)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, assumes that existing customer’s capacity will not be preempted
and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established in this subchapter.
   (D)   This subchapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside the
city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the POTW. Except
as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the Director of the city’s POTW shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-76) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.066 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Department of Natural Resources,
who is the pretreatment program approval authority.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   As follows:
            1.   If the industrial user is a corporation:
               a.   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of
the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person
who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation;
or
               b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in second quarter 1980 dollars, if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
            2.   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; and
            3.   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local
governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated
to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or his or her designee.
         (b)   The individuals described in divisions (a)1. and (a)2. above may
designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
      AUTHORIZED SIGNOR OF DOCUMENTATION OF COMPLIANCE. Any individual
authorized to sign documentation of compliance must have the ability to
authorize funds and personnel as needed to ensure compliance with pretreatment
standards.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter (mg/l)).
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standards.
      CITY. The City of Marshalltown or the City Council of Marshalltown.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Director of the POTW.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
      DIRECTOR. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of
the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this subchapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW, including holding tank waste discharged into the
system.
      INDUSTRIAL USER (I.U.). A source of non-domestic waste; any non-domestic
source discharging pollutants to a POTW.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
from other sources: inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause
of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory
provisions or permits issued there under or more stringent state or local
regulations: § 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA),
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act;
the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES PERMIT. A
permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
      NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act,
which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge
limits established pursuant to § 403.5 of the Act.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   As follows:
            1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that:
               a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
               b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
               c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
            2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (a)1.a. or (a)1.b. above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
         (b)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or
operator has begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment;
            2.   Significant site preparation work including cleaning,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            3.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine. The singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution and is a measurement of the intensity of the
acidity or alkalinity of the solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage;
garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; chemical wastes; biological materials;
radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar
dirt; and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
      POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user.
      PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) that is owned in this instance by the city.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this
subchapter, the acronym POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city’s POTW.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRIES.
         (a)   Applies to the following:
            1.   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; and
            2.   Any other industrial user that:
               a.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater;
               b.   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment
plant; or
               c.   Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
         (b)   The control authority may decide to remove any non-categorical
industrial user from the list of SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS if the industrial
facility has no reasonable potential to violate any pretreatment standards
(general and specific prohibitions or local limits). The approval authority may
choose to review deletions and/or require additional facilities to be listed.
         (c)   The control authority may reduce oversight of certain industrial
users that may be reclassified as nonsignificant categorical industrial users
(NCSIUs) (40 C.F.R. §§ 403.3(v)(2), 403.8(f)(2)(v) and 403.12(e)(3)(i)).
Previously, all IUs falling under a federal-listed category were designated as
categorical industrial users (CIUs), no matter the size of the operations. The
amendment creates two additional classifications for CIUs:
            1.   Non-significant CIU: CIUs that consistently comply with
applicable pretreatment standards consistently discharge less than 100 gpd of
categorical wastewater, and never discharge any untreated concentrated
wastewater may be classified as non-significant CIU. This classification
reduces the monitoring requirements for an industry and does not require that
the facility have a pretreatment permit. However, they must continue to comply
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and provide annual
certification of compliance.
            2.   Middle tier CIU: CIUs which are:<0.01% of POTW’s design dry
weather hydraulic capacity or 5,000 gpd, whichever is smaller (measured by
continuous effluent flow monitoring) unless the CIU is a batch discharger;
0.015 of POTW’s design dry weather treatment capacity; and <0.01% of the
maximum allowable headworks loading (MAIL) for any local limits. To be eligible
for classification as a middle tier CIU, the CIU must not have been in SNC for
any time in the previous two years and the daily flow rates, production levels,
or pollutant levels cannot vary significantly whereby reduced reporting would
not be representative of operating conditions. Adoption of these
classifications allows for reduced monitoring and regulatory burden for CIUs
with very low flows and potential to impact the POTW.
      SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1);
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants,
except pH);
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority hereunder to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report non-compliance; and
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
      SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant, including BOD, released in a discharge at a
flow rate or concentration sufficient to cause a violation of the specific
discharge prohibitions in 40 C.F.R. §§ 403.5(b) to 403.12(f).
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of CWA § 307(a) or other acts.
      USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city’s POTW.
      WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT. As set forth in §
52.076 of this chapter.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   (B)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings.
      BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
      EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      l. Liter.
      Mg. Milligrams.
      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
      POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works.
      SIC. Standard industrial classification.
      SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
      U.S.C. United States Code.
      TSS. Total suspended solids.
(2013 Code, § 28-77) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14899, passed 4-9-
2012; Ord. 14969, passed 9-25-2017)
§ 52.067 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance or pass through of the POTW. The general prohibitions and
specific prohibitions listed in this subchapter apply to all such users or a
POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standard or
requirements. Each industrial user is required to notify the Director of any
planned significant charges to the industrial user’s operations or system that
might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change.
   (B)   The Director may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.076(B) of this chapter.
   (C)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
52.076 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
§
52.076(C) of this chapter.
   (D)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changes until and
unless the Director has responded to the industrial user’s notice.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, flow increases of 10% or greater and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed significant.
(2013 Code, § 28-78) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.068 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the general discharge prohibitions in §
52.067 of this chapter, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into
the POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at
any portion in the system, be more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and in no case pollutants with a
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C);
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, diapers, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. Discharge
of petroleum oil, non- biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through is prohibited;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 11.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals
or create the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A
toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any substance that may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-
compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Wastes
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;
      (7)   Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference but in no case
wastewater with a temperature which will cause the treatment plant headworks
wastewater temperature to exceed 40°C (104°F);
      (10)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a hazard to humans or
animals;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (12)   Any wastewater that causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance;
      (13)   Any wastewater containing any medical or infectious wastes;
      (14)   Any trucked or handled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with the city’s Trucked Waste
Ordinance; or
      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
   (B)   When the Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW
any of the substances enumerated in division (A) above in such amounts as to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, the Director shall:
      (1)   Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and
      (2)   Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW.
(2013 Code, § 28-79) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14446, passed 11-8-
1993)
§ 52.069 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The national categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 C.F.R. Ch. I,
Subch. N, parts 405 through 471, are incorporated into this subchapter by
reference. Upon the promulgation of new federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this subchapter. The Director shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
(2013 Code, § 28-80) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.070 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on dischargers shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-81) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.071 CITY’S RIGHTS OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.065 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-82) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.072 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.
   Under this subchapter, no user shall ever increase the use of process water
or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. (Comment: this
dilution is an acceptable means of complying with the pH prohibition.)
(2013 Code, § 28-83) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.073 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES (SLUG LOADS); PLANS.
   (A)   (1)   Generally. Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
subchapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and expense.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by
the city before construction of the facility and each user shall verify the
status of the slug control plan for any renewal cycle. No user who commences
contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which
this subchapter derives shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve
the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter. If an accidental
discharge (slug load) occurs, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification
shall include location of the discharge, the type of waste, the concentration
and volume and corrective actions.
      (2)   Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge,
the user shall submit to the Director a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. No such notification shall relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor
shall such notification relieve the use of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this subchapter or other applicable law.
      (3)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
if a slug or accidental discharge occurs. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(2013 Code, § 28-84)
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the Director may require any
industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. At least once every two years, the Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs a plan. Any industrial user required to
develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a
plan that addresses, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge that
would violate any of the prohibited discharges in §
52.067 of this chapter;
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response
      (5)   Industrial users are required to notify the Director immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(2013 Code, § 28-85)
(Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14969, passed 9-25-2017) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.074 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the
recovery of costs from users of the city’s wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established in this subchapter. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth by resolution in the city’s schedule of
charges and fees.
   (B)   Adoption.
      (1)   The city may adopt charges and fees that may include the following:
         (a)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
city’s pretreatment program;
         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
         (c)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
         (d)   Fees for permit applications;
         (e)   Fees for filing appeals;
         (f)   Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
         (g)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in this subchapter.
      (2)   The fees relate solely to the matters covered by this subchapter
and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city.
   (C)   City’s scheduling of charges and fees.
      (1)   The cost of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment
program shall be absorbed in the administrative costs of the operation of the
POTW.
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, sample equipment, sample handling and
laboratory testing are set by Council resolution and are reviewed periodically
to ensure the fee covers the cost of performing the work.
      (3)   A wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be assessed
each wastewater discharge permit holder, as well as a renewal fee as set by
Council resolution. An additional fee shall be assessed in the amount of $50
per month past the time due as required by this subchapter.
      (4)   An appeal filing fee shall be assessed in the amount of $100.
(2013 Code, § 28-86) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.075 WASTEWATER DISCHARGER PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit and/or Department of
Natural Resource permit to any natural outlet within the city or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW any wastewater, except as
authorized by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-87) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.076 WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS.
   (A)   General permits. All significant users or major contributors proposing
to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing
significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall maintain their
existing wastewater contribution permits.
   (B)   Permit application.
      (1)   Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the
city and accompanied by the permit application fee. Proposed new users shall
apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Each
existing user shall submit an application for a permit renewal 90 days prior to
the expiration date of the current permit. In support of the application, the
user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address and location, if different from the address;
         (b)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended;
         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in §§
52.067 through
52.073 of this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to § 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 135, as amended;
         (d)   Time and duration of the contribution;
         (e)   Average daily and 15-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonably variations, if any;
         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials that are or could be discharged; and
         (h)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
      (2)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment shall be established. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. (See §
52.077 of this chapter.) The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing a contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the
like);
         (b)   No increment referred to in division (B)(2)(a) above shall
exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months;
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps
being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to
the Director;
         (d)   Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of
production;
         (e)   Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum
per day;
         (f)   Number and type of employees and hours of operation of the plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of the pretreatment system; and
         (g)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
      (3)   All plans required in this division (B) must be certified for
accuracy by a state-registered professional engineer.
      (4)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and any
required additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms
and conditions provided in this subchapter.
   (C)   Permit modification.
      (1)   This permit may be modified for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following:
         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
         (b)   Material or substantial alterations or additions to the
discharger’s operation processes or discharge volume or character which were
not considered in drafting the effective permit;
         (c)   A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the
POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge;
         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the control authority’s collection and treatment systems, POTW
personnel or the receiving waters;
         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;
         (f)   Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant
facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;
         (g)   To correct typographical or other errors in the permit;
         (h)   To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation
to a new owner/operator; and
         (i)   Upon request of the permittee; provided, such request does not
create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws or rules and
regulations.
      (2)   Under promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard,
the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be
revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a
wastewater contribution permit as required by division (B) above, the user
shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In
addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit
to the Director, within 90 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard, the information required hereby.
   (D)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain
the following as determined by the Director:
      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      (2)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (3)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      (4)   Specifications for monitoring programs that may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule;
      (5)   Compliance schedules;
      (6)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see §
52.077 of this chapter) and including monthly monitoring reports;
      (7)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city access
thereto. Industrial users must keep records of monitoring activities and
results for a minimum of three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this
subchapter or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Director and/or approval authority;
      (8)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system;
      (9)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per §
52.073(A) of this chapter; and
      (10)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific day. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements, as
identified in §§
52.067 through
52.073 of this chapter, are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall
be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior
to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (F)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises
or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding
owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
permit.
   (G)   Report of changed conditions.
      (1)   Each industrial user is required to notify the Director of any
planned significant changes to the industrial user’s operations or system that
might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change in accordance with the following.
         (a)   The Director may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
division (B) above.
         (b)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
division (A) above or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
division (C) above.
      (2)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions
until and unless the Director has responded to the industrial user’s notice.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (G), flow increases of 10% or greater
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed
significant.
(2013 Code, § 28-88) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.077 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
   (A)   General pretreatment regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 set forth five
basic reporting requirements that apply to industrial users subject to specific
categorical pretreatment standards. Categorical industrial users must comply
with these federal reporting requirements, even if the control authority has
determined that the local limit requirement is more stringent than the
categorical standard. These requirements are as follows.
      (1)   Baseline monitoring report (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)). A baseline
monitoring report is required, including a compliance schedule, when necessary,
for meeting categorical standards (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(c)). Within either 180
days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the
final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject
to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the Director
a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)1-7. At
least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources
that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard shall be required to submit to the Director a report which
contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)1-7. A new source shall
also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
      (2)   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d)). Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in
the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user facility, which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and,
if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user
into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user, and certified by a qualified professional.
      (3)   Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards.
(See §
52.076 of this chapter.) The Director may impose mass limitations on users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by division (A)(1) above shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration,
or production and mass where requested by the Director of pollutants contained
therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment
standards.
      (4)   Periodic report on continued compliance (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)).
Categorical and non- categorical industrial users are required to report on
their regulated waste discharges to the control authority at least
semiannually. The regulations (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(e)(1)) state that the reports
are to contain information indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent that are limited by such categorical pretreatment
standards. For some categorical TTO standards, the categorical regulation
provides for the use of a certification as a substitute for sampling and
analysis results. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured
or estimated average daily flows for the reporting period. If the city performs
all of the monitoring and sampling requirements of the industrial user’s permit
every six months, the city will send all permitted industrial users a standard
six-month compliance form for the industrial user to certify compliance.
      (5)   Signatory requirements. All wastewater discharge permit
applications and industrial user reports must contain the following
certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user: “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine for knowing violations.”
      (6)   Notice of slug loading (40 C.F.R. § 403.12(f)). (See §
52.073(A) of this chapter.) All industrial users must notify the control
authority immediately of any slug loading. SLUG LOADING is defined as any
pollutant, including biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), released in a discharge
at a flow rate or concentration which will cause interference with the
operation of the treatment works.
      (7)   Notification of discharge of hazardous waste. Any industrial user
who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the
Environmental Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under
40 C.F.R. part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the Environmental Protection Agency
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous batch or other).
If the industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained
in the wastes; an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents
in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and an estimation of
the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this division (A)(7)
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under §
52.076 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this division (A)(7)
does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring
requirements.
   (B)   (1)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms
of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified
in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
      (2)   If any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identify additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or list any additional substance as a
hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the Environmental
Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations. For any notification made under this
division (B), the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place
to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree
it has determined to be economically practical.
(2013 Code, § 28-89) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
§ 52.078 ANALYSES.
   All analyses required under this subchapter shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments. Where 40 C.F.R. part
136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the Environmental Protection Agency publication,
Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for
Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other
sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.
(2013 Code, § 28-90) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.079 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The city may require an industrial user of the POTW to provide and
operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that landscaping or parked vehicles will
not obstruct it.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-91) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.080 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this subchapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination/copying or in the performance of any of their
duties. The city, approval authority and Environmental Protection Agency shall
have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval
authority and Environmental Protection Agency will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
Sampling of an industrial user’s wastewater shall be required at least
semiannually (once every six months). The POTW may choose to monitor in lieu of
requiring the industrial user to perform the self-monitoring. If sampling
conducted by the industrial user indicates a violation, the user must repeat
the sampling and submit analytical results within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation. If the industrial user performed the initial sampling, the
user must notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation in
addition to performing the follow-up sampling and analysis. Industrial users
that are identified as “significant” are required to report all monitoring
results to the POTW.
   (B)   In cases of violation where the POTW has assumed responsibility for
sampling in lieu of the industrial user, the POTW must repeat the sampling and
analysis. An exception of that requirement is made if the POTW performs the
sampling at the facility at a frequency of at least once a month or if the POTW
performs sampling at the industrial user between the time of the initial
sampling and the receipt of the results of that sampling.
   (C)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, 24-
hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composited
sampling techniques, unless the POTW authorized time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling. Where the POTW authorizes time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling, the samples must be representative of the
discharge, and the justification for the decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented in the IU’s file for that facility or facilities.
When grab samples are determined to be applicable for representative sampling
under certain circumstances, the POTW shall determine and document the number
of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable
limits.
(2013 Code, § 28-92) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14969, passed 9-25-
2017)
§ 52.081 PRETREATMENT.
   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply
with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal
pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this subchapter. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
(2013 Code, § 28-93) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.082 RECORDKEEPING.
   Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying
all records and information required to be retained under this subchapter.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning compliance with this subchapter or where the industrial user has
been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director and/or
approval authority.
(2013 Code, § 28-94) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.083 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
   The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the city, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months,
were in significant non-compliance with any standard or requirement of this
subchapter. (See §
52.066 of this chapter, defining the term “significant non-compliance”.)
(2013 Code, § 28-95) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.084 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs and from city inspection and sampling activities pursuant
to this subchapter shall be available to the public without restriction unless
the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of the report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for
uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302
will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the
public without restriction.
(2013 Code, § 28-96) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.085 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   Under this subchapter, the Director may immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately suspend
a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. If a user fails to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Director shall allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings set forth in division (B) below are initiated against the user.
      (3)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the Director, prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under divisions (B) and (D) below. Nothing in this
section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this section.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions
of this subchapter or applicable state and federal regulation is subject to
having his or her permit revoked in accordance with the procedure of this
section:
      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;
      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring;
      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit;
      (5)   Supplying any false information or statement, representation or
certification in any application, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this subchapter; or
      (6)   Violation of any of the provisions and/or requirements of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Notification of violation; compliance scheduling.
      (1)   Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating
this subchapter, wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation
or requirements contained in this subchapter, the water pollution control plant
shall serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. The notification shall require the industry to reply to the city in
writing, within ten days of notification, the cause for the violation and the
action the industry plans to take to achieve compliance. A notice of violation
to an industry in significant non-compliance shall require the industry to
submit a compliance schedule to the city within 30 days of notification. The
Director may require a compliance schedule be required as part of the notice of
violation if any single violation warrants immediate action. Whenever discharge
permit renewals or reports are not submitted as required, a notice of violation
shall be issued requiring submission within seven days of notification.
      (2)   Any industry found in significant non-compliance of its discharge
permit or any single violation of an industrial permit or pretreatment
ordinance provision deemed significant by the Director shall within 30 days of
notification submit to the city a schedule of compliance to correct the
violation. Any plan for corrective action submitted after notification shall
include a timetable for completion of the required tasks. The plan must be
approved and accepted by the city and will represent an agreement which will
allow any available enforcement procedure to apply. Any schedule of compliance
that exceeds 60 days shall be submitted to the district courts for purposes of
a court order approving the compliance schedule making it enforceable against
each party thereto as a court order.
   (D)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the City Council why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the City
Council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the
City Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The City Council shall itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence.
      (3)   After the City Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service will be discontinued. If the user
certifies that proper modifications have been made to meet discharge
requirements, the sewer disconnect order may be cancelled. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
   (E)   Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the city’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or
any order of the city, the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in the District Court of the county.
(2013 Code, § 28-97) (Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §§
52.020 through
52.031 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable for any damages done
to the sanitary sewer system or the water pollution control plant and shall be
punished by a civil penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation continues may
be considered a separate violation.
(2013 Code, § 28-53)
   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates or resists the
enforcement of any provision of §§
52.045 through
52.051 of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction, punishable as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. Each violation constitutes a separate
offense. Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of §§
52.045 through
52.051 of this chapter after previously being found guilty of violating the
same provision of §§
52.045 through
52.051 of this chapter at the same location or at a different location shall be
guilty of a repeat offense.
      (2)   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this division (C) does not
preclude the city from seeking alternative relief, including injunctive relief,
suits for monetary damages or enforcement provisions under the city’s
Industrial Pretreatment Ordinance.
(2013 Code, § 28-69)
   (D)   (1)   Judicial enforcement remedies.
         (a)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued under §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter or any other pretreatment requirement, the Director may
petition the courts through the city’s Attorney for the issuance of a temporary
or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action
as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the
city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to
taking any other action against a user.
         (b)   Civil penalties. Civil penalties, including municipal
infractions pursuant to city ordinance (see I.C.A. § 364.22), may be imposed as
follows.
            1.   Any industrial user who violates any pretreatment standard or
requirement, as referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8, may be punished by a civil
penalty of not more than $1,000 for each day a violation exists or continues.
            2.   Any user who commits any environmental violation of I.C.A. Ch.
455B or a violation of a standard established by the city in consultation with
the state’s Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be punished by a
civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each occurrence.
            3.   A person committing an environmental violation is not subject
to a civil penalty, if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
               a.   The violation results solely from the person conducting an
initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing
or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation;
               b.   The person notifies the city of the violation within 24
hours from the time that the violation begins; and
               c.   The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight hours. The city shall not enforce this division (D)(1)(b) against a
person committing an environmental violation until the city offers to
participate in informal negotiations with the person. If the person accepts the
offer, the city and the person shall participate in good faith negotiations to
resolve issues alleged to be the basis of the violation.
            4.   The Director may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city.
            5.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
            6.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite
for taking any other action against a user.
            7.   Violation of §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter shall, in addition hereto, be a municipal infraction.
         (c)   Criminal prosecution. Any person who violates any provision of
§§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter shall, in addition to the civil penalties in this
division (D), upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
         (d)   Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report,
plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter or the wastewater contribution permit or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
         (e)   Remedies non-exclusive. The provisions in this section are not
exclusive remedies. Additional remedies shall include, but not be limited to,
injunctive relief, suits for monetary damage and suits for court orders
directing compliance. The city reserves the right to take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any non-compliant
user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(2013 Code, § 28-98)
      (2)   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
         (a)   Upset. Upset used as an affirmative defense to a discharge
violation under §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter shall be in accordance with the following.
            1.   For the purposes of this division (D)(2), the term UPSET means
an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include non-
compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
            2.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for non- compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements hereof are met.
            3.   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:
               a.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause of the upset;
               b.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
               c.   The industrial user has submitted the following information
to the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the upset; if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days:
                  i.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
non-compliance;
                  ii.   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected
to continue; and
                  iii.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
            4.   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
            5.   Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
            6.   The industrial user shall control production of all discharges
to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
division (D)(2)(a)6. applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
         (b)   General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for non-
compliance with the general and specific prohibitions in §§
52.067 and
52.068 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to
know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
            1.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during
the pass through or interference; or
            2.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the city WPCP was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
         (c)   Bypass. Bypass used as an affirmative defense to a discharge
violation under §§
52.065 through
52.085 of this chapter shall be in accordance with the following:
            1.   For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
               BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a industrial user’s treatment facility.
               SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
            2.   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does
not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of divisions (D)(2)(c)3. and (D)(2)(c)4.
below.
            3.   Notice of bypass shall be submitted as follows.
               a.   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
               b.   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW
within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain: a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent occurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
            4.   Enforcement actions and approval of an anticipated bypass
shall be as follows.
               a.   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
                  i.   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;
                  ii.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such
as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
                  iii.   The industrial user submitted notices as required
hereunder.
               b.   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the
three conditions listed in division (D)(2)(c)4.a. above.
(2013 Code, § 28-99)
(Ord. 14438, passed 8-23-1993; Ord. 14461, passed 5-23-1994; Ord. 14531, passed
3-25-1996; Ord. 14711, passed 3-24-2003; Ord. 14914, passed 12-10-2012; Ord.
14933, passed 9-8-2014; Ord. 14945, passed 3-14-2016; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER
Section
Storm Water Utility
   
53.001   Purpose and objective
   
53.002   Creation of Storm Water Management and Drainage Systems Utility
   
53.003   Definitions
   
53.004   Storm Water Utility Fund
   
53.005   Storm Water Utility budget
   
53.006   Rate structure and storm water rate
   
53.007   Director of Storm Water Utility; powers
   
53.008   Powers and duties of the city
   
53.009   Responsibility for management and system
   
53.010   Storm Water Advisory Committee
Conditions and Charges
   
53.020   On-site storm water systems; enforcement and inspections
   
53.021   Right to appeal
   
53.022   Billing and collection
   
53.023   Adjustments to service charges
   
53.024   Exemptions and credits available
   
53.025   Statewide urban designs and specifications
   
53.026   Detention required; design requirements; redevelopment
STORM WATER UTILITY
§ 53.001 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and procedure for
managing and controlling the quantity and quality of storm water runoff within
the city limits. The management shall include the establishment of a Storm
Water Utility to provide revenues for whatever aspects of this requirement are
deemed appropriate by the city.
   (B)   The city finds, determines and declares that the storm water drainage
system provides benefits and services to all property within the city limits.
Such benefits include, but are not limited to: the provision of adequate
systems for collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of storm
water for quality and quantity management that minimize impacts on receiving
waters.
   (C)   In order to manage additions and improvements to the city storm water
systems, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its storm water
management program operating and capital investment needs.
(2013 Code, § 28-120) (Ord. 14713, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-
2013)
§ 53.002 CREATION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS UTILITY.
   (A)   The function of the Storm Water Management and Drainage Systems
Utility (hereinafter referred to as “Storm Water Utility”) within the
Department of Public Works is to provide for the safe and efficient capture of
storm water runoff, mitigate the damaging effects of storm water runoff,
correction of storm water problems, to fund activities of storm water
management and include design, planning, regulations, education, coordination,
construction, operations, maintenance, inspection and enforcement activities.
   (B)   There is hereby established a Storm Water Utility within the city,
which shall be responsible for creating revenue for storm water management
throughout the city’s corporate limits, and shall provide for the management,
protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of storm water systems and
facilities. Such utility shall be under the operational direction of the Public
Works Director. The corporate limits of the city, as increased from time to
time, shall constitute the boundaries of the Storm Water Utility District.
   (C)   The city shall establish a Storm Water Utility Fund in the city budget
and accounting system, separate and apart from its General Fund, for the
purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and
responsibilities of the utility.
(2013 Code, § 28-121) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJUSTMENT. A modification in a non-residential customer’s storm water rate
for certain activities that impact storm water runoff or impact the city’s
costs of providing storm water management.
   CITY. The City of Marshalltown.
   DETACHED DWELLING UNIT. Developed land containing one structure which is not
attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a
bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. DETACHED
DWELLING UNITS may include houses, manufactured homes and mobile homes located
on one or more individual lots or parcels of land.
   DEVELOPED AGRICULTURAL PROPERTIES. A lot or parcel of real estate used as a
“farm”, which may contain one or greater dwelling units and/or other building
structures, but does not include undeveloped properties.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Property altered from its natural state by the
construction or installation of a structure equaling more than 150 square feet
of impervious surface, thus increasing the amount of rain water or surface
water runoff.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Storm Water Utility.
   EXEMPT PROPERTY. Includes public streets, alleys and sidewalks; all
undeveloped properties.
   GROUND WATER. Sub-surface water or water stored in pores, cracks and
crevices in the ground below the water table.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA. The number of square feet of hard-surfaced areas that
either prevent or resist the entry of water into soil surface, as it entered
under natural conditions as undeveloped property, and/or that cause water to
run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from
that present under natural conditions as undeveloped property. This includes,
but is not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways,
sidewalks, pavement, athletic courts and semi-impervious surfaces such as
gravel which are used as driveways or parking lots.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES. All properties not encompassed by the definition
of residential shall be defined as non-residential. NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
shall include: single-family and duplex properties with gross area greater than
two acres; apartment building properties; condominium properties; mobile home
parks; developed agricultural properties; commercial property; industrial
property; institutional property; governmental property; churches; hospitals;
schools; transient rentals; parking lots; federal, state, county and local
properties; and any other property not mentioned in the lists of properties.
   OCCUPANT. The person residing or doing business on the property. In a family
or household situation, the person responsible for the obligation imposed shall
be the adult head of the household. In a shared dwelling or office situation,
the adult legally responsible for the management or condition of the property
shall be responsible.
   OWNER. The legal owner(s) of record as shown on the tax rolls of the city,
except where there is a recorded land sale contract, the purchaser thereunder
shall be deemed the OWNER.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All single-family and duplex properties located within
the corporate limits of the city with gross area less than or equal to two
acres.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer, which carries storm water, surface runoff, street wash
waters and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
other than permitted discharges.
   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All human-made facilities, structures and
natural watercourses owned by the city, used for collection and conveying storm
water to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet
including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and
appurtenant features; canals; creeks; catch basins; ditches; streams; gullies;
ravines; flumes; culverts; siphons; streets; curbs; gutters; dams; flood walls;
levees; and pumping stations.
   STORM WATER FACILITIES. Various storm water and drainage works that may
include inlets, pipes, pumping stations, conduits, manholes, energy dissipation
structures, stream channels, outlets, retention/detention basins, infiltration
practices and other structural components.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The tasks required to control storm water runoff
using storm water management systems, to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public, and comply with relevant state and federal regulations.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS. Address the issues of drainage management
(flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of
receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds and reservoirs through
improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, works,
instrumentalities and properties used or useful in the collection, retention,
detention and treatment of storm water or surface water drainage.
   STORM WATER RATE. The periodic rate applicable to a parcel of developed
land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city’s
Storm Water Utility. STORM WATER RATES are based on measurable parameters which
influence the Storm Water Utility’s cost of providing services and facilities,
with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each
parcel of developed land.
   STORM WATER UTILITY. The utility established under this subchapter for the
purpose of managing storm water and imposing charges for the recovery of costs
connected with such storm water management.
   SURFACE WATER. Water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the
surface of the ground including lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams,
puddles, channelized flow and runoff.
   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been
modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to
land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. UNDEVELOPED
LAND shall have minimal concrete pavement, asphalt or compacted gravel surfaces
or structures which create an impervious surface.
   USER. The owner and/or occupant of any developed property within the
corporate limits of the city, and shall mean any person who uses property which
maintains connection to, discharges to or otherwise receives services from the
city for storm water management. The occupant of any habitable property is
deemed the USER. If the property is not occupied, then the owner shall be
deemed the USER.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural overland route through which water passes, including
drainage courses, streams, creeks and rivers.
(2013 Code, § 28-122) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.004 STORM WATER UTILITY FUND.
   (A)   Funding for the Storm Water Utility’s activities may include, but are
not limited to: storm water rate charges; storm water permits and inspection
fees; other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local and private
grants, bonds or loans.
   (B)   All rate charges and all sources of revenue generated by or on behalf
of the Storm Water Utility shall be deposited in a Storm Water Utility Fund and
used exclusively for management of the Storm Water Utility.
(2013 Code, § 28-123) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.005 STORM WATER UTILITY BUDGET.
   The city shall adopt an operating and capital budget for the Storm Water
Utility each fiscal year. The budget shall set forth revenues for such fiscal
year and estimated expenditures for operations, maintenance, improvements,
replacement and debt service.
(2013 Code, § 28-124) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.006 RATE STRUCTURE AND STORM WATER RATE.
   (A)   Any property, lot, parcel of land, building or premises that is
tributary directly or indirectly to the storm water system of the city, shall
be subject to a rate based upon the quantity of impervious area situated
thereon. This charge is not related to the water and/or sewer service and does
not rely on occupancy of the premises to be in effect. All properties having
impervious area of at least 150 square feet within the corporate limits of the
city will be assigned the rate.
   (B)   A unit of impervious surface area on an average single-family,
residential property or equivalent residential unit (ERU) is the quantity used
for assessing storm water charges. One ERU equals 2,800 square feet of
impervious area for the city.
   (C)   The Storm Water Utility charge is calculated based on the following
method.
      (1)   Single-family residential customers and duplexes with gross
property area less or equal to two acres will be assigned one ERU and assessed
a storm water charge that is equivalent to one ERU unit rate per month.
      (2)   All other developed properties shall be assigned a number of ERUs
based upon the property's individually measured impervious area (in square
feet) divided by one ERU, or 2,800 square feet, and rounding up to the nearest
integer. The monthly storm water charge assessed to each of these properties is
the number of ERUs times the ERU unit rate.
      (3)   Storm water charges for residential customers with gross property
area greater than two acres or non-residential developments shall be based on
measurements of impervious areas.
   (D)   Impervious area measurements shall be maintained by the city's
Engineering Department for all residential customers with parcels greater than
two acres and non-residential customers to determine their share of the storm
water management costs. In no event shall any owner specified herein pay less
than the rate required for one ERU per month. As part of the building permit
process, property owners shall coordinate with the city's Building Inspection
and Engineering staff to ensure that, as impervious areas change on the owner's
property due to construction or demolition, the Engineering Department
maintains up to date records of impervious areas for use in determining
property storm water utility billing.
   (E)   Commencing on July 1, 2024, and continuing thereafter, the monthly
unit rate shall be $4.20 per equivalent residential unit (ERU).
(2013 Code, § 28-125) (Ord. 14956, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 15082, passed 3-11-
2024)
§ 53.007 DIRECTOR OF STORM WATER UTILITY; POWERS.
   Storm water service charges incurred pursuant to this chapter may be
collected by the Storm Water Utility Director or designee who is also
responsible for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such
storm water charges.
(2013 Code, § 28-126) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.008 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY.
   (A)   The city shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities
with respect to the Storm Water Utility:
      (1)   Administer the design, construction, maintenance and operation of
the utility system, including capital improvements designated in the
comprehensive drainage plan; and
      (2)   Acquire, construct, lease, own, operate, maintain, extend, expand,
replace, clean, dredge, repair, conduct, manage and finance such facilities,
operations and activities, as are deemed by the city to be proper and
reasonably necessary for a system of storm and surface water management. These
facilities may include, but are not limited to, surface and underground
drainage facilities, storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches and such other
facilities relating to collection, runoff, treatment and retention as will
support a storm water management system.
   (B)   The city shall separately account for the Storm Water Utility
finances. The Storm Water Utility shall prepare an annual budget, which is to
include all operation and maintenance costs and costs of borrowing. The budget
is subject to approval by the City Council. Any excess of revenues over
expenditures in a year shall be retained in a segregated fund, which shall be
used for Storm Water Utility expenses in subsequent years. Storm water utility
fees collected shall be deposited in the Storm Water Utility Fund and shall be
used for no other purpose.
(2013 Code, § 28-127) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.009 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city’s storm water management and drainage system consists of all
rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways,
channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes,
head walls and other structures, natural or human-made, within the political
boundaries of the city which control and/or convey storm water and through
which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and
properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation,
maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which:
      (1)   Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements;
      (2)   Are subject to easements of rights-of-entry, rights-of-access,
rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation,
maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or
      (3)   Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access
for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems and facilities.
Operation and maintenance of storm water systems and facilities which are
located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for
which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for
operation, maintenance and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall
be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner.
   (B)   It is the intent of this section to protect the public health, safety
and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create
any special duty or relationship with an individual person or to any specified
property within or without the boundaries of the city. The city expressly
reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any
action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers,
employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or
relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created.
(2013 Code, § 28-128) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.010 STORM WATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Created. There is created and established a Storm Water Advisory
Committee consisting of five formal members who have an interest in storm water
matters, who have attained the age of 18, and who reside within the corporate
limits of the city. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
and approval of the Council. Committee members shall serve without compensation
but may receive reimbursement for expenditure of personal funds related to
Committee business upon approval of the city’s Finance Director. Reimbursement
may require advance approval.
   (B)   Terms of office. All Committee members shall be appointed for four
years, commencing January 1 of the year of appointment, with staggered end
appointment dates for the initial establishment of the Committee. The first
meeting of this Committee shall be called by the Mayor.
   (C)   Reappointments. Any member appointed to a term on the Storm Water
Advisory Committee may be reappointed for successive terms without limitation.
   (D)   Election of officers. The Storm Water Advisory Committee shall meet
and shall elect from its own membership a Chairperson to serve as the presiding
officer for two years. A Vice-Chairperson shall also be elected to serve as the
presiding officer in the absence of the Chairperson for two years.
   (E)   Regular meetings. The Storm Water Advisory Committee shall hold a
minimum of one meeting each calendar year and may hold special meetings upon
the call of the Chairperson or by three members joining in such call upon at
least one day’s written notice prior thereto. Three members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any matter of business coming before it.
   (F)   Duties and functions. The Storm Water Advisory Committee shall:
      (1)   Work in harmony with the City Council, the Public Works Director,
and the Storm Water Coordinator to develop a public involvement and
participation program;
      (2)   Be and stay informed of the city’s NPDES storm water permit;
      (3)   Make recommendations for public education and outreach efforts on
storm water impacts;
      (4)   Participate in decision making, holding public hearings, and
working with volunteer groups concerning storm water impacts; and
      (5)   Encourage business owners, developers, homeowners, members of
environmental groups, and other members of the public at large to attend
Committee meetings and participate in the city’s storm water efforts.
(Ord. 15056, passed 1-23-2023)
CONDITIONS AND CHARGES
§ 53.020 ON-SITE STORM WATER SYSTEMS; ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All property owners and developers of developed real property within
the city shall provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site storm water
systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain and discharge storm water in a
safe manner consistent with all city, state and federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   Pursuant I.C.A. § 364.12(3) or successor section of the state code,
any failure to meet this obligation may constitute a nuisance and may be
subject to an abatement action filed by the city. In the event a nuisance is
found to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable
time as allowed by the city, the city may enter upon the property and cause
such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost
thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against
the property. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this
section, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and
public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice
to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and
engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance.
(2013 Code, § 28-129) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.021 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied
in error may appeal in the following manner.
   (A)   An appeal must be filed in writing with the City Administrator. In the
case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a
registered state land surveyor or professional engineer containing information
on the total property area, the impervious surface area and any other features
or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to
rainfall events.
   (B)   Using the information provided by the appellant, the City
Administrator shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the
property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days.
   (C)   In response to an appeal, the City Administrator may adjust the storm
water service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (D)   A decision of the City Administrator which is adverse to an appellant
may be further appealed to the City Council within 30 days of receipt of notice
of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the City
Council by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The City Council
shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days. All decisions of the City
Council shall be served on the appellant by registered mail, sent to the
billing address of the appellant.
   (E)   All decisions of the City Council shall be final.
(2013 Code, § 28-130) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.022 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   A storm water service charge bill may be sent through the United
States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of
the bill, the date the payment is due and the date when past due. Failure to
receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to
whom the bill is initially directed, liability for payment of the storm water
management charge attributable to that property shall be joint and several as
to the owner and occupant.
   (B)   All comprehensive storm water service charges are due and payable 30
days after the date of billing.
   (C)   A penalty of 5% shall be added to a comprehensive storm water service
charge when the charge is not paid per Marshalltown Water Works procedure. Each
storm water service charge rendered under or pursuant to this chapter is hereby
made a lien upon the corresponding lot, parcel of land, building or premises
that are tributary directly or indirectly to the storm water system of the city
and, if the same is not paid pursuant to the notice, it shall be certified to
the County Treasurer, who shall place a lien on said property as allowed by law
and be collected in the same manner as property taxes.
   (D)   (1)   The Storm Water Utility charges in this chapter shall constitute
a lien upon the premises served by the storm water management and drainage
system utility.
      (2)   The Marshalltown Water Works will compile a list of all storm water
utility charges that have remained unpaid and delinquent with the name of the
owner and the legal description of the property or premises for each separate
bill, and this list may be certified to the County Treasurer by the Board of
Water Works Trustees for collection in the same manner as taxes, and when so
collected the proceeds shall become a part of the Storm Water Utility Fund of
the city.
      (3)   Failure to send or receive a bill for comprehensive storm water
service charge is not a defense to the collection of the service charges.
   (E)   Suits for collection shall be commenced by the city in the state’s
District Court for the county. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent
collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent
jurisdiction. The city may employ any lawful means to collect funds owed and is
not restricted to filing a lawsuit.
   (F)   The Storm Water Utility service charge may be billed on a common
statement and collected along with other city utility services.
   (G)   The State of Iowa Offset Program may also be utilized by the
Marshalltown Water Works for collection of delinquent storm water utility
accounts that are not eligible for a lien.
   (H)   The City Clerk reserves the right to process collection procedures
through the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-131) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013; Ord. 15067, passed 6-26-
2023; Ord. 15072, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 53.023 ADJUSTMENTS TO SERVICE CHARGES.
   Increase adjustments (debit) will be made to non-residential service charges
by property owners adding additional impervious area such as rooftops, parking
lots, driveways and walkways.
(2013 Code, § 28-132) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.024 EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS AVAILABLE.
   (A)   All public or private property shall be subject to Storm Water Utility
rate charges, except as provided in this chapter. The following areas are
exempt from Storm Water Utility rate charges:
      (1)   Undeveloped property, as defined in this chapter; and
      (2)   Streets, alley ways and highways in the public and private domain
are exempt from utility service charges or connection fees. Railroad rights-of-
way (tracks) shall be exempt from storm water rate charges. However, railroad
stations, maintenance buildings or other developed land used for railroad
purposes shall not be exempt from storm water service charges.
      (3)   All properties and facilities owned and operated by the City of
Marshalltown, which are used for general governmental purposes, including but
not limited to:
         (a)   City Hall and administrative buildings;
         (b)   Public safety facilities (police and fire stations);
         (c)   Public parks, trails, and recreational facilities;
         (d)   Public libraries and community centers;
         (e)   Public works and infrastructure maintenance facilities; and
         (f)   Other municipal facilities directly supporting government
operations, as indicated by the City Administrator.
      (4)   All properties and facilities owned by the City of Marshalltown and
leased or rented to a non-profit entity, which are used to provide public
recreational opportunities.
   (B)   Decrease adjustments (credit) can be made to non-residential property
rates for performing activities that reduce the impact of storm water runoff to
the storm water system or lessen the burden in accordance with the city’s Storm
Water Utility Rate Credit Policy, as set by Council resolution.
(2013 Code, § 28-133) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013; Ord. 15107, passed 6-23-
2025)
§ 53.025 STATEWIDE URBAN DESIGNS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The city adopts the Statewide Urban Designs and Specifications (SUDAS)
standards prepared by the Center of Transportation Research and Education at
Iowa State University, for storm water management and drainage as set out in
its 2004 Design Manual and Specifications, §§ 1, 2, 3 and 8 of Ch. 2 of said
Manual.
(2013 Code, § 28-134) (Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 53.026 DETENTION REQUIRED; DESIGN REQUIREMENTS; REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Storm water runoff detention shall be required on low-density single-
or two-family residential subdivisions of four or more lots and all medium- and
high-density multi-family residential, commercial and industrial development in
the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-135)
   (B)   Design of storm water detention in the city and as regulated in § 8.4
of the Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards Manual shall be based on the
following detention requirements:
      (1)   Runoff shall be detained from a 100-year storm event with the
property in a developed state; and
      (2)   The release rate from detention shall be based on a rate not to
exceed a five-year storm event on the property undeveloped.
(2013 Code, § 28-136)
   (C)   On any development of one acre or more, storm water detention shall be
planned and installed as part of the required Pollution Prevention Plan and as
an erosion control device. At no time shall occupancy be granted prior to
completion of the detention facility.
(2013 Code, § 28-137)
   (D)   Any redevelopment of a lot to repair, replace or add-on to the
existing improvements, that generate runoff greater that that discharged prior
to redevelopment shall require detention. Said detention facilities shall, at a
minimum, provide for the increased volume of runoff generated by the
redevelopment (preferably for runoff from the whole development), unless the
original detention facility was designed for the proposed new redevelopment.
(2013 Code, § 28-138A)
   (E)   If a developer can demonstrate that detention facilities are
unfeasible to construct, the city may grant exception to the detention
requirement and said developer shall pay a fee in lieu of constructing storm
water detention facilities. The fee shall be based on the type of development/
zoning, the runoff coefficient set by the city and a fee of $15,000 per acre
prorated by the runoff coefficient. The fee is calculated as follows: category
runoff coefficient:
      (1)   Low-density and single- and two-family residential: $0.40, $6,000
per acre or fraction thereof to be developed;
      (2)   Medium-high-density and multi-family residential: $0.80, $12,000
per acre or fraction thereof to be developed;
      (3)   Commercial: $0.90, $13,500 per acre or fraction thereof to be
developed; and
      (4)   Industrial: $0.80, $12,000 per acre or fraction thereof to be
developed.
(2013 Code, § 28-138B)
   (F)   All new medium- and high-density residential, commercial or industrial
development shall be required to have storm water detention, unless a building
permit was issued prior to this chapter’s passage and publication. Low-density
single- and two-family residential subdivisions of four lots or more shall also
have detention requirements unless a preliminary plat was approved by the City
Council prior to passage and publication of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-139)
(Ord. 14746, passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 14918, passed 4-22-2013)
CHAPTER 54: ILLICIT DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Section
   
54.001   Purpose
   
54.002   Definitions
   
54.003   Allowable non-storm water
   
54.004   Illicit discharges prohibited
   
54.005   Illicit connections prohibited
   
54.006   Industrial discharges
   
54.007   Illicit discharge detection and reporting; cost recovery
   
54.008   Suspension of access to city’s storm sewer system
   
54.009   Watercourse protection
   
54.010   Appeal
 
   
54.999   Penalty
§ 54.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-storm water
discharges to the city’s separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent
practicable, as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city’s separate storm sewer
system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
(2013 Code, § 28-140) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter, which occurs
by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL CONNECTION. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain
system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
city’s separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in §
54.003 of this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits, as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4. Any facility designed or used
for collecting or conveying storm water or both, including inlets, catch
basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural storm water controls
or other drainage structures which are owned or maintained by the city.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) PERMIT. A permit issued by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters
of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group
or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects or
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical,
chemical or biological properties, including change in color, turbidity or odor
of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid or other
substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or
render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health,
safety or welfare.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. One or more persons that control or are in possession of
or own property. RESPONSIBLE PARTIES shall be jointly and severally responsible
for compliance with this chapter and jointly and severally liable for any
illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or owned. For
purposes of this chapter, “property” includes, but is not limited to, real
estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any kind located upon, under or
above the real estate.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF or STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
   STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL. A structural storm water management facility
or device that controls storm water runoff and changes the characteristics of
that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period
of release or the velocity of flow.
(2013 Code, § 28-141) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.003 ALLOWABLE NON-STORM WATER.
   Discharges from firefighting activities, fire hydrant flushings, potable
water sources, waterline flushings, uncontaminated ground water, foundation or
footing drains, springs, riparian habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air
conditioning condensate, exterior building wash water when no detergents or
other surfactants are used and pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents or other
surfactants are used.
(2013 Code, § 28-142) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.004 ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to relieve a responsible party
subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or any other federal,
state or city permit, statute, ordinance or rule, from any obligation imposed
by such permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any such obligation is greater
than any obligation imposed by this chapter.
   (B)   Any discharge into the city’s storm sewer system prohibited by the
city’s MS4 permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
shall be deemed an “illicit discharge” in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on a
construction site not otherwise subject to Ch. 55 of this code of ordinances or
sediment pollution entering a municipal storm sewer that causes a water quality
violation as determined by the DNR shall be deemed an illicit discharge in
violation of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-143) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.005 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any
illicit connection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
(2013 Code, § 28-144) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.006 INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any responsible party subject an industrial NPDES discharge permit
issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
   (B)   Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Enforcement Officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer
system authorized by said permit.
(2013 Code, § 28-145) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.007 ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   All detection activities permitted under this chapter shall be
conducted by the Superintendent of Water Pollution Control, or his or her
designee, hereinbefore and after referred to as the “Enforcement Officer”.
   (B)   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge or circumstances
which may cause an illicit discharge, detected or undetected by the city.
   (C)   Every responsible party has a duty to monitor conditions on property
owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges and to report to
the Enforcement Officer illicit discharges, which the responsible party knows
or should have known to have occurred. Failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter is a violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible
party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge, the
responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment and clean-up of such discharge at the responsible
party’s sole cost.
   (E)   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the
responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
   (F)   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
   (G)   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone
or facsimile or email to the Enforcement Officer immediately, but in any event
within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by phone
shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or emailed to the
Enforcement Officer within 24 hours of the personal or phone notice.
   (H)   Any person or entity shall also report to the city any illicit
discharge or circumstances which such person or entity reasonably believes pose
a risk of an illicit discharge.
   (I)   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous provisions of this
section, or otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an
actual or imminent illicit discharge, the Enforcement Officer shall conduct an
inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall
provide to the responsible party, and any third party reporter, a written
report of the conditions which may cause or which have already caused an
illicit discharge. The responsible party shall immediately commence corrective
action or remediation and shall complete such corrective action or remediation
within 24 hours.
   (J)   The Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to
determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party has security
measures that require identification and clearance before entry to its property
or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access by the Enforcement Officer. By way of specification, but not
limitation:
      (1)   A responsible party shall allow the Enforcement Officer ready
access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual or imminent
illicit discharge and for the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law;
      (2)   The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to set up on any
property such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Enforcement
Officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual or
imminent illicit discharge; and
      (3)   The Enforcement Officer shall have the right to require any
responsible party at the responsible party’s sole expense to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the Enforcement Officer as
the Enforcement Officer directs. The sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense. All devices shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   (K)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
responsible party at the written or oral order of the Enforcement Officer and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party.
   (L)   An unreasonable delay in allowing the Enforcement Officer access to a
property is a violation of this chapter.
   (M)   If the Enforcement Officer has been refused access to any part of the
property from an illicit connection or illicit discharge, or both to a
municipal storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect or sample, or both as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Enforcement Officer may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (N)   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has
occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be recovered from the responsible party. The
Enforcement Officer shall submit an invoice to the responsible party reflecting
the actual costs and wages and expenses incurred by the city for the
enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced under this
chapter within 30 days of billing shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-146) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007; Ord. 14870, passed 3-8-
2010)
§ 54.008 SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Emergency suspension. The Enforcement Officer may, without prior
notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such emergency
suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit discharge. If
the responsible party fails to immediately comply with an emergency suspension
order, the Enforcement Officer shall take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize the illicit discharge. All costs of such action shall be
recovered from the responsible party for the property identified as the source
of the illicit discharge.
   (B)   Non-emergency suspension. If the Enforcement Officer detects or is
informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge, but such
illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of storm
sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce the
potential illicit discharge, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the
responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and
the time and date of such suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the
property shall be sufficient notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances
shall avoid a violation of this chapter; provided that, no illicit discharge
occurs. In the alternative, the responsible party may request a meeting with
the Enforcement Officer for the purpose of presenting information which the
responsible party believes will show that remediation is unnecessary and, if
the Enforcement Officer finds such information is satisfactory, the Enforcement
Officer may rescind or modify the notice of suspension. If the Enforcement
Officer finds such information unsatisfactory, the Enforcement Officer shall
issue a final written order of suspension including the date and time of
suspension and such order may be appealed as provided in this chapter. Any
physical action to reinstate storm sewer system access to property subject to
such order prior to obtaining a court order of relief shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. An order of suspension shall not preclude charging
the responsible party with a municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or
taking any other enforcement action permitted by law.
(2013 Code, § 28-147) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.009 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash, debris,
grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate or significantly alter the quality or quantity of water flowing
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(2013 Code, § 28-148) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.010 APPEAL.
   (A)   Administrative decisions by city staff and enforcement actions of the
Enforcement Officer may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council
pursuant to the following rules.
      (1)   The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within five
business days of the decision or enforcement action.
      (2)   The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed
from, the errors allegedly made by the Enforcement Officer giving rise to the
appeal, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of all
witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant
intends to introduce at the hearing and the relief requested.
      (3)   The Enforcement Officer shall specify in writing the reasons for
the enforcement action, a written summary of all oral and written testimony the
Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names
and addresses of all witnesses the Enforcement Officer intends to call and
copies of all documents the Enforcement Officer intends to introduce at the
hearing.
      (4)   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant and the Enforcement
Officer by ordinary mail, and shall give public notice in accordance with
I.C.A. Ch. 21 of the date, time and place for the regular or special meeting of
the City Council at which the hearing on the appeal shall occur. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date not less than four, nor more than 20, days after
the filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard
of proof to be applied, shall be the same as provided by I.C.A. Ch. 17A. The
applicant may be represented by counsel at the applicant’s expense. The
Enforcement Officer may be represented by the City Attorney or by an attorney
designated by the City Council at city expense.
   (B)   The decision of the City Council shall be rendered in writing and may
be appealed to the state’s District Court.
(2013 Code, § 28-150) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement
action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its
attorney’s fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of I.C.A. § 364.22, pursuant to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
Enforcement Officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.
(2013 Code, § 28-149) (Ord. 14800, passed 2-26-2007)
CHAPTER 55: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL FOR CONSTRUCTION SITES
Section
   
55.001   General
   
55.002   Definitions
   
55.003   Major erosion control permit required
   
55.004   Minor erosion control permit required
   
55.005   Permit renewals
   
55.006   Filling requirements
   
55.007   SWPPP required; requirements; review and approval
   
55.008   Sites covered by state’s DNR General Permit No. 2
   
55.009   Inspection, notice to comply and notice of violation
   
55.010   Powers and authority for inspection
   
55.011   Repair and clean-up of damage
   
55.012   Appeals
   
55.013   Fees established
 
   
55.999   Penalty
§ 55.001 GENERAL.
   (A)   Soil erosion contributes to the impairment of drainageways, increases
road and storm sewer maintenance costs, contributes to the destruction and
obstruction to traveled roadways creating a potential hazard for vehicular
traffic, and contributes to contamination and degradation of land surfaces and
streams, flooding and dusty conditions. This chapter establishes requirements
in an effort to control erosion and sediment transport.
   (B)   Owners of certain construction sites are required, under rules
contained in General Permit No. 2, Storm Water Discharge Associated with
Industrial Activity for Construction Activities (“General Permit No. 2”), to
obtain coverage through the state’s DNR under that permit.
   (C)   Under its Municipal Storm Water National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System permit, which permit is on file at the offices of the City
Clerk and the City Engineer and is available for public inspection during
regular office hours, the city is required to regulate, treat and control storm
water discharges into the city’s storm water drainage system. One provision of
that permit requires the city to enforce the requirements of General Permit No.
2 jointly with the state’s DNR.
   (D)   General Permit No. 2 and the document entitled Summary Guidance, A
Brief Guide to Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management
Practices, issued and administered by the state’s DNR, are hereby adopted and
by reference made part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Any act
these documents require or prohibit, is required or prohibited by this section.
Any future amendments, revisions or modifications to these documents,
incorporated herein, are intended to be made a part of this section.
   (E)   This chapter also establishes requirements for grading, filling, fill
material and for obtaining erosion control permits. These requirements include
use of suitable fill material, stable slope construction, proper site drainage
and usability of public and private easements.
   (F)   Except as provided in §
55.004 of this chapter, no person shall engage in land-disturbing activities
within the city unless they have received an erosion control permit from the
city.
(2013 Code, § 28-160) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008) Penalty, see §
55.999
§ 55.002 DEFINITIONS.
   Words using the present tense shall include the future; the singular shall
include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; the masculine gender
shall include the feminine; the term “shall” is always mandatory, and the term
“may” is permissive. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership, or
proprietor of land to undergo land-disturbing activities.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Director of Community Development, or Building Trades
Manager, or their designee.
   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SPECIALIST. A specialist
in the area of soil erosion and sediment control as certified by the Soil and
Water Conservation Society and the International Erosion Control Association.
   CITY. The City of Marshalltown, Iowa.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Marshalltown, Iowa.
   CITY ENGINEER. The official holding the position established by §
31.030 of this code of ordinances or designee.
   CIVIL ENGINEER. A professional engineer licensed in the state to practice
civil engineering.
   CLEARING AND GRUBBING. Removal of unwanted growth, in the form of trees,
wood, shrubs, brush or stumps on a site.
   DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. A licensed civil engineer or certified professional
erosion and sediment control specialist.
   DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL. The 2008 edition of the Iowa Statewide Urban Design
Standards for Public Improvements (SUDAS).
   DEVELOPMENT. The alteration of land from its existing state.
   DISTURBED AREA. The part of a site on which land-disturbing activities take
place. All land area that is to be disturbed at any time during the project is
to be counted in determining the disturbed area, even if part of the land will
be stabilized before another part is disturbed.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice,
gravity or other geological, natural or human-made agents.
   EROSION CONTROL OFFICER. The City Engineer, Building Official or designee.
   EROSION CONTROL PERMIT. A major erosion control permit or a minor erosion
control permit.
   FILLING. Placing materials to effectively change the site contours. This
shall include placing materials from the site itself or from off site.
   FILL MATERIAL. Soil, stone, rock, brick, portland cement or asphaltic
concrete or sand.
   FILL SITE. Land upon which fill materials are placed and which placement
does not require a sanitary disposal permit issued by the state.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All land-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed, and that a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70%
for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization measures have
been employed.
   GENERAL PERMIT NO 2. General Permit No. 2, Storm Water Discharge Associated
with Industrial Activity for Construction Activities, as authored and
administered by the state’s DNR.
   IOWA DNR. The Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES. Clearing, grading, excavating, filling or
removal of vegetation, paving or buildings, exposing earthen material on a
site.
   MAJOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city to engage in land-
disturbing activities on a site with one acre or greater disturbed area.
   MINOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city to engage in land-
disturbing activities on a site of greater than one-quarter acre and less than
one acre of disturbed area.
   ORDINANCE. This chapter.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. One or more persons who have applied for or hold a city
erosion control permit, or who own, control or perform work on a site.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both natural and human-made, that is in
suspension, has been transported or has been moved from its origin by air,
water, gravity or ice and has been deposited by the action of water or wind.
   SITE. Property where land-disturbing activities take place.
   STABILIZATION or STABILIZED. Vegetative cover with a density of 70% has been
established, or equivalent stabilization measures have been employed.
   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The 2008 edition of the Iowa Statewide Urban
Standard Specifications For Public Improvements (SUDAS).
   STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All human-made facilities and structures and
all natural watercourses that are owned by the city, or that are within a
drainage easement owned by the city, and that are used for collection, storage,
treatment and conveyance of storm water from any area, through any area. This
includes without limitation all storm water facilities, canals, creeks, curb
and gutter, dams, ditches, flood walls, flumes, gulches, gullies, levees,
ravines, siphons, streams, streets and swales. For the purpose of illicit
discharge regulation, any discharge to an area tributary to the STORM WATER
DRAINAGE SYSTEM shall be treated as a discharge to the STORM WATER DRAINAGE
SYSTEM. The STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM does not include the Iowa River.
   STORM WATER FACILITIES. Anything built or used for the control of storm
water, including without limitation catch basins, channels, culverts, detention
basins, energy dissipation structures, inlets, manholes, outlets, pipes and
other conduits, retention basins and roadways and gutters.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document conforming to the
requirements therefor contained in General Permit No. 2 and this chapter,
prepared and certified by a design professional, as defined herein.
   SWPPP. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
(2013 Code, § 28-161) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.003 MAJOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Sites or common plans of development or sale that will result in a
total disturbed area of one or more acres shall obtain a major erosion control
permit prior to any land-disturbing activities.
      (2)   All major erosion control permits shall be issued by the city’s
Engineering Department upon approval of a completed application for erosion
control permit on a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed
by the title holder of the site, together with the applicant, if different from
the title holder.
      (3)   Sites required to obtain an erosion control permit shall comply
with §
55.008 of this chapter, requirements for sites covered by the state’s DNR
General Permit No. 2, herein.
      (4)   A major erosion control permit application shall include the
following:
         (a)   A completed application for erosion control permit on a form
provided by the city’s Engineering Department; and
         (b)   SWPPP conforming to the requirements of this chapter, and the
requirements of General Permit No 2. If a SWPPP for the site has previously
been submitted to the city and has not been modified, the applicant shall
submit a signed and dated statement that the SWPPP has not been modified, in
which case the SWPPP need not be resubmitted.
   (B)   Payment of the permit fee. The permittee shall provide the Erosion
Control Officer with all material submitted as part of a notice of
discontinuation when such a notice is filed with the state’s DNR.
(2013 Code, § 28-162) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.004 MINOR EROSION CONTROL PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Sites or common plans of development or sale that will result in a
disturbed area of greater than one-quarter of an acre, but less than one acre,
shall obtain a minor erosion control permit prior to any land-disturbing
activity, except:
         (a)   Filling or construction within floodplain limits as established
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and in Ch. 158 of this code of
ordinances will require a separate additional permit under that ordinance, in
addition to the permits required by this chapter; and
         (b)   For work that is specifically covered by a city demolition
permit, building permit, NPDES permit or approved plan of improvements
containing a SWPPP, a minor erosion control permit is not required. However,
site filling and grading done pursuant to these approved permits and plans
shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
         (a)   Crop production activities;
         (b)   Cemetery graves;
         (c)   Emergencies posing an immediate danger to life or property or
substantial flood or fire hazards;
         (d)   Total fill quantity of less than 25 cubic yards in a 12-month
time period; and
         (e)   Public improvements.
   (B)   Issuance.
      (1)   All minor erosion control permits shall be issued by the city’s
Building Official upon approval of a completed application for erosion control
permit on a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the
title holder(s) of the site, together with the applicant, if different from the
title holder(s).
      (2)   A minor erosion control permit application shall include the
following:
         (a)   A completed application for erosion control permit on a form
provided by the city; and
         (b)   A dimensioned drawing including the following:
            1.   Property address and legal description;
            2.   Property lines and any existing easements of record;
            3.   Limits of area of land-disturbing activities;
            4.   Existing and proposed ground elevations (two-foot maximum
interval);
            5.   A SWPPP if required under §
55.007(A) of this chapter; and
            6.   Other information as required by the city’s Building Official
or Engineer.
(2013 Code, § 28-163) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.005 PERMIT RENEWALS.
   (A)   Erosion control permits shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance and may be renewed as provided for herein.
   (B)   A renewal application shall include the following:
      (1)   A completed application for erosion control permit renewal on a
form provided by the city;
      (2)   Payment of the renewal fee; and
      (3)   Any information required in §§
55.003 (for a major permit) or
55.004 (for a minor permit) if it has changed. A major permit renewal shall
include a certification by the design professional (as defined herein) that all
changed conditions are included in the renewal application.
   (C)   The city shall revoke an erosion control permit or decline renewal if
unacceptable materials are being deposited at the site, or if the permittee has
failed to comply with any of the regulations set forth in this chapter, or any
requirement of law, statute or regulation.
(2013 Code, § 28-164) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.006 FILLING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Clearing and grubbing shall be performed according to Part 3 of §
2010 of the Standard Specifications, except as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Fill material shall be placed according to the SWPPP as accepted by
the city.
      (3)   Interim filling during construction shall be placed in a safe
manner. Slope stabilization, inspection and maintenance of erosion control and
soil stabilization where work has been suspended shall be according to the
Design Standards Manual.
      (4)   Finish grading shall be according to Part 3 of § 2010 of the
Standard Specifications.
      (5)   Finish slopes shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) ratio on any
slope facing and terminating within 15 feet of a property line.
   (B)   Unacceptable fill materials.
      (1)   Fill materials shall not include hazardous waste, synthetic
material, metal and organic material other than natural topsoil incidental to
excavation, except as noted below. Concrete, brick, tile and other manufactured
inert material shall not be greater than 18 inches in its greatest dimension.
Asphalt paving material shall not be used for bank stabilization or where the
final location will be below the known water table.
      (2)   Trees may be buried within the site they originate from; provided,
they are not buried within structural footprints or in earthwork providing
structural support, such as for building foundations and roadways. Trees shall
not be placed in the trench backfill for sewers, culverts and other underground
utilities. Trees shall not be imported on-site from off-site for use as fill.
(2013 Code, § 28-165) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.007 SWPPP REQUIRED; REQUIREMENTS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   (1)   Sites with land-disturbing activities shall fall into one of two
categories as determined by the City Engineer as set forth herein below.
         (a)   Sites with a disturbed area less than one acre shall not require
submittal of a SWPPP. However, the owner of a site is required to plan and
implement erosion control measures as described in the brochure Erosion Control
for Small Site Development. The City Engineering and Building Departments shall
make this brochure available. The City Engineer may require an acceptable SWPPP
for sites with a disturbed area less than one acre in cases warranted by site
conditions. Such site conditions may include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Site contains slopes of 9% or greater;
            2.   Site is adjacent to a water body or open drainage channel; and
            3.   The site has been identified as having severe erosion or as
creating a significant impact on adjacent properties, waterbodies or open
drainage channels due to erosion and sediment deposition.
         (b)   Sites with a disturbed area greater than or equal to one acre
shall require an acceptable SWPPP meeting the requirements of this chapter,
certified by a design professional and approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The SWPPP must be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior
to the commencement of land-disturbing activities.
      (3)   The city’s acceptance of a SWPPP does not constitute approval of
Design Standards Manual exceptions unless specifically requested and approved
by the City Engineer.
(2013 Code, § 28-166)
   (B)   (1)   Every SWPPP submitted to the city in support of an application
for a major erosion control permit:
         (a)   Shall contain complete 24-hour contact information for the site
owner and the person in responsible charge of providing and maintaining
sedimentation and erosion control for the site. The permittee shall inform the
Erosion Control Officer within seven calendar days of any change in this
contact information;
         (b)   Shall comply with all current minimum mandatory requirements for
SWPPPs promulgated by the state’s DNR in connection with General Permit No. 2,
including those published as Summary Guidance for General Permit No. 2 by the
state’s DNR. The City Engineer may develop policies modifying these
requirements for sites with a disturbed area less than one acre;
         (c)   Shall comply with all other applicable state or federal permit
requirements in existence at the time of application;
         (d)   Shall include a drainage plan prepared according to the Design
Standards Manual. The drainage plan shall be accompanied by a drainage report
prepared according to Ch. 53 of this code of ordinances. This code shall be
available in the city’s Engineering Department. The drainage report shall at a
minimum demonstrate the design of proposed grading, erosion and sediment
control if constructed per plan is not expected to adversely impact adjacent
properties;
         (e)   Shall be prepared by a design professional, as defined herein;
and
         (f)   Shall include within the SWPPP a signed and dated certification
by the person preparing the SWPPP that the SWPPP complies with all requirements
of this section.
      (2)   The SWPPP shall be modified by a design professional (as defined
herein) as required in General Permit No. 2. Any modification of a SWPPP shall
meet the requirements above.
(2013 Code, § 28-167)
   (C)   (1)   The applicant shall submit a SWPPP for the site, meeting the
requirements established in the Design Standards Manual, to the City Engineer
for review and approval, as follows.
         (a)   The City Engineer shall review the submittal for compliance with
the requirements of a SWPPP as set forth in the Design Standards Manual.
Following the review, the City Engineer may return comments to the design
professional.
         (b)   Following receipt of comments from the City Engineer, the
applicant shall provide a revised submittal to the City Engineer in accordance
with any requested revisions.
      (2)   The City Engineer or Building Official may require supporting
documentation as needed to demonstrate conformance with these requirements.
Issuance of an erosion control permit may be delayed pending receipt of the
documentation.
      (3)   If the submittal is complete, and meets the requirements as set
forth herein, the City Engineer shall approve the plan.
(2013 Code, § 28-168)
(Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.008 SITES COVERED BY STATE’S DNR GENERAL PERMIT NO. 2.
   (A)   The city shall not allow any land-disturbing activity on a site for
which coverage under General Permit No. 2 is required, nor shall the city issue
any permit, authorization or license allowing such activity, until the site
owner has obtained coverage for the site under General Permit No. 2 from the
state’s DNR.
   (B)   Any responsible party who is required to obtain, or has obtained,
coverage under General Permit No. 2 shall comply with all the requirements of
General Permit No. 2. Failure to do so is a violation of this section.
   (C)   Completion of work shown in a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
submitted under the provisions of General Permit No. 2 is a requirement of
General Permit No. 2 and failure to complete such work is a violation of this
section.
   (D)   For sites covered under General Permit No. 2 where the ownership
changes, the Enforcement Officer must be notified of the title transfer within
30 days, except in the case of single-lot sales, which shall be recorded on the
SWPPP. The new owner shall be subject to all terms and conditions of the
erosion control permit. A copy of the notice of transfer that was sent to the
Enforcement Officer shall be included in the SWPPP. For sites that are part of
a larger common plan of development such as a housing or commercial development
project, if a permittee transfers ownership of all or any part of property
subject to an erosion control permit, both the permittee and transferee shall
be responsible for compliance with the provisions of General Permit No. 2 and
the erosion control permit for that portion of the project which as been
transferred including when the transferred property is less than one acre in
area. If the new owner agrees in writing to be solely responsible for
compliance with the provisions of General Permit No. 2 and the erosion control
permit for the property which has been transferred, then the existing permittee
shall be relieved of responsibility for compliance with General Permit No. 2
and the erosion control permit for the transferred property, from and after the
date the transfer of responsibility is attached to the SWPPP.
(2013 Code, § 28-169) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.009 INSPECTION, NOTICE TO COMPLY AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Erosion Control Officer may inspect the site in response to
reports from third parties or at other times, at the Erosion Control Officer’s
discretion.
   (B)   The Erosion Control Officer may issue a notice to comply to the
responsible party or parties, describing any problems and specifying a date and
time by which compliance must be achieved.
   (C)   The Erosion Control Officer may modify a notice to comply and may
authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified date and time by which
compliance must be achieved.
   (D)   Failure to achieve compliance by the specified date and time is a
violation of this section.
   (E)   The Erosion Control Officer shall, upon determination of any violation
of this section, issue a notice of violation in writing to the responsible
party or parties, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it.
   (F)   The notice of violation may:
      (1)   Order the discontinuance of any illegal work, specifying a date and
time for such discontinuance;
      (2)   Require the repair and clean-up of any damage done due to failure
to comply with General Permit No. 2, specifying a date and time for completion
of repair and clean-up;
      (3)   Order the withholding of any building or occupancy permits for the
site; and
      (4)   Order the discontinuance of any or all work at the site, including
at the Erosion Control Officer’s discretion work not directly related to the
cause and prevention of erosion and sedimentation, except work necessary to
achieve compliance and to repair and clean up damage, specifying a date and
time for such discontinuance to commence and conditions for such discontinuance
to cease.
   (G)   Failure to comply with any order in a notice of violation is an
additional violation. Each day of such failure constitutes a separate
violation.
   (H)   The Erosion Control Officer may modify a notice of violation and may
authorize, in writing, an extension to the specified dates and times therein.
   (I)   The notice of violation shall, where necessary or appropriate,
recommend to the City Attorney the institution of legal or equitable actions
that may be required for the enforcement of this section.
   (J)   Communication to a responsible party’s employee, partner, attorney,
agent, contractor or subcontractor shall be regarded as communication to the
responsible party for the purpose of this section.
   (K)   Communication to one responsible party shall be regarded as
communication to each responsible party for the purpose of this section.
(2013 Code, § 28-170) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.010 POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   The City Engineer or Building Official and authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
applicant, owner or titleholder shall be deemed to have consented to such entry
by submission of an application for any permit or plan contemplated in this
chapter. Barring or delaying such inspection is a violation of this section.
   (B)   The Erosion Control Officer shall have access to and be able to copy
any records that must be kept under the conditions of General Permit No. 2
within three business hours, where a business hour is any hour between 8:00
a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on a non-holiday weekday.
(2013 Code, § 28-171) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.011 REPAIR AND CLEAN-UP OF DAMAGE.
   (A)   For any site, whether or not covered by an erosion control permit or
other storm water discharge permit, the city may clean up eroded sediment or
tracked soil deposited on public property if:
      (1)   Corrective action has not been completed within 24 hours or within
an extended deadline granted in writing by the city; or
      (2)   In the judgment of the City Engineer, damage to the environment is
ongoing and prompt corrective action would be intended to reduce such damage.
   (B)   If the city cleans up such material deposited off site, the City
Engineer will invoice the responsible party or parties for the city’s actual
costs including overhead, which may be recorded as an assessment against the
property and constitute a lien thereon.
   (C)   Failure to pay an invoice under this section within 30 days shall
constitute a violation of this section.
(2013 Code, § 28-172) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.012 APPEALS.
   (A)   Anyone claiming to be aggrieved by any determination made by the
Erosion Control Officer may within 20 days of the date of such determination
appeal to the City Manager or designee and in writing state his or her reasons
for requesting such order to be rescinded or modified.
   (B)   The City Manager or designee shall review the determination of the
Erosion Control Officer and, if reasonable grounds exist, shall modify,
withdraw or order compliance with said determination.
   (C)   Anyone claiming to be aggrieved by the determination made by the City
Manager or designee shall have such rights of appeal as provided by the law.
(2013 Code, § 28-174) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.013 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The City Council may establish fees by resolution for permit
applications, permit renewal applications, inspections and for the review and
processing of documents necessitated by this chapter.
   (B)   When such fees are established, a submittal shall not be considered
unless the appropriate fee has been submitted to the city.
(2013 Code, § 28-175) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
§ 55.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil
action including an action for injunctive relief.
   (B)   In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city
shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and costs from a person who is
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
   (C)   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
municipal infraction within the meaning of I.C.A. § 364.22, pursuant to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 28-173) (Ord. 14824, passed 2-11-2008)
CHAPTER 56: POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
56.001   Title
   
56.002   Purpose
   
56.003   Definitions
   
56.004   Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan
   
56.005   Maintenance
   
56.006   Inspections
   
56.007   Corrective action by city
   
56.008   Responsibility
   
56.009   Appeal
   
56.010   Statewide urban design and specifications and state’s Storm Water
Management Manual
 
   
56.999   Penalty
§ 56.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Marshalltown Post-Construction Storm
Water Management Ordinance” and may be cited as such and will be referred to
herein as “this chapter”.
(2013 Code, § 28-201) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The U.S. EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program administered by the state’s Department of Natural Resources
(IDNR) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and environmental
impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of storm
water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) (MS4 permit). The city
is subject to the program and is required to obtain, and has obtained, an MS4
permit. The city’s MS4 permit is on file at the office of the City Clerk and is
available for public inspection during regular office hours.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the MS4 permit
requirements and establish a set of water quality and quantity policies
applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the
regulation of storm water runoff for the purpose of protecting local water
resources from degradation. The regulation of storm water runoff discharged
from land development and other construction activities in order to control and
minimize increases in storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion,
stream channel erosion and non-point source pollution associated with storm
water runoff, is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public
health and safety.
(2013 Code, § 28-202) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person, firm or entity applying for a permit or development
approval to develop, grade or construct any improvement within the corporate
limits of the city.
   APPROVAL. Formal, written consent by the City Council, or authorized
representative of the city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practice, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. Common BMPs are described
in the Iowa Storm Water Management Manual and SUDAS. The BMPs covered by are
not meant to be a comprehensive list of acceptable BMPs.
   DRAINAGE DETENTION OR OVERLAND FLOWAGE EASEMENT. A legal right granted by a
land owner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for storm water
management.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). The program for
issuing, modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits
under the Clean Water Act (§§ 301, 318, 402 and 405) and United States Code of
Federal Regulations (33 C.F.R. parts 1317, 1328, 1342 and 1345).
   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. A set of plans and
specifications approved by the City Council during the approval of the site
plan, construction drawing, plat that defines the system of BMPs that are to be
constructed and maintained on the site.
   PROPERTY. Land located in the city, whether or not improved with buildings
or other structures.
   PROPERTY OWNER. A person who alone or with another person or other persons,
holds the legal title to property; except, however, where property has been
sold on contract to a person who has the present right to possess the property
and the contract has been filed for record in the construct any improvement
within the corporate limits of the city.
   REGIONAL DETENTION FACILITY. A wet or dry detention basin or basins which
are designed to accept storm water runoff from two or more sites that are
required to obtain a NPDES General Permit No. 2 and that otherwise complies
with all city, state or federal permit requirements as they apply to storm
water management requirements for those sites.
   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan as defined in the
state’s NPDES storm water general permit.
   SUDAS. The current Standard Urban Design and Specifications Manual, as
locally amended, that specifies the storm water guidelines and storm water
controls deemed by SUDAS to meet the goals of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agencies NPDES permit program administered by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources.
(2013 Code, § 28-203) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.004 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Every property owner or applicant required to have coverage under
NPDES General Permit No. 2 shall design, install and maintain Post-Construction
Storm Water Management Plan (PCSWMP) facilities as approved by the City Council
during the site plan, construction drawing or platting process.
   (B)   A state licensed professional engineer or landscape architect shall
design PCSWMP facilities in conformance with the guidelines established in the
Iowa Storm Water Management Manual and SUDAS. PCSWMP facilities shall be
designed with appropriate BMPs, such as detention and retention basins, grass
swales, buffer strips, bio-retention and other similar types of infiltration
basins and riparian areas, that will convey drainage through the property to
one or more treatment areas such that no development shall cause downstream
property owners, watercourses, channels or conduits to receive storm water
runoff from the proposed development site at a flow greater than the rate
allowed.
   (C)   (1)   In order to ensure that the PCSWMP facilities are constructed in
accordance with the approved design, the property owner or applicant shall
provide to the city an as-built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as
well as certification that the approved facilities were installed and properly
working.
      (2)   The as-built plan shall be completed by a state licensed
professional engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the city prior to
the acceptance of any improvements or issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   At the discretion of the city, the property owner or applicant may
satisfy the PCSWMP requirements by ensuring the conveyance of storm water
discharge from the property to a regional detention facility.
(2013 Code, § 28-204) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.005 MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be the property owner’s duty to ensure that the site is
periodically inspected and maintained in accordance with the approved Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Plan (PCSWMP). Periodic inspections shall
be completed as needed and in no case less than one time per calendar year.
Inspections shall be documented and shall be retained for at least three years.
Copies of the inspection documentation shall be made available to the city upon
request.
(2013 Code, § 28-205) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.006 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject
to regulation as often and as necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter, after the city has first made a reasonable attempt to contact the
property owner or representative of the owner.
   (B)   The city may conduct site visits at any time to determine compliance
with the approved Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan (PCSWMP).
Additionally, the city may request that a property owner verify, through the
preparation of an as-built plan completed by a state licensed professional
engineer or landscape architect, that the PCSWMP facilities contain appropriate
capacities and operational characteristics as originally designed and approved.
   (C)   In the event that a site is found not to be in compliance with the
PCSWMP, the city will communicate in writing, with the property owner a list of
deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of non-compliance. The
property owner shall have 14 days from the date of notice to provide a written
response outlining the steps and implementation timelines for corrective
action. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of notice to
complete the corrective action necessary to bring the site back into compliance
with the approved PCSWMP.
   (D)   Following the review of the property owner’s written response, if
extenuating circumstances exist which makes implementation of the necessary
corrective action difficult to complete within the specified time period, the
city may grant, at its sole discretion, a reasonable extension of time to
complete the corrective action.
   (E)   Failure to allow access to the property, provide a written response or
undertake corrective action shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 28-206) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009) Penalty, see §
56.999
§ 56.007 CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY.
   If the property owner fails to take corrective action in the time period
prescribed in §
56.006 of this chapter, the city may do so by its own crews or by persons under
its hire and assess against the property owner the city’s cost therefor. Said
costs shall include the salaries and benefits earned by city employees during
such corrective action, a charge for city machinery used and such other costs
and expenses as the city actually incurred. To the extent allowed by state law,
such costs and expenses may be assessed against the property owner and
collected in the same manner as a property tax.
(2013 Code, § 28-207) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.008 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The failure of city officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to impose other additional conditions or requirements, or to
deny or revoke permits or approvals, or to stop work in violation of this
chapter shall not relieve the property owners of the consequences of their
actions or inactions or result in the city, its officers or agents being liable
therefore or on account thereof. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter,
every applicant bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with the
NPDES General Permit No. 2 and any other requirements of the state or federal
law or administrative rule.
(2013 Code, § 28-208) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.009 APPEAL.
   Any person affected by a decision of the city’s appointed construction
official or Public Works Director may request in writing a hearing on such
decision within five days of receipt of notification of deficiencies or non-
compliance. The request shall be made to the City Administrator who shall
conduct the hearing or who shall designate a Hearing Officer.
(2013 Code, § 28-210) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.010 STATEWIDE URBAN DESIGN AND SPECIFICATIONS AND STATE’S STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT MANUAL.
   The city adopts the Iowa Storm Water Management Manual.
(2013 Code, § 28-211) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009)
§ 56.999 PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any
particular provision or section, any person violating any provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to a municipal infraction. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and
continues to exist constitutes a separate offense and by punished by a penalty
as provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 28-209) (Ord. 14853, passed 2-23-2009; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
CHAPTER 57: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
57.001   Removal of snow and ice; depositing on private drive, parking space or
in front of private property prohibited
   
57.002   Responsibility for maintenance
   
57.003   Liability of abutting property owners for failure to maintain
   
57.004   Periods of amortization set for public improvements
Excavations and Driveways
   
57.015   Excavation permit required
   
57.016   Entrance permit required
   
57.017   Tunneling permit required
   
57.018   Transfer of permit prohibited
   
57.019   Cutting pavement and refilling excavation
   
57.020   Guarding excavations
   
57.021   Permit application
   
57.022   Permit qualifications
   
57.023   Bond
   
57.024   Authority of city to cancel permit
Sidewalks
   
57.035   Purpose
   
57.036   Definitions
   
57.037   City may order repairs
   
57.038   Sidewalk construction ordered
   
57.039   New sidewalks required
   
57.040   Deferments of new sidewalk construction
   
57.041   Deferment expiration and repeal
   
57.042   Permit required
   
57.043   Sidewalk standards
   
57.044   Location
   
57.045   Barricades and warning lights
   
57.046   Failure to repair or barricade
   
57.047   Encroaching steps
   
57.048   Openings and enclosures
   
57.049   Interference with sidewalk improvements
   
57.050   Fires or fuels on sidewalks
   
57.051   Defacing
   
57.052   Debris on sidewalks
   
57.053   Authority of city to repair broken, defective sidewalks; statement of
costs
   
57.054   Costs of repairs as tax; assessments; objections
   
57.055   Compliance required
 
   
57.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 57.001 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE; DEPOSITING ON PRIVATE DRIVE, PARKING SPACE OR
IN FRONT OF PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The abutting property owner is required to remove all accumulations of
snow and ice from public sidewalks located upon street and alley terraces and
from the public sidewalks located upon his, her or their privately-owned
property.
(2013 Code, § 26-1)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to push, pile, deposit or leave
deposited any snow or frozen materials removed from any private drive or
private parking area upon any public street or thoroughfare or upon or in front
of the private property or the private drive of another.
(2013 Code, § 26-3)
(Ord. 23, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8775, passed 2-28-1955; Ord. 10717, passed 3-
23-1965; Ord. 14766, passed 8-8-2005; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-2017) Penalty,
see §
57.999
§ 57.002 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The owner of any lot or parcel thereof abutting any sidewalk on the city
streets in the city shall maintain said sidewalk in state of good repair, free
from cracks, holes and unevenness to that the sidewalk does not constitute a
safety hazard. A state of sidewalk disrepair is hereby declared a public
nuisance. The owner of any lot or parcels who fails to repair said sidewalk
shall be liable to any person injured as a result of such failure and shall
further save, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any
claim arising out of the failure to maintain said sidewalk.
(2013 Code, § 26-4) (Ord. 14403, passed 12-14-1992; Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-
2018)
§ 57.003 LIABILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS FOR FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   Abutting property owners failing to maintain property as required by §
57.002 of this chapter shall be expressly liable for personal and property
damages caused by such failure in the maintenance of such property.
(2013 Code, § 26-5) (Ord. 14403, passed 12-14-1992)
§ 57.004 PERIODS OF AMORTIZATION SET FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The period of amortization for public improvement projects for
opening, establishing or grading streets, the construction of portland cement
concrete or asphalt concrete street improvements, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, water mains, pedestrian underpasses and overpasses, sewage pumping
station, disposal or treatment plants, drainage conduits, channels and levees,
street lighting, parking facilities and appurtenant facilities, is hereby
established as ten years, to be calculated commencing from the date of adoption
by the Council of said city of the resolution accepting the completed public
improvements.
   (B)   The period of amortization, to be computed in the same manner as
established in division (A) above, is hereby established as seven years for
sidewalks and three years for the repair of street grading, street surfacing
with oil, gravel, oil and gravel or chloride, or for the removal of diseased or
dead trees.
   (C)   In any instance where the Council determines that the useful life of a
public improvement should be for a different time period than herein above
established, the Council may so provide for such period by amendment hereto,
prescribing the appropriate amortization period as may be applicable to these
specific public improvements.
(2013 Code, § 26-6) (Ord. 13511, passed 3-12-1979)
EXCAVATIONS AND DRIVEWAYS
§ 57.015 EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut through any paved surface or
otherwise dig or excavate or install any substantial device in any part of any
street, avenue, terrace or public ground outside of the lot line, for any
purpose, without first securing a permit therefor, in writing, from the
Director of Public Works/City Engineer.
(2013 Code, § 26-16) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.016 ENTRANCE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut or
remove any curbing for any purpose or install a driveway or entrance to a
property without first securing a written permit therefor from the Director of
Public Works/City Engineer.
   (B)   If the Director of Public Works/City Engineer denies the permit, the
applicant may appeal to the City Council by the procedures provided in §
110.003 of this chapter.
   (C)   Before any permit shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall pay
the City Clerk a fee set by resolution.
(2013 Code, § 26-17) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14228, passed 4-14-1986;
Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-1998) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.017 TUNNELING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to tunnel under the sidewalk or the curb or the
pavement of any street, avenue or public highway, except where permitted by the
Director of Public Works/City Engineer, and no such permit shall be granted for
a tunnel more than 18 inches under the curb and paving.
   (B)   Permit fee to be set by resolution.
(2013 Code, § 26-18) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.018 TRANSFER OF PERMIT PROHIBITED.
   No permit required by or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be assigned or transferred, and the work contemplated therein shall be done by
or under the personal supervision of the person to whom the permit is issued.
(2013 Code, § 26-19) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 57.019 CUTTING PAVEMENT AND REFILLING EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Wherever it is necessary to go under the pavement for any purpose, the
pavement shall be replaced in accordance with the city’s Standard
Specifications for Street Excavation and Pavement Restoration.
   (B)   Whenever a permit is required to make an excavation through the paved
surface of any public street, avenue or public way and the same has been
refilled as required by ordinance for resurfacing the area for such excavation,
the City Engineer shall be notified thereof.
   (C)   The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs to complete the
surfacing of the excavation.
(2013 Code, § 26-20) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 9091, passed 8-27-1956;
Ord. 10292, passed 7-16-1962)
§ 57.020 GUARDING EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   All openings in the street shall be made in such manner as will cause
the least inconvenience to the public and permit the passage of water along the
gutters.
   (B)   All openings and excavations made in any street, avenue, terrace or
public ground outside the lot line or next to the sidewalk or footway on
private property shall be protected by barricades and signs meeting the Federal
Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets
and Highways and the city’s standards.
(2013 Code, § 26-22) (Ord. 9091, passed 8-27-1956)
§ 57.021 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Before any permit is issued under provisions of this subchapter, an
application shall be filed with the Director of Public Works/City Engineer
stating the place; the amount and purpose of the contemplated work; the time
when the work is proposed to be done; the time within which it will be
completed; and in what street, avenue, alley or public place such excavation is
to be made or work done, and its location thereon. Each application must
contain a stipulation that the applicant will, within the time limit therein,
fill any excavation or trench in a proper and workmanlike manner and will
restore the street, avenue, alley or public place to its proper condition, and
that if the applicant fails or neglects to fill such excavation or trench
properly and restore the street, avenue, alley or public place to its proper
condition within such time, the Director of Public Works/City Engineer may do
so or cause the work to be done and charge the applicant with the cost and
expense thereof.
(2013 Code, § 26-23) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 57.022 PERMIT QUALIFICATIONS.
   No permit shall be granted to any person for any purpose contemplated under
§
57.015 of this chapter, unless such person has been authorized by the City
Council to do excavating within the city limits and has complied with the
requirements of the City Council in granting such authorization.
(2013 Code, § 26-24) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 57.023 BOND.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no permit shall be granted under
this subchapter unless the applicant shall have on file in the office of the
City Clerk a bond in the penal sum of $1,000, in form and with surety approved
by the City Council. It is particularly and especially provided that such bonds
executed shall, in addition to the specific terms and conditions thereof,
include and be construed as undertaking that the principal will faithfully
perform each and every duty required of him or her under state laws, city
ordinances and the rules, regulations and specifications of the City Council;
shall properly complete all work within the time specified in any permit issued
to him or her; shall pay all fines imposed on him or her on account of any act
or omission growing out of or in connection with the work for which such permit
was issued; shall pay all costs and expense of completing any work not properly
completed by him or her within the time limit of his or her permit and all
items charged against him or her on account thereof; shall refill all trenches
and excavations made under any permit issued to him or her as provided in this
subchapter to the approval of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer; shall
restore the street, pavement, sidewalk, parking, terrace or other portion of
any public place properly and as provided in this subchapter and to as good
condition as before starting the work; and shall maintain all refills and
restorations made by him or her for a period of four years. If any trench,
excavation or restoration settles, sinks or causes any irregularity in the
surface of the street, avenue, alley or public place within a period of four
years, he or she will immediately remedy such condition as directed by the
Director of Public Works/City Engineer. If he or she fails to do the work
within five days after notice thereof is given to or served on him or her or
the surety on such bond, the Director of Public Works/City Engineer shall cause
the work to be done and such principal will pay the cost and expense thereof.
   (B)   Such bond will continue in force until the completion of all work
covered or contemplated in any permit issued while it is in effect.
   (C)   This bond requirement shall not apply to repairs being made at a
residence by its owner or co-owner who is not using the services of a licensed
contractor to perform the work.
   (D)   Licensed contractors may fulfill the bonding requirements of this
section on individual residential projects of not more than $10,000 gross cost,
to be performed by that contractor within the city limits by providing evidence
to the City Clerk of a bond from an approved surety providing coverage for the
particular calendar year during which all work will be completed.
(2013 Code, § 26-25) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14777, passed 11-14-2005;
Ord. 14928, passed 11-11-2013)
§ 57.024 AUTHORITY OF CITY TO CANCEL PERMIT.
   Without canceling or affecting any bond, policy or obligation provided for
in §
57.023 of this chapter, the City Council may, for any cause that it deems
sufficient, cancel the authority granted under §
57.022 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 26-27) (Ord. 24, passed 8-14-1950)
SIDEWALKS
§ 57.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner,
and to minimize the liability of the city.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BROOM FINISH. A sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when
it is hardening.
   DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK. Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more;
      (2)   Horizontal separations equal to one inch or more.
      (3)   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter;
      (4)   Spalling over 50% of a single square of the sidewalk with one or
more depressions equal to one-half inch or more;
      (5)   Spalling over less than 50% of a single square of the sidewalk with
one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more;
      (6)   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot;
      (7)   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth; or
      (8)   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
   ESTABLISHED GRADE. That grade established by the city for the particular
area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   ONE-COURSE CONSTRUCTION. The full thickness of the concrete is placed at one
time, using the same mixture throughout.
   OWNER. The person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and
includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein.
For all other purposes, OWNER includes the lessee, if any.
   PORTLAND CEMENT. Any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   SIDEWALK. All permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban
areas.
   SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. The construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement
or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing
of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   WOOD FLOAT FINISH. A sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface
of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.037 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within 30 days, and if such action
is not completed within such time, the Council may require the work to be done
and assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 364.12(2)(d) and (e)
§ 57.038 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
   The Council may order the construction of permanent or temporary sidewalks
upon any street or court in the city and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
I.A.C. Ch. 384.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 384.38
§ 57.039 NEW SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   A public sidewalk shall be constructed adjacent to any lot platted prior to
January 1, 2001, at the time any of the following occur:
   (A)   Construction of a new building is completed upon a vacant lot;
   (B)   Construction or reconstruction of a building upon the lot which
amounts to an increase in value of 50% or more of an existing structure;
   (C)   Reconstruction of a building which has incurred 50% or more in damage;
and
   (D)   The property owner shall pay for all costs for constructing all
sidewalks required under this section.
(2013 Code, § 26-44) (Ord. 14668, passed 2-26-2001; Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-
2018)
§ 57.040 DEFERMENTS OF NEW SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The construction of a sidewalk, as required by §
57.039 of this subchapter may be deferred for a specified period of time in a
given instance. Applications for deferments must be submitted to the Housing
and Community Development Department, along with the established fee, as set by
resolution. A deferment will be recommended by staff if an applicant
demonstrates one or more of the following criteria have been met:
      (1)   Where the location of the proposed sidewalk is not adjacent to a
street which has or will have curb and gutter;
      (2)   Where the location of the proposed sidewalk has grade and drainage
problems which would significantly interfere with the construction of the
sidewalk at that location; and
      (3)   Where the location of the proposed sidewalk is on non-residential
or non-retail property adjacent to an existing street with curb and gutter, and
grade and drainage problems would not significantly interfere with the
construction of its sidewalk at that location, and the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   No pedestrian generators exist in this location; or
         (b)   The unique use of the property in conjunction with sidewalks or
bike paths near the location allow for alternate pedestrian routes, unless the
proposed sidewalk is needed to connect area residential property to other
sidewalks in the area.
   (B)   Should a deferment not be granted by the city staff, the applicant can
appeal this denial to the City Council.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.041 DEFERMENT EXPIRATION AND REPEAL.
   Deferments will expire automatically if the street adjacent to the deferred
location is improved and curb and gutter is installed. If conditions supporting
the deferment change, the City Zoning Officer may administratively repeal the
deferment.
(2013 Code, § 26-45) (Ord. 14779, passed 3-13-2006; Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-
2018)
§ 57.042 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, reconstruct or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the city and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the city for such work. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the city and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set
forth and established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.043 SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   (A)   Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be constructed in accordance with the city’s standard
specifications. All such work shall be done under the direction and supervision
of and subject to inspection and approval of the Public Works Director. If such
work does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Public Works
Director, after notice to the property owner, shall cause the sidewalks to be
constructed in the proper manner and assess the cost for such work against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
   (B)   Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards.
      (1)   Cement. Portland cement concrete shall be the only cement used in
the construction and repair of sidewalks. The cement shall be standard gray
color. Request to use any other color must be approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction, using
State Department of Transportation Class C portland cement concrete.
      (3)   Sidewalk base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a four-inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel, sand or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil
drainage is to be determined by the city.
      (4)   Sidewalk bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the
constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.
      (5)   Length, width and depth. Length, width and depth requirements are
as follows:
         (a)   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four
inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in length;
         (b)   Business district sidewalks shall extend from the property line
to the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six feet
in length and width unless the City Engineer so directs; and
         (c)   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
      (6)   Grade. The City Engineer shall establish the sidewalk grade.
      (7)   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation
even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb
for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
      (8)   Slope. All sidewalks shall have a maximum slope of 2% towards the
curb.
      (9)   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish. All
walks must be true to grade.
      (10)   Ramps for persons with disabilities. There shall be not less than
two curb cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or near the
crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least 48 inches
wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per 12 inches lineal
distance, with a maximum cross slope of 2%. Each curb ramp shall include
installation of detectable warning panels with trucated domes. All curb ramp
installations should comply with the Iowa SUDAS Standard Specifications,
Division 7, Section 7030.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.044 LOCATION.
   Residential sidewalks shall be located within the inner edge (edge nearest
the abutting private property) one foot outside the property line, unless the
Council establishes a different distance due to special circumstances.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.045 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Whenever sidewalk improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a
dangerous condition, it is the duty of all persons having an interest therein,
either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in
front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous
condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and
at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient
number of approved traffic control barricades, and to keep them lit during the
entire night and to maintain said barricades both at night and in the daytime
to secure the same as stated in §
57.020 of this chapter. The party or parties using the street for any of the
purposes specified in this chapter are liable for all injuries or damage to
persons or property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or
parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the privileges
conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.046 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the city immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 57.047 ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.048 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   (A)   Stairs and railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to
any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council;
   (B)   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public; and/or
   (C)   Protect openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all
openings on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.049 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.050 FIRES OR FUELS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.051 DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 716.1
§ 57.052 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle.
(Ord. 14973, passed 7-9-2018) Penalty, see §
57.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 364.12(2)
§ 57.053 AUTHORITY OF CITY TO REPAIR BROKEN, DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS; STATEMENT OF
COSTS.
   The nuisance officer or such other city officer as may be designated by the
Mayor or City Council may cause to be repaired, with or without notice to the
property owner, all broken or defective sidewalks when in an unsafe, broken or
defective condition, and he or she shall return to the Council an itemized and
verified statement of expenditures of labor and materials used in making such
repairs and the description of the lot or parcel of ground abutting on which
such repairs have been made.
(2013 Code, § 26-51) (Ord. 23, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 57.054 COSTS OF REPAIRS AS TAX; ASSESSMENTS; OBJECTIONS.
   (A)   Upon the filing of the verified statement required by §
57.053 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of such facts to be
given to all persons liable for such expense, either by personal service, by
mailing a notice to the last known address of the person liable for taxes
assessed against such property or by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, which notice shall contain a statement of the
character of the work performed, a description of the property affected, and
the amount returned against such lot or parcel of ground, together with a
statement of the time and place at which objections to such assessment may be
made, which time shall be not less than ten days after the giving of notice.
(2013 Code, § 26-52)
   (B)   At the time and place designated in notice given pursuant to division
(A) above, the City Council shall meet, hear and consider all objections made
to the whole or any part of such assessment and shall correct any errors or
omissions therein, and after such consideration the City Council shall adopt
the list, as corrected, as the amounts to be assessed against the property
therein described.
(2013 Code, § 26-53)
   (D)   After the adoption of the corrected list as provided in division (C)
above, the City Council shall, by resolution, assess the respective amounts
against each lot or parcel of ground, and all such assessments or any part
thereof which shall remain unpaid shall, before September 1 of each year, be
certified by the City Clerk to the County Auditor as a special tax against the
lots or parcels of ground.
(2013 Code, § 26-54)
(Ord. 23, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 57.055 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or
reconstruct any public sidewalk in the city, except in full compliance with all
of the requirements of this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 26-55) (Ord. 23, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
57.999
§ 57.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the pertinent provisions of §§
57.035 through
57.055 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 26-55) (Ord. 22, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 58: VEGETATION
Section
General Provisions
   
58.001   Purpose
   
58.002   Definitions
   
58.003   Removal of weeds, vines and brush
Trees
   
58.015   Injuring or damaging
   
58.016   Fastening materials
   
58.017   Planting in public right-of-way easements
   
58.018   Planting permit
   
58.019   Certain species prohibited
   
58.020   Spacing and placement in public right-of-way areas
   
58.021   Removal and trimming on public property
   
58.022   Removal and trimming on private property
   
58.023   Notice and assessment of costs to property owners
   
58.024   Barricades and other protective devices required
Compost
   58.035   Establishment of a compost utility
   58.036   Compost fee
 
   
58.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 58.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to regulate and control the planting,
removal, pruning and protection of trees and other vegetation within streets,
highways and alley rights-of-way and public park areas within the boundaries of
the city; to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result
in injury to persons using the public areas of the city; to prevent damage to
any public sewer or water main, street, sidewalk or other public property; to
protect trees located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe planting,
removal, pruning and protection practices; and to guard all trees within the
public areas of the city against the spread of disease or pests. The provisions
of this chapter shall apply to all trees, shrubs, weeds, vines and brush
planted in or upon any public area and in certain instances on private property
within the city and any existing trees that violate other sections of this
chapter.
   (B)   It is also the intent of this chapter to maintain all public and
private areas in the city in such a manner that they are free of weeds, vines
and brush; to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may cause
injury or illness to persons using the public areas; to promote and enhance the
beauty of the city; and to guard against pestilence and widespread weed
invasion of any area of the city. State legislation or State Department of
Transportation rules take precedence over this chapter if along a state-
designated highway.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 58.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A thoroughfare through the middle of a block giving access to the
rear of a building.
   PARK. Any property owned in whole or in part by the city used in whole or in
part for recreational purposes, wildlife purposes or other municipally-owned
public purpose related to recreation or wildlife, but does not include parking
or terraces or municipal parking lots.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise
the record holder of legal title.
   PUBLIC AREA. Parks and other lands owned or leased by the city and all
terraces along all streets, highways, boulevards and alleys.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Dedicated public property containing or proposed to
contain publicly owned street surfaces, curb and gutter, sidewalks and planted
strips.
   SHRUB. A woody plant with several stems and usually with a low mature height
of eight feet or less.
   STREET INTERSECTION. The intersection of the public street right-of-way
lines of the two intersecting streets. On streets that have sidewalks, this
would be the intersection of the inside edges on the private property side of
the sidewalks.
   TREE. Any woody perennial plant of any age with a main trunk and many
branches, and includes living or dead trees and standing or fallen trees.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 58.003 REMOVAL OF WEEDS, VINES AND BRUSH.
   All areas of the city are to be kept free of any noxious weeds and shall
also be kept free of any other weeds, vines or brush for health and safety
reasons.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
TREES
§ 58.015 INJURING OR DAMAGING.
   (A)   No person shall in any public area of the city break, injure,
mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub; permit any animal under his or her
control to do so; permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub;
or permit any toxic chemicals or materials to seep, drain, be emptied on or
otherwise enter into any tree or shrub.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, damage, carve, transplant
or remove any tree, or injure the bark of any tree located in a park, except
for authorized city personnel in the performance of his, her or their duties.
   (C)   During building operations, commercial promotions or public
promotions, the builder or sponsor shall erect suitable protective barriers
around public trees and shrubs that may be injured.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.016 FASTENING MATERIALS.
   No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire or other materials to or around
or through any trees or shrubs in any public area, except in emergencies such
as storms or accidents.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.017 PLANTING IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY EASEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or other woody plant material within
any dedicated utility easement area within the city. Any tree or other wood
plant material planted within public right-of-way requires a planting permit.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.018 PLANTING PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall plant a tree in a public right-of-way unless the
individual has completed a planting permit application at the Parks and
Recreation Office and has been issued a permit by the Parks and Recreation
Director or their designee.
   (B)   (1)   Trees shall be subject to conditions of the permit. Conditions
of the permit shall include a requirement for diversity of species withal, the
planting area, as well as other conditions as may be provided elsewhere in this
subchapter.
      (2)   Whenever a tree is planted in conflict with the provisions of the
permit or without obtaining a permit, it shall be lawful for city staff to
remove or cause removal of the tree.
      (3)   The cost of the removal of such tree may be charged to the property
owner responsible for the planting.
   (C)   The city may consider the following review criteria in permit
approvals but not limited to:
      (1)   Visibility triangles at streets, alleys and driveways;
      (2)   Sign visibility;
      (3)   Proximity to other trees;
      (4)   Proximity to utilities;
      (5)   Proximity to pavement; or
      (6)   Area of space available.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.019 CERTAIN SPECIES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree species on or within 25 feet of
public right-of-way in the city that has been identified on a list of
prohibited species compiled by city staff. The list shall be kept on file at
the Parks and Recreation Office and on the city website.
   (B)   (1)   The Parks & Recreation Department may issue a planting permit
for planting evergreen and deciduous shrubs with a mature height greater than
12 inches within the public right-of-way for decorative purposes.
      (2)   Each request will be reviewed upon its own merits, and the proposed
plantings at mature height shall not interfere with pedestrian and vehicular
safety or the free use of the street or sidewalk.
   (C)   It shall also be unlawful to plant any tree species that bears fruit,
except for male sterile varieties, on a public right-of-way or on private
property in a location where the tree will overhang the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Any plant species prohibited by this section, but in place on the
effective date of this chapter, need not be removed by virtue of its mere
existence unless interference with other sections of this chapter so requires.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.020 SPACING AND PLACEMENT IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AREAS.
   (A)   No tree shall be planted nearer than three feet to the curb. No tree
shall be planted within three feet of sidewalk in residential areas.
   (B)   (1)   Trees planted on or adjacent to Highway 14 right-of-way shall be
planted ten feet back from the back of the curb line.
      (2)   Other special considerations do exist and a special permit must be
secured from the state's Department of Transportation; contact the local
state's Department of Transportation Engineer.
   (C)   Trees shall be planted no closer than the sum of half of the mature
spread of each tree from one another.
   (D)   Trees shall be planted no closer to a utility pole than a distance
equal to half of the mature spread of the tree species being planted.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.021 REMOVAL AND TRIMMING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for the removal of all dead and diseased
trees from the public right-of-way and other public areas.
   (B)   The adjacent property owner shall be responsible for the trimming of
all trees in the public right-of-way. The city shall be responsible for the
trimming of trees in other public areas.
      (1)   Trees shall be so trimmed that the overhanging branches shall be at
least 15 feet above the surface of the street and at least eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk so as not to interfere with the street lighting or the
free and safe use of the street and sidewalk by the public, taking into
consideration tree maturity and size.
      (2)   Property owners, agents or occupants may trim limbs or branches not
exceeding six inches in diameter from trees on public right-of-way areas
adjacent to their property. Such cutting or trimming shall conform to the
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the city
staff.
      (3)   Only city staff, tree trimming or removal contractor, or public
service company can trim branches exceeding six inches in diameter from the
public right-of-way area. Adjacent property owners, agents or occupants must
obtain a contractor at their expense to have branches exceeding six inches
removed from trees in the public right-of-way.
   (C)   The city shall have the authority to trim or remove any tree, shrub or
other plant material planted on any public right-of-way for non-compliance of
this subchapter. This work shall be done at city expense if notice is not given
to the adjacent property owner.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.022 REMOVAL AND TRIMMING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   The property owner, agent or occupant of any lot or parcel of land
shall keep the trees on their property so trimmed that the overhanging branches
shall be at least 15 feet above the surface of the street and at least eight
feet above the surface of the sidewalk so as not to interfere with the street
lighting or the free and safe use of the street and sidewalk by the public and
shall be kept free of dead limbs and branches, taking into consideration the
tree maturity and size.
   (B)   The city shall have the right to trim or prune any tree or shrub on
private property without notice when it overhangs public property and
interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight
or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. The city
may serve notice on the abutting property owner as per §
58.023 to remedy the situation and assess the cost to the property.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022) Penalty, see §
58.999
§ 58.023 NOTICE AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS TO PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   If the property owner does not perform an action required under this
subchapter within a reasonable time after written notice, the city may perform
the required action and assess the costs against the property for collection in
the same manner as a property tax. Notice shall be by certified mail or other
personal service to the address of the property owner as well as the occupant
of the premises as shown by the records of the County Auditor. The notice shall
describe the violation and location of the violation, state the act(s)
necessary to cure the violation, state the time within which action is
required, and state that if the violation is not cured and no request of
hearing is made within a set period of time, the city will assess costs as set
forth above.
   (B)   In an emergency, the city may perform any action which may be required
under this subchapter without prior notice if it is deemed an imminent hazard
to the safety and well-being of the public and assess the costs as provided in
this section after notice to the property owner and hearing. All action taken
by the city without notice to the property owner is done at the city's expense
and shall not be assessed to the property owner.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 58.024 BARRICADES AND OTHER PROTECTIVE DEVICES REQUIRED.
   When necessary for the protection of the public, guards, barricades or other
protective devices or warnings shall be maintained on any sidewalk, street or
other public places where trees are being trimmed or removed. Barricades and
other protective devices shall meet the standards set forth by the Public Works
Department. Traffic on any street shall not be barricaded without first
obtaining permission therefor from the Public Works Department and notifying
the Fire Department, Police Department and the ambulance service of the closing
and again when the street is reopened.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
COMPOST
§ 58.035 ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMPOST UTILITY.
   A compost utility is hereby established to provide for the operations of the
Marshalltown Compost Facility, which includes the breaking down, processing and
re-use of vegetative and tree materials.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 58.036 COMPOST FEE.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, set the fee for the operation of the
Marshalltown Compost Facility. This includes the initial establishment of fees
and subsequent changes to the fees as deemed necessary by the City Council.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 58.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of any section of this chapter shall be deemed to be a municipal
infraction and be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 15042, passed 6-13-2022)
CHAPTER 59: MAILBOXES
Section
   
59.001   Purpose
   
59.002   Definitions
   
59.003   Visibility; obstruction
   
59.004   Cluster-style mailbox required in new developments
   
59.005   Cluster-style mailbox requirements
   
59.006   Curbside mailbox requirements
   
59.007   Custom-built mailbox requirements
   
59.008   Responsibilities of property owner
§ 59.001 PURPOSE.
   The city’s right-of-way is held by the city primarily for the purpose of
pedestrian and vehicular passage and for the city’s provision of essential
public safety services, including police, fire and emergency medical response
services, and public health services, including sanitary sewer, water, and
storm drainage. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for
mailboxes in order to maintain the safety and the visual character of the
city’s right-of-way.
§ 59.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BREAKAWAY SUPPORT. A supporting post which shall be no larger than a four-
inch by four-inch wood post or a metal post with a strength no greater than a
two-inch diameter schedule 40 steel pipe and which is buried no more than 24
inches deep. Such a support post shall not be set in concrete unless
specifically designed as a breakaway support system as defined in A Guide for
Erecting Mailboxes on Highways published by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials, May 24, 1984 (ASHTO).
   CLEAR ZONE. An unobstructed flat area adjacent to the traveled portion of a
roadway that is used for the recovery of errant vehicles.
   CLUSTER-STYLE MAILBOX. A style whereby mailboxes, meeting the specifications
of the United States Postal Service (USPS) with the inscription plainly legible
“U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL,” are assembled and grouped
together on a single area of land so that they are regarded as one unit.
Cluster-style mailboxes must be manufactured cluster-style mailboxes approved
by both the city and the USPS.
   CURBSIDE MAILBOX. A mailbox consisting of a lightweight sheet metal or
plastic box meeting the specifications of the United States Postal Service
(USPS) with the inscription plainly legible “U.S. MAIL” and “APPROVED BY THE
POSTMASTER GENERAL,” which is erected at the edge of a roadway or curbside of a
street and is mounted on a breakaway support post, and is intended or used for
the collection of mail and is to be served by a mail carrier from a vehicle.
   CUSTOM-BUILT MAILBOX.  A mailbox erected at the edge of a roadway or
curbside of a street constructed using materials that do not meet the
definition of a CURBSIDE MAILBOX and BREAKAWAY SUPPORT.
§ 59.003 VISIBILITY; OBSTRUCTION.
   All mailboxes must be erected:
   (A)   Away from the intersection of any street and, in no case closer than
75 feet measured from the centerline of the intersecting street, in order to
prevent obstruction of free and clear vision; and
   (B)   Away from any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or
color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
§ 59.004 CLUSTER-STYLE MAILBOX REQUIRED IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   All new residential or commercial developments constructed after the
enactment of the regulations contained in this chapter, except developments in
R-1 and R-2 Residence Districts, and which are situated on any public street,
avenue, or other roadway that is maintained by the city and receive curbside
delivery of mail shall have cluster-style mailboxes. Any housing development
constructed and already receiving mail service before the regulations in this
chapter are enacted is not required to have cluster-style mailboxes.
§ 59.005 CLUSTER-STYLE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Cluster-style mailboxes serving housing developments situated on any
public street or roadway shall be located between the sidewalk and curb,
outside of the three-foot clear zone. Cluster-style mailboxes shall not be
installed anywhere within a cul-de-sac bulb. Cluster-style mailboxes shall have
a four-foot concrete access from the public street and the public sidewalk. The
location of the cluster-style mailboxes shall not exceed 300 feet from the
property line of those residents served by that cluster-style mailbox. Cluster-
style boxes shall be located on property lines on the same side as what the
future no-parking areas will be. The location of the cluster-style mailbox is
to be approved by the city and by the USPS.
   (B)   The cost of installation, including but not limited to box units and
concrete pad, shall be borne by the developer, and subsequent maintenance shall
be carried out by the USPS.
   (C)   No driveway or street access shall be constructed within five feet of
a cluster-style mailbox.
Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 59.006 CURBSIDE MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   While curbside mailboxes may be installed in developments constructed and
already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter, the mailbox
owner must comply with the following installation requirements:
   (A)   The bottom of the mailbox shall be 42 inches from the top of curb. On
streets without curbs, the bottom of the mailbox shall be 48 inches from the
edge of pavement, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
   (B)   Lateral placement of the mailbox shall be six inches to eight inches
from the face of the curb, as defined by USPS installation requirements.
   (C)   The mailbox support post shall be of a “breakaway support” design, as
defined by AASHTO.
   (D)   The post-to-box attachment shall be of sufficient strength to prevent
the box from separating from the post if a vehicle strikes the post.
   (E)   Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
curbside mailbox.
§ 59.007 CUSTOM-BUILT MAILBOX REQUIREMENTS.
   A custom-built mailbox may be installed in developments constructed and
already receiving mail service before the adoption of this chapter if an
application for approval of a custom-built mailbox is submitted to the city for
review and is approved. A custom-built mailbox must conform to the following
requirements and the rules set forth in the application:
   (A)   The structure supporting the mailbox shall be at least 12 inches from
the back of curb.
   (B)   The mailbox structure shall not exceed the dimensions of two feet in
width, two feet in depth and five feet in height.
   (C)   The mailbox structure shall be located on a concrete pad, two feet six
inches wide, two feet six inches deep and four inches thick. The mailbox
structure shall not be permanently affixed to the concrete pad in an attempt to
make structure rigid.
   (D)   The local postmaster shall approve and sign off on the application
before submittal to the city.
   (E)   Property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the custom-
built mailbox. If the mailbox is damaged beyond use by the city, a standard
curbside mailbox and breakaway post as defined in this chapter will be provided
or the property owner can be reimbursed up to a maximum replacement amount set
by Council in a fee schedule. If the property owner performs the replacement,
reimbursement will not exceed the established cost for a standard curbside
mailbox and breakaway post. Property owner must submit an application for a
custom-built mailbox with the city prior to making any needed repairs.
§ 59.008 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   Any type of mailbox located in the city right-of-way is subject to damage or
destruction, at any time, as a result of the city or a person with a utility
easement entering upon the city right-of-way to construct, repair or maintain
the utilities located in the city right-of-way or as a result of the city
engaging in activities to maintain the public street or right-of-way, such as
snow removal, pavement repair or street cleaning. If a curb side or cluster-
style mailbox located in the city right-of-way is damaged during such
activities, the city or the utility that damaged the mailbox shall reimburse
the property owner up to a maximum replacement amount set by Council in a fee
schedule for the cost of a mailbox of the same design, if it has been approved
for installment by the USPS with the proper markings inscribed “U.S. Mail” and
“Approved by the Postmaster General,” if it is still available for purchase and
complies with this chapter, and for the cost of the installation of said
mailbox.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING RULES
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
      
75.   PEDESTRIANS
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.001   Definitions
   
70.002   Operation of vehicles on public streets, alleys and highways
   
70.003   Obedience to police officers
   
70.004   Applicability to public officers
   
70.005   Application to road workers
   
70.006   Animals or animal-drawn vehicles
   
70.007   Rights of owners of private property
   
70.008   Enforcement agency
   
70.009   Vehicle condition, equipment and load
   
70.010   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.011   Offenses by owners
   
70.012   Scheduled fines for violation of certain provisions
   
70.013   Special school parking
Accidents
   
70.025   Reports of death or personal injuries
   
70.026   Report of damage to vehicle
   
70.027   Duty of driver to give information and aid
   
70.028   Report upon striking unattended vehicle
   
70.029   Report of striking fixtures upon highway
Traffic Signs and Signals
   
70.040   Conformity with state specifications
   
70.041   Obedience
Automated Traffic Enforcement (ATE)
   
70.070   Definitions
   
70.071   General
   
70.072   Vehicle owners subject to civil fine for automated traffic citations
   
70.073   Notice of automated traffic citation
   
70.074   Fines
   
70.075   Challenging an automated traffic citation
   
70.076   Failure to timely pay or challenge automated traffic citation
   
70.077   Exemptions from §
70.072
 
   
70.999   Penalty
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section or elsewhere in this code shall have the meaning
assigned to it by I.C.A. § 321.1, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
   ALLEY. A thoroughfare laid out, established and platted as such, by
constituted authority.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY. Vehicles of the Fire Department; police vehicles,
ambulances and emergency vehicles owned by the United States, the state or any
subdivision of the state or any municipality therein; and privately-owned
ambulances and fire, rescue or disaster vehicles as are designated or
authorized by the state’s Director of Transportation, under I.C.A. § 321.451.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
buildings in use for business occupy 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a
distance of 300 feet or more.
   CAR or AUTOMOBILE. A motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying nine
passengers or less, excluding motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   CHAUFFEUR. A person who operates a motor vehicle, including a school bus, in
the transportation of persons for wages, compensation or hire, or a person who
operates a truck tractor, road tractor or a motor truck that has a gross
vehicle weight rating exceeding 16,000 pounds. A person is not a CHAUFFEUR when
the operation of the motor vehicle, other than a truck tractor, by the owner or
operator is occasional and merely incidental to the owner’s or operator’s
principal business. A person is not a CHAUFFEUR when the operation is by a
volunteer firefighter operating fire apparatus, or is by a volunteer ambulance
or rescue squad attendant operating ambulance or rescue squad apparatus. If a
volunteer firefighter or ambulance or rescue squad operator receives nominal
compensation not based upon the value of the services performed, the
firefighter or operator shall be considered to be receiving no compensation and
classified as a volunteer. If authorized to transport inmates, probationers,
parolees or work releasees by the Director of the state’s Department of
Corrections or the Director’s designee, an employee of the state’s Department
of Corrections or a District Department of Correctional Services is not a
CHAUFFEUR when transporting the inmates, probationers, parolees or work
releasees. A farmer or the farmer’s hired help is not a CHAUFFEUR when
operating a truck, other than a truck tractor, owned by the farmer and used
exclusively in connection with the transportation of the farmer’s own products
or property. If authorized to transport patients or clients by the Director of
the Department of Human Services or the Director’s designee, an employee of the
Department of Human Services is not a CHAUFFEUR when transporting the patients
or clients in an automobile. A person is not a CHAUFFEUR when the operation is
by a home care aide in the course of the home care aide’s duties. If authorized
to transport students or clients by the Superintendent of the state’s Braille
and Sight Saving School or of the State School for the Deaf, or the
Superintendent’s respective designee, an employee of the state’s Braille and
Sight Saving School or the State School for the Deaf is not a CHAUFFEUR when
transporting the students or clients.
   COMBINATION or COMBINATION OF VEHICLES. A group consisting of two or more
motor vehicles, or a group consisting of a motor vehicle and one or more
trailers, semi-trailers or vehicles, which are coupled or fastened together for
the purpose of being moved on the highways as a unit.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections
or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.
   DEALER. Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or
exchanging vehicles of a type required to be registered under this chapter and
who has an established place of business for such purpose in the state.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   ESSENTIAL PARTS. All integral and body parts of a vehicle of a type required
to be registered under this chapter, the removal, alteration or substitution of
which would tend to conceal the identity of the vehicle or substantially alter
its appearance, model, type or mode of operation.
   ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place actually occupied either
continuously or at regular periods by a dealer or manufacturer where his or her
books and records are kept and a large share of the dealer’s or manufacturer’s
business is transacted.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that on ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects
or of destroying life or limb.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flashpoint of 70°F or less, as
determined by a Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FOREIGN VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be registered by law
brought into the state from another state, territory or country other than in
the ordinary course of business by or through a manufacturer or dealer and not
registered in the state.
   FRONTAGE.
      (1)   FRONTAGE occupied by the building means the linear measure of the
plot of ground upon which the building is located abutting upon the highway.
      (2)   FRONTAGE on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more means
the total frontage on both sides of the highway for such distance.
   GARAGE. Every place of business where motor vehicles are received for
housing, storage or repair for compensation.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The empty weight of a vehicle, plus the maximum load to be
carried thereon. The maximum load to be carried by a passenger-carrying vehicle
shall be determined by multiplying 150 pounds by the number of passenger seats
carried by such vehicle.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway, the roadway of which is divided into three or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MANUFACTURER.
      (1)   Every person engaged in the business of fabricating or assembling
vehicles of a type required to be registered.
      (2)   It does not include a person who converts, modifies or alters a
completed motor vehicle manufactured by another person.
      (3)   It includes a person who uses a completed motor vehicle
manufactured by another person to construct a Class B motor home, as defined in
I.C.A. § 321.124.
   METAL TIRE. Every tire, the surface of which in contact with the highway is
wholly or partly of metal or other hard, non-resilient material.
   MOTOR TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying livestock,
merchandise, freight of any kind or over nine persons as passengers.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, but not including
vehicles known as trackless trolleys which are propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground including a motor scooter, but excluding a tractor.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOTOR BICYCLE. A motor vehicle having a saddle or a
seat for the use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground, with an engine having a displacement no
greater than 50 cubic centimeters and not capable of operating at a speed in
excess of 25 mph on level ground unassisted by human power.
   NON-RESIDENT. Every person who is not a resident of the state.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with ordinance or law placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.
   OPERATOR. Every person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
upon a highway.
   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or if a vehicle is
the subject of a security agreement with an immediate right of possession
vested in the debtor, such debtor shall be deemed the OWNER for the purpose of
this chapter.
   PEACE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violation of traffic regulations in addition to its meaning in
I.C.A. § 801.4.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PNEUMATIC TIRE. Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support
the load.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon
stationary rails.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. An engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails.
   RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be registered by
law materially altered from its original construction by the removal, addition
or substitution of essential parts, new or used.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory within the city contiguous to and
including a highway, not comprising a business, suburban or school district,
where 40% or more of the frontage on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated
by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a
safety zone.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every vehicle operated for the transportation of children to or
from school, except vehicles that are:
      (1)   Privately owned and not operated for compensation;
      (2)   Used exclusively in the transportation of the children in the
immediate family of the driver;
      (3)   Operated by a municipally or privately owned urban transit company
for the transportation of children as part of or in addition to their regularly
scheduled service; or
      (4)   Designed to carry not more than nine persons as passengers, either
school owned or privately owned, which is used to transport pupils to activity
events in which the pupils are participants or used to transport pupils to
their homes in case of illness or other emergency situations. The vehicles
operated under the provisions of this division (4) shall be operated by
employees of the school district who are specifically approved by the Local
Superintendent of Schools for the assignment.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway for a
distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SOLID TIRE. Every tire of rubber or other resilient material that does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT. Every vehicle not designed or used primarily for
the transportation of persons or property and incidentally operated or moved
over the highways, including road construction or maintenance machinery and
ditch-digging apparatus. This description does not exclude other vehicles that
are within the general terms of this definition.
   SPECIALLY CONSTRUCTED VEHICLE. Every vehicle of a type required to be
registered under state law not originally constructed under a distinctive name,
make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of vehicles and not
materially altered from its original construction.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of the city not within a business, school or
residence district.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY or THRU HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by
law to stop before entering or crossing the highway and when stop signs are
erected as provided by ordinance or such entrances are controlled by a police
officer or traffic control signal. The term ARTERIAL shall be synonymous with
the term THROUGH or THRU when applied to highways of the state.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
   TRAILER.
      (1)   Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
      (2)   Whenever the term TRAILER is used in this chapter, it shall be
construed to include the term SEMI-TRAILER.
   TRANSPORTER. A person engaged in the business of delivering vehicles of a
type required to be registered or titled in the state who has received
authority to make delivery as specified by rules adopted by the state’s
Department of Transportation.
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway. Where a VEHICLE is kept refers to the
county of residence of the owner or to the county where the VEHICLE is mainly
kept if such owner is a non-resident of the state. The term VEHICLE does not
include the following:
      (1)   Any device moved by human power;
      (2)   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks;
      (3)   Any steering axle, dolly or other integral part of another vehicle,
which in and of itself is incapable of commercially transporting any person or
property, but is used primarily to support another vehicle; and
      (4)   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is
mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind
the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which
cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-1) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 10904, passed 5-11-1996)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.1
§ 70.002 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS, ALLEYS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   The sections of this traffic code relating to the operation of
vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon public streets,
alleys and highways, except where a different place is specifically referred to
in a given section.
   (B)   The provisions of §§
70.025 through
70.029 of this chapter, inclusive, and §§
70.025 and
70.026 of this code of ordinances shall apply upon highways and elsewhere
within the city.
(2013 Code, § 20-2) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.228
§ 70.003 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
directions of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-3) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.229
§ 70.004 APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC OFFICERS.
   The sections of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon
the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by
the United States, the state or any county, city, town, district or any other
political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are
set forth in this traffic code with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
(2013 Code, § 20-4) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.230
§ 70.005 APPLICATION TO ROAD WORKERS.
   The sections of this traffic code, except §
71.025 of this chapter, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and
other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway
officially closed to traffic, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work. The minimum speed restriction of I.C.A. §
321.285(6), and the provisions of §§
71.001,
71.002 and
71.064 of this code of ordinances do not apply to road workers operating
maintenance equipment on behalf of any state or local authority while engaged
in road maintenance, road blading, snow and ice control and removal and
granular resurfacing work on a highway, whether or not the highway is closed to
traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-5) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.233
§ 70.006 ANIMALS OR ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   A person riding an animal or driving an animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway is subject to the sections of this traffic code applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except those sections of this traffic code that, by their
nature, can have no application.
(Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14137, passed 8-9-1982; Ord. 14970, passed 11-
27-2017; Ord. 15047, passed 9-26-2022) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.234
§ 70.007 RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Nothing in this traffic code shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right from prohibiting such use or from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this traffic code or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such
owner.
(2013 Code, § 20-7)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.251(1)
§ 70.008 ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
   The Police Department shall be the enforcement agency of all parking or
traffic violations.
(2013 Code, § 20-8) (Ord. 11658, passed 4-29-1970; Ord. 12521, passed 8-14-
1974)
§ 70.009 VEHICLE CONDITION, EQUIPMENT AND LOAD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle that is not
equipped and in the operating condition required by state law. Vehicle
equipment shall be operated as required or permitted by state law. Except as
otherwise posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle that
exceeds the load limitations established by state law.
   (B)   A person shall not drive a vehicle equipped with a windshield,
sidewings or side or rear windows which do not permit clear vision. A person
shall not operate on the highway a motor vehicle equipped with a front
windshield, a side window to the immediate right of left of the driver or a
sidewing forward of and to the left or right of the driver which is excessively
dark or reflective so that it is difficult for a person outside the motor
vehicle to see into the motor vehicle through the windshield, window, or
sidewing. A motor vehicle may have add-on (aftermarket) window tint on any
window except the windshield; provided that, the tinting material allows a
minimum of 70% light transmittance through the glass.
(2013 Code, § 20-9) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14875, passed 7-12-2010 )
Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle equipment, size, weight and load, see I.C.A. § 321.384 et seq.
§ 70.010 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of
a felony or in response to an incident dangerous to the public or when
responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section.
   (B)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of the
provisions of this traffic code; and
      (2)   Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for
the minimum distance necessary before an alternative route that conforms to the
traffic laws and regulations is available.
   (C)   The driver of a Fire Department vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance
or a peace officer riding a police bicycle in the line of duty may do any of
the following:
      (1)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; and/or
      (2)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not
endanger life or property.
   (D)   The exceptions granted to an authorized emergency vehicle under
division (B) above and for a Fire Department vehicle, police vehicle or
ambulance as provided in division (C) below shall apply only when such vehicle
is making use of an audible signaling device meeting the requirements of I.C.A.
§ 321.433, or a visual signaling device; except that, use of an audible or
visual signaling device shall not be required when exercising the exemption
granted under division (C)(2) above when the vehicle is operated by a peace
officer, pursuing a suspected violator of the speed restrictions imposed by or
pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of determining the speed of travel of
such suspected violator.
   (E)   Divisions (A) through (D) above shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle or the rider of a police bicycle from the duty to
drive or ride with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such
provisions protect the driver or rider from the consequences of the driver’s or
rider’s reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(2013 Code, § 20-10) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.231
§ 70.011 OFFENSES BY OWNERS.
   It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law.
(2013 Code, § 20-12) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.484
§ 70.012 SCHEDULED FINES FOR VIOLATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Violations of sections of this chapter specified in this section shall
be scheduled violations, and the scheduled fine for each of those violations
shall be as found in state law as it relates to city ordinances. The city has
adopted the following ordinances, the violation of which may be considered a
scheduled violation:
      (1)   For excessive speed violations under
Ch. 76, Schd. VIII, division (A), of this code of ordinances, and automated
traffic enforcement excessive speed violations under § 70.072;
      (2)   For operating, passing, turning and standing violations under §§
71.003 through
71.008,
71.010,
71.011,
71.040 through
71.046,
71.064,
71.080 and
71.081 of this code of ordinances;
      (3)   For violations involving failures to yield or observe pedestrians
and other vehicles under §§
71.001,
71.002,
71.009,
71.027,
71.042,
71.060,
71.061,
71.062,
75.003,
75.007 and
Ch. 76, Schd. VIII(B);
      (4)   For violations by pedestrians and bicyclists under §§
75.001,
75.002,
75.004 and
75.006 of this code of ordinances; and
      (5)   For violations of vehicle equipment, traffic signs and signals and
failure to obey an officer under §§
70.003,
70.009,
70.041,
71.027,
71.063,
71.065,
71.085,
71.089,  
72.070(A) and (B) and
72.072.
   (B)   The scheduled fine for each of the scheduled violations in division
(A) above shall be that as provided by state law for the violation of a city
ordinance.
   (C)   The method and procedure of payment and collection of such scheduled
fines shall be the same as that provided for the payment collection of
scheduled fines for violation of city ordinances under state law.
(2013 Code, § 20-13) (Ord. 13862, passed 12-9-1980; Ord. 14875, passed 7-12-
2010; Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.013 SPECIAL SCHOOL PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful to stop or park a motor vehicle in a school zone for
the purpose of passenger loading or unloading; provided, however, that, the
driver must remain in the vehicle at all times.
(2013 Code, § 20-14) (Ord. 14198, passed 9-24-1984; Ord. 14218A, passed 6-24-
1985) Penalty, see §
70.999
ACCIDENTS
§ 70.025 REPORTS OF DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury
to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall then forthwith return
to and, in every event, shall remain at the scene of the accident until he or
she has fulfilled the requirements of §
70.027 of this chapter.
   (B)   Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(2013 Code, § 20-26) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.261
§ 70.026 REPORT OF DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in
damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as
possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the
scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of §
70.027 of this chapter.
   (B)   Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary.
(2013 Code, § 20-27) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.262
§ 70.027 DUTY OF DRIVER TO GIVE INFORMATION AND AID.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to
or death of any person or damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by
any person shall give the driver’s name, address and the registration number of
the vehicle the driver is driving and shall, upon request and if available,
exhibit the driver’s license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of
or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to a person
injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the transporting or
arranging for the transporting of such person for medical treatment if it is
apparent that such treatment is necessary or if transportation for medical
treatment is requested by the injured person.
   (B)   If the accident causes the death of a person, all surviving drivers
shall remain at the scene of the accident except to seek necessary aid or to
report the accident to law enforcement authorities. Before leaving the scene of
the fatal accident, each surviving driver shall leave the surviving driver’s
license, automobile registration receipt or other identification data at the
scene of the accident. After leaving the scene of the accident, a surviving
driver shall promptly report the accident to law enforcement authorities and
shall immediately return to the scene of the accident or inform the law
enforcement authorities where the surviving driver can be located.
(2013 Code, § 20-28) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.263
§ 70.028 REPORT UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle that is unattended
shall immediately stop and shall, then and there, either locate and notify the
operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and
owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a
conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and
address of the driver of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a
statement of the circumstances thereof.
(2013 Code, § 20-29) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.264
§ 70.029 REPORT OF STRIKING FIXTURES UPON HIGHWAY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to
property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to
locate and notify the owner, a peace officer or person in charge of such
property of the damage and of the driver’s name and address and of the
registration number of the vehicle causing the damage and shall, upon request
and if available, exhibit the driver’s license and shall make report of such
accident, as required in I.C.A. § 321.265.
(2013 Code, § 20-30) (Ord. 66, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.265
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
§ 70.040 CONFORMITY WITH STATE SPECIFICATIONS.
   All traffic control devices upon the highways within the city shall conform
to the Federal Highway Administration Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
(2013 Code, § 20-36) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.255
§ 70.041 OBEDIENCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this traffic
code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-37) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.256
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT (ATE)
§ 70.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CITATION. A notice of violation generated in connection
with the automated traffic enforcement system.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT CONTRACTOR. The company or entity, if any,
with which the city contracts to provide equipment and/or services in
connection with the automated traffic enforcement system.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. An electronic system consisting of a
photographic, video, or electronic camera and a vehicle sensor installed to
work in conjunction with an official traffic controller or Police Department
employee to automatically produce photographs, video or digital images of each
vehicle violating a standard traffic control device or speed restriction.
   VEHICLE OWNER. The person or entity identified by the Iowa Department of
Transportation or identified by any other state vehicle registration office, as
the registered owner of a vehicle detected violating traffic law by failing to
obey speed regulations within the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the
event the Iowa Department of Transportation or any other state vehicle
registration office identifies a person or entity as the lessee of the vehicle,
that lessee shall be the vehicle owner for purposes of this section. In the
event a state registration office does not specify whether a person or entity
listed on the registration for the vehicle is the owner or the lessee of the
vehicle, any person or entity listed on that vehicle registration may be deemed
the vehicle owner and held jointly and respectively responsible for a violation
of this section.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.071 GENERAL.
   The city, in accordance with its police powers, may deploy, erect or cause
to be erected an automated traffic enforcement system for capturing images of
motor vehicles that violate traffic laws by failing to obey speed regulations
within the city. The system may be managed by a private contractor that owns
and operates the requisite equipment. The Police Chief shall retain supervisory
control over the system and, with prior City Council approval, shall determine
the exact deployment of the system components throughout the city. The
contractor shall provide photographic and/or video images of any potential
violations to the Police Department to review and, in the event the Police
Department determines a vehicle was operated in violation of the city's traffic
code ordinances, the Police Department shall direct that a notice of automated
traffic citation be issued to the vehicle owner in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.072 VEHICLE OWNER SUBJECT TO CIVIL FINE FOR AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   (A)   If a vehicle is detected traveling at a speed above the posted limit,
the vehicle owner shall be subject to a civil fine as scheduled below in §
70.074.
   (B)   Exemptions from this section are outlined in §
70.077, and shall not be considered violations for purposes of the automated
traffic enforcement system.
   (C)   In no event will an automated traffic citation be sent or reported to
the Iowa Department of Transportation or a similar department of any other
state for the purpose of being added to the vehicle owner's driving record.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.073 NOTICE OF AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CITATION.
   Upon a city police officer's determination that the automated traffic
enforcement system has detected a violation described in §
70.072, a notice of an automated traffic citation will be mailed to the vehicle
owner for each such violation recorded by the automated traffic enforcement
system. The automated traffic enforcement contractor shall mail the notice
within 30 days of receiving information about the vehicle owner. The notice
shall include the name and address of the vehicle owner; the vehicle make if
available and readily discernable; the vehicle registration number; the
violation alleged; the time, date, and location of the alleged violation; the
applicable fine; information as to how the automated traffic citation may be
challenged; and that the basis of the notice is a photographic or video record
generated by an automated traffic enforcement system.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022; Ord. 15057, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 70.074 FINES.
   Any violation of §
70.072 above shall be subject to a civil fine as scheduled in the table below,
and the fine for any violation committed in a designated construction zone as
provided by the Code of Iowa shall be doubled with a maximum fine of $1,000, as
scheduled below, subject in any event to the limit on fines sought in municipal
infractions.
 
Speed over the limit Civil fine Construction zone fine
11 through 20 mph    $75        $150
21 through 25 mph    $100       $200
26 through 30 mph    $250       $500
Over 30 mph          $500       $1,000
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022; Ord. 15086, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 70.075 CHALLENGING AN AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CITATION.
   Within 30 days from the date appearing at the top of a notice of automated
traffic citation sent to the vehicle owner, the vehicle owner may either pay
the fee associated with the citation or challenge the citation by submitting a
written challenge to the citation or requesting that a municipal infraction be
filed pursuant to I.C.A. § 364.22, as amended. Any such written challenge or
request must be on a form specified by and available from the city as indicated
on the notice and be sent to the city according to the instructions on the
form. This shall include an opportunity to submit evidence that the owner was
not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation, and to provide the name
and address of the person who was operating the vehicle at the time of the
violation. Upon receipt of a written challenge, a city police officer shall
determine whether the citation should be rescinded. Within 15 days after the
city receives such a challenge, the city shall notify the vehicle owner whether
the challenge to the automated traffic citation is granted, in which case, the
citation shall be rescinded. Otherwise, the citation shall stand. Thereafter,
the city may seek voluntary payment and/or file the citation as a municipal
infraction against the vehicle owner.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022; Ord. 15086, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 70.076 FAILURE TO TIMELY PAY OR CHALLENGE AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CITATION.
   If the recipient of an automated traffic citation does not either pay the
fine by the due date stated on the original citation or successfully challenge
the citation as provided herein above, the city may conduct collection
procedures in accordance with all applicable laws. The city holds the right to
file a municipal infraction against the vehicle owner in accordance with the
City Code Ch. 70 and I.C.A. § 364.22 as amended, seeking judgment for the
applicable civil fine provided in §§
70.074(B) and
70.074(C) above, plus state-mandated filing fee and court costs. If a judgment
is entered for the city in the municipal infraction proceeding, the city may,
subject to applicable law, pursue enforcement of the judgment together with
interest as permitted by law.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.077 EXEMPTIONS FROM § 70.072.
   The following shall not be considered violations for purposes of the
automated traffic enforcement system.
   (A)   The operator of the vehicle in question was issued a uniform traffic
citation for the violation in question pursuant to City Code Ch. 76 or I.C.A.
Ch. 321.
   (B)   The violation occurred at any time after the vehicle in question or
its state registration plates were reported to a law enforcement agency as
having been stolen, provided, however, the vehicle or its plates had not been
recovered by the vehicle owner at the time of the alleged violation.
   (C)   The vehicle in question was an authorized emergency vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing list of exemptions from this section shall not be
construed as limiting the defenses available to challenge an automated traffic
citation or defend a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 15055, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
70.006 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 20-6.1) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14137, passed 8-9-1982;
Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Vehicle Operation
   
71.001   Driving on right side of the road
   
71.002   Meeting and turning to right
   
71.003   Passing vehicles
   
71.004   Overtaking on the right
   
71.005   Overtaking on the left
   
71.006   When passing is prohibited
   
71.007   Driving on one-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.008   Roadways laned for traffic
   
71.009   Following too closely
   
71.010   Elevated structures
   
71.011   Safety zones
   
71.012   Use of safety belts, harnesses and child restraint devices required
   
71.013   Vehicles over eight tons
   Speed Limits and Related Offenses
   
71.025   Reckless driving
   
71.026   Drag racing
   
71.027   Control of vehicle
   
71.028   Information and notice as to speeding violation
   
71.029   Minimum speed
Turning and Starting
   
71.040   Turning at intersections
   
71.041   Turning on curve or crest of grade
   
71.042   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.043   When signal required
   
71.044   Signal to be continuous
   
71.045   Stop signals; types
   
71.046   Hand and arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
71.060   Entering intersections from different highways
   
71.061   Yield when turning left
   
71.062   Entering through highways
   
71.063   Entering stop or yield intersections
   
71.064   Backing vehicles
   
71.065   Operation on approach of emergency vehicles
Miscellaneous Rules
   
71.080   Unattended motor vehicle
   
71.081   Obstruction to driver’s view
   
71.082   Grades, defiles or curves
   
71.083   Coasting prohibited
   
71.084   Following fire apparatus
   
71.085   Crossing fire hose
   
71.086   Debris or injurious material; removal; clean-up
   
71.087   Backing to curb
   
71.088   Operation of vehicle upon flood walls, levees or dikes
   
71.089   School bus discharging pupils
   
71.090   Operation in parks
   
71.091   People on streets and parking areas; movement and presence
   
71.092   Motor vehicle licenses
   
71.093   Soliciting on roadway
 
   
71.999   Penalty
VEHICLE OPERATION
§ 71.001 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF THE ROAD.
   A vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway upon all
roadways of sufficient width, except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
   (B)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of
the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed
portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate
hazard;
   (C)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon;
   (D)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
   (E)   Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the
time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the
right-hand lane then available for traffic upon all roadways, or as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection, an alley, a private road or a
driveway; and
   (F)   A vehicle shall not be driven upon any roadway having four or more
lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes or except as permitted under division (B) above. This division (F) shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left
turn into or from an alley, a private road or a driveway.
(2013 Code, § 20-47) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.297
§ 71.002 MEETING AND TURNING TO RIGHT.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
71.001 of this chapter, vehicles or persons on horseback, meeting each other on
the public highway, shall yield one-half of the roadway by turning to the
right.
(2013 Code, § 20-48) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.298
§ 71.003 PASSING VEHICLES.
   The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules stated.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his or
her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-49) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.299
§ 71.004 OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle that is making or about to make a left turn.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, allowing sufficient
clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon
the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for four or more lines of moving traffic when such movement
can be made in safety.
   (C)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the
roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
(2013 Code, § 20-51) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.302
§ 71.005 OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
   (B)   The overtaking vehicle shall return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within 300 feet of a vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed limit in
excess of 30 mph, and the overtaking vehicle shall return to the right-hand
side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of a vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed limit
of 30 mph or less.
(2013 Code, § 20-52) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.303
§ 71.006 WHEN PASSING IS PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other
time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
   (A)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway
where the driver’s view along the highway is obstructed for a distance of
approximately 700 feet;
   (B)   When approaching within 100 feet of any narrow bridge, viaduct or
tunnel, when so signposted, or when approaching within 100 feet of or
traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; and
   (C)   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right or a distinctive centerline is marked, which distinctive line also so
directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the state’s
Department of Transportation.
(2013 Code, § 20-53) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.304
§ 71.007 DRIVING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of such island.
(2013 Code, § 20-54) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.305
§ 71.008 ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
with this section, shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such
allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such
sign.
   (D)   Vehicles moving in a lane designated for slow-moving traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles moving in the same direction in a lane not
so designated when such lanes merge to form a single lane.
   (E)   A portion of a highway provided with a lane for slow-moving vehicles
does not become a roadway marked for three lanes of traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-55) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.306
§ 71.009 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-56) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.307
§ 71.010 ELEVATED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any public bridge or elevated
structure at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed permitted under
this chapter on the street or highway at a point where the street or highway
joins the bridge or elevated structure.
      (2)   Provided that, if the maximum speed permitted on the street or
highway differs from the maximum speed on any other street or highway joining
the bridge or elevated structure, the lowest of the speeds shall be the maximum
speed limit on the bridge or elevated structure.
   (B)   However, no person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed that is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is signposted as provided by law.
(2013 Code, § 20-57) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.295
§ 71.011 SAFETY ZONES.
   No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven through or within a safety zone.
(2013 Code, § 20-58) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.340
§ 71.012 USE OF SAFETY BELTS, HARNESSES AND CHILD RESTRAINT DEVICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The driver and front seat occupants of a type of motor vehicle which
is subject to registration in the state, except a motorcycle or a motorized
bicycle, shall each wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt or safety
harness any time the vehicle is in forward motion on a street or highway in the
state, as required by state law.
   (B)   Child restraint devices shall be utilized as required by state law.
(2013 Code, § 20-59) (Ord. 14364, passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 14741, passed 7-12-
2004; Ord. 14875, passed 7-12-2010) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.013 VEHICLES OVER EIGHT TONS.
   (A)   Subject to the exceptions set out in division (B) below, no person
shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in excess of a registered weight of over
eight tons on the streets of the city where so designated by the City Council.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following: garbage trucks; utility
trucks; buses, including municipal and public buses; municipal fire apparatus
or road maintenance equipment owned or leased by the city, county or state;
delivery or moving trucks; trucks journeying to and from a truck terminal
without other access; implements of husbandry, as defined in I.C.A. § 321.1(16)
and implements of husbandry loaded on hauling units for transporting the
implements to locations for purposes of repair.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed so as to allow parking of trucks
in residential areas if doing so would be contrary to any ordinance of the
city.
   (D)   THROUGH TRAFFIC is defined as operation of a motor vehicle in excess
of a registered weight of eight tons on the streets designated pursuant to
division (A) above for purposes other than those designated in division (B)
above.
   (E)   Suitable signs shall be erected to advise the public of the provisions
of this section. For example: “NO THROUGH TRUCKS OVER 8 TONS”.
(2013 Code, § 20-60) (Ord. 14414, passed 2-8-1993) Penalty, see §
71.999
SPEED AND RELATED OFFENSES
§ 71.025 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in the city in such
manner as to indicate either a willful or a wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property.
(2013 Code, § 20-76) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.277
§ 71.026 DRAG RACING.
   No person shall engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of
speed on any street or highway of the state, and no person shall aid or abet
any motor vehicle speed contest or speed exhibition on any street or highway of
the state; except that, a passenger shall not be considered as aiding and
abetting. The term MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST OR EXHIBITION OF SPEED is
defined as one or more persons competing in speed in excess of the applicable
speed limit in vehicles on the public streets or highways.
(2013 Code, § 20-77) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.278
§ 71.027 CONTROL OF VEHICLE.
   The person operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle shall have the vehicle or
motorcycle under control and shall reduce the speed to a reasonable and proper
rate when:
   (A)   Approaching and passing a person walking in the traveled portion of
the public highway;
   (B)   Approaching and passing an animal which is being led, ridden or driven
upon a public highway;
   (C)   Approaching and traversing a crossing or intersection of public
highways or a bridge, a sharp turn, a curve or a steep descent, in a public
highway;
   (D)   Approaching and passing an emergency warning device displayed in
accordance with rules adopted under I.C.A. § 321.449, or an emergency vehicle
displaying a revolving or flashing light;
   (E)   Approaching and passing a slow-moving vehicle displaying a reflective
device as provided by I.C.A. § 321.383; and
   (F)   Approaching and passing through a signposted road work zone upon the
public highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-80) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.288
§ 71.028 INFORMATION AND NOTICE AS TO SPEEDING VIOLATION.
   In every charge of violation of Ch. 76, Schd. VIII, division (A), of this
code of ordinances, the information, as well as a notice to appear, shall
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the
speed limit applicable within the district or at the location.
(2013 Code, § 20-81) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.291
§ 71.029 MINIMUM SPEED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. Peace officers are
authorized to enforce this section by directions to drivers, and for apparent
willful disobedience to this section and refusal to comply with the direction
of an officer in accordance with this section, the continued slow operation by
a driver shall be a misdemeanor.
(2013 Code, § 20-82) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.294
TURNING AND STARTING
§ 71.040 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   Except as otherwise indicated by markings, buttons or signs, the driver of a
vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows.
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof, and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   (C)   (1)   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way
street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection.
      (2)   A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection.
(2013 Code, § 20-91) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Power of city to regulate or prohibit turning at intersections, see I.C.A. §
321.236(9)
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.311
§ 71.041 TURNING ON CURVE OR CREST OF GRADE.
   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon
any curve or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade or hill, where
such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(2013 Code, § 20-92) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.312
§ 71.042 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle that is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(2013 Code, § 20-93) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.313
§ 71.043 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after
giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be
affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner
provided in this subchapter if any other vehicle may be affected by such
movement.
(2013 Code, § 20-94) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.314
§ 71.044 SIGNAL TO BE CONTINUOUS.
   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously
during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning
when the speed limit is 45 mph or less and a continuous signal during not less
than the last 300 feet when the speed limit is in excess of 45 mph.
(2013 Code, § 20-95) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.315
§ 71.045 STOP SIGNALS; TYPES.
   (A)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this
subchapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is
opportunity to give such signal.
(2013 Code, § 20-96)
   (B)   The signals required under the provisions of this subchapter may be
given either by means of the hand and arm as provided in §
71.046 of this chapter or by a mechanical or electrical directional signal
device or light conforming to the provisions of this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-97)
(Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 321.316, 321.317(1)
§ 71.046 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   All signals required in this subchapter which may be given by hand and
arm shall when so given be given from the left side of the vehicle.
   (B)   The following manner and interpretation thereof is suggested:
      (1)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease of speed: hand and arm extended downward.
(2013 Code, § 20-98) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.318
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 ENTERING INTERSECTIONS FROM DIFFERENT HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   When two vehicles enter an intersection from different highways or
public streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the
left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The rule in division (A) above is modified at through highways and
otherwise as stated in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-111) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.319
§ 71.061 YIELD WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left within an intersection or
into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction which are within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, then the
driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by
this chapter, may make such left turn.
(2013 Code, § 20-112) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.320
§ 71.062 ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as required by this subchapter
at the entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from the through highway or which
are approaching so closely on the through highway as to constitute a hazard,
but the driver having so yielded may proceed cautiously and with due care enter
the through highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-113) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.321
§ 71.063 ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a
stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop
line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle on the intersecting roadway that has entered the intersection or which
is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop
at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before
entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which
has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection.
(2013 Code, § 20-114) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.322
§ 71.064 BACKING VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate a vehicle on a highway in reverse gear unless and
until such operation can be made with reasonable safety, and shall yield the
right-of-way to any approaching vehicle on the highway or intersecting highway
thereto which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(2013 Code, § 20-115) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.323
§ 71.065 OPERATION ON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle with
any lamp or device displaying a red light or an authorized emergency vehicle of
a Fire Department displaying a blue light or when the driver is giving audible
signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear
of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer. For the purposes of this section, the term RED LIGHT or BLUE
LIGHT means a light or lighting device that, when illuminated, will exhibit a
solid flashing or strobing red or blue light.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-116) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.324
MISCELLANEOUS RULES
§ 71.080 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine or, when standing upon any
perceptible grade, without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning
the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-386) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.362
§ 71.081 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER’S VIEW.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are
in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with
the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his or her
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-387) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.363
§ 71.082 GRADES, DEFILES AND CURVES.
   The driver of a motor vehicle traveling through defiles or on approaching
the crest of a hill or grade shall have such motor vehicle under control and on
the right-hand side of the roadway and, upon approaching any curve where the
view is obstructed within a distance of 200 feet along the highway, shall give
audible warning with the horn of such motor vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-388) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.083 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive with the source of motive
power disengaged from the driving wheels, except when disengagement is
necessary to stop or to shift gears.
(2013 Code, § 20-389) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.365
§ 71.084 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus
has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
(2013 Code, § 20-390) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.367
§ 71.085 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
(2013 Code, § 20-391) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.368
§ 71.086 DEBRIS OR INJURIOUS MATERIAL; REMOVAL; CLEAN-UP.
   (A)   A person shall not throw or deposit upon a highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, grass,
leaves, lawn clippings or any other debris. A person shall not throw or deposit
upon a highway a substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon
the highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-392)
   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material and other material, as defined in
division (A) above, shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be
removed.
(2013 Code, § 20-393)
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from
such vehicle. Any owners or operators of motor vehicles involved in an accident
in which the investigating officer determines the operator to be at fault, or
to share fault, and which requires a response by the city’s Fire Department to
control a fire, extract individuals from the wreckage, remove hazardous
materials or restore the road way to a safe condition, shall be liable to the
city for the cost of the materials and services provided in amounts established
by resolution of the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 20-394)
(Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14893, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 14934, passed
9-8-2014) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 321.369, 321.370, 321.371
§ 71.087 BACKING TO CURB.
   It shall be unlawful to back any vehicle to the curb for the purpose of
loading or unloading, in the business district on Main Street, or on any street
where the position of such vehicle will interfere with or impede the movement
of traffic along the street.
(2013 Code, § 20-395) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 8141, passed 7-11-1951)
Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.088 OPERATION OF VEHICLE UPON FLOODWALLS, LEVEES OR DIKES.
   (A)   No person shall use or operate any motor vehicle or bicycle, except
for maintenance vehicles or emergency vehicles or snowmobiles, on any portion
of any dike, levee or floodwall or within 50 feet of the toe of any dike, levee
or floodwall, except at such areas designated and marked as authorized
crossings.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term TOE OF ANY DIKE is defined as that
point where the sloping sides of the flood control dike or levee ends and where
the sloping sides of the dike or levee meets the surrounding area.
(2013 Code, § 20-396) (Ord. 12975, passed 7-28-1976) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.089 SCHOOL BUS DISCHARGING PUPILS.
   (A)   The driver of a school bus used to transport children to and from a
public or private school shall, when stopping to receive or discharge pupils,
turn on flashing warning lamps at a distance of not less than 300 feet or more
than 500 feet from the point where the pupils are to be received or discharged
from the bus if the speed limit at that point is 45 mph or greater and shall
turn on flashing warning lamps at a distance of not less than 150 feet from the
point where the pupils are to be received or discharged from the bus if the
speed limit at that point is less than 45 mph. At the point of receiving or
discharging pupils, the driver of the bus shall bring the bus to a stop, turn
off the amber flashing warning lamps, turn on the red flashing warning lamps
and extend the stop arm. After receiving or discharging pupils, the bus driver
shall turn off all flashing warning lamps, retract the stop arm and proceed on
the route. Except to the extent that reduced visibility is caused by fog, snow
or other weather conditions, a school bus shall not stop to receive or
discharge pupils unless there is at least 300 feet of unobstructed vision in
each direction. However, the driver of a school bus is not required to use
flashing warning lamps and the stop arm when receiving or discharging pupils at
a designated loading and unloading zone at a school attendance center or at
extracurricular or educational activity locations where students exiting the
bus do not have to cross the street or highway.
   (B)   If a school bus provided by an urban transit system is equipped with
flashing warning lights and a stop arm, the driver of the school bus shall use
the flashing warning light and stop arm as required by law.
   (C)   A school bus, when operating on a highway with four or more lanes,
shall not stop to load or unload pupils who must cross the highway, except at
designated stops where pupils who must cross the highway may do so at points
where there are official traffic control devices or police officers.
   (D)   A school bus shall, while carrying passengers, have its headlights
turned on.
   (E)   All pupils shall be received and discharged from the right front
entrance of every school bus and, if the pupils must cross the highway, they
shall be required to pass in front of the bus, look in both directions, and
proceed to cross the highway only on signal from the bus driver.
   (F)   The driver of a vehicle, including the driver of a vehicle operating
on a private road or driveway, when meeting a school bus with flashing amber
warning lamps shall reduce the vehicle’s speed to not more than 20 mph and
shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop when the school bus stops and the
stop signal arm is extended. The vehicle shall remain stopped until the stop
signal arm is retracted, after which time the driver may proceed with due
caution.
   (G)   The driver of a vehicle, including the driver of a vehicle operating
on a private road or driveway, overtaking a school bus shall not pass a school
bus when red or amber warning signal lights are flashing. The driver shall
bring the vehicle to a complete stop no closer than 15 feet from the school bus
when it is stopped and the stop arm is extended, and the vehicle shall remain
stopped until the stop arm is retracted and the school bus resumes motion.
   (H)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway providing two or more lanes in
each direction need not stop upon meeting a school bus which is traveling in
the opposite direction, even though the school bus is stopped.
(2013 Code, § 20-397) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 11308, passed 10-15-
1968) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.372
§ 71.090 OPERATION IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any motor vehicle or
bicycle in any park, playground or other recreation area owned or operated by
the city, except on established roadways or streets open to public use or
unless signs are posted allowing such use.
(2013 Code, § 20-398) (Ord. 12502, passed 7-24-1974) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Exclusion of vehicles from parks and cemeteries, see I.C.A. § 321.248
§ 71.091 PEOPLE ON STREETS AND PARKING AREAS; MOVEMENT AND PRESENCE.
   (A)   Statement of purpose.
      (1)   This section is adopted out of concern for the health, safety and
welfare of those using the public streets and parking areas within the city.
      (2)   This section is designed to prevent injury to both property and
persons.
   (B)   Definitions. The terms “motor vehicle”, “truck”, “pickup”,
“motorcycle”, “motorized bicycle” and “bicycle” are defined by reference to the
definitions of the terms found in I.C.A. Ch. 321.1, all of which are adopted by
this reference.
   (C)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to do any
of the following upon the public streets, alleys or parking areas within the
city:
         (a)   Sit upon the hood, fenders, roof, trunk lid, bumpers or pickup
box of any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or parking areas;
         (b)   Sit or stand upon the public streets or parking areas;
         (c)   Sit upon the sidewalk or curb and in doing so allow any part of
the human torso to rest on the public streets or parking areas; and
         (d)   Sit upon any motorcycle, motorized bicycle or bicycle while such
is parked upon the public streets or parking areas.
      (2)   The conduct declared unlawful as set out in this division (C) shall
only be so between the hours of 8:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. daily.
   (D)   Lawful acts. It shall not be unlawful for any person to sit within a
car, pickup or truck lawfully parked on a public street or parking area. It
shall not be unlawful for any person to traverse over and upon a public street
or parking area for otherwise lawful purposes, including ingress and egress to
and from a lawfully parked motor vehicle, truck, pickup, motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or bicycle.
(2013 Code, § 20-399) (Ord. 14399, passed 10-26-1992; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.092 MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSES.
   (A)   General. Operators of all motor vehicles, including, but not limited
to, motor scooters and motorized bicycles, operated on the public street are
required to be properly licensed in accordance with the Code of Iowa, except:
      (1)   Motorized wheel chairs, three- or four-wheel, may be operated for
the purpose of transporting the disabled;
      (2)   Lawn mowers operated for the purpose of mowing the grass may use
the public street to take the most direct route from one residence to another;
      (3)   Farm equipment may be operated for the purpose of agriculture; and
      (4)   Golf carts may be operated and licensed as provided in §
70.006(B) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 20-400)
   (B)   Sidewalk operator of motorized vehicles.
      (1)   The operation of all motorized vehicles, including, but not limited
to, motor scooters and motorized bicycles, are prohibited on public sidewalks.
      (2)   However, motorized wheel chairs, three or four wheel, may operate
on a public sidewalk for the purpose of transporting the disabled.
(2013 Code, § 20-401)
   (C)   Vehicle licenses. All motor vehicles operated on the public streets
must be properly licensed and insured in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(2013 Code, § 20-402)
§ 71.093 SOLICITING ON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stand on the roadway, including the roadway medians, curbs,
traffic islands and shoulders, for purposes of soliciting a ride, employment,
charitable contributions or business, from the occupant of any vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-403) (Ord. 14773, passed 10-10-2005) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
71.013 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100.
(2013 Code, § 20-60)
   (C)   A person who violates §
71.091 of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 20-399)
   (D)   A person violating a provision of §
71.092 of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 20-403)
(Ord. 14414, passed 2-8-1993; Ord. 14723, passed 9-8-2003; Ord. 14970, passed
11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING RULES
Section
General
   
72.001   Definitions
Stopping, Standing or Parking
   
72.010   General prohibition
   
72.011   Overtime and alternate parking
   
72.012   Semi-tractors, trucks or trailers
   
72.013   Responsibility for vehicles
   
72.014   Removal of unattended vehicle from bridge, tunnel or causeway
   
72.015   Stopping on traveled way
   
72.016   Moving another’s vehicle
   
72.017   Theaters, hotels and auditoriums
   
72.018   Parking at right-hand curb
   
72.019   Parking within lines
   
72.020   Parking over 24 hours
   
72.021   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
72.022   Street right-of-way and terrace parking
   
72.023   Median strips
   
72.024   Parking in alleys
   
72.025   Municipally owned parking lots
   
72.026   Street parking near intersections
Parking on Residential Properties
   
72.035   Purpose
   
72.036   Scope
   
72.037   Driveways; number, composition, location and size
   
72.038   Driveway extensions in front yards; exceptions
   
72.039   Residential parking
   
72.040   Unlicensed, inoperable vehicles
   
72.041   Responsibility for violations
   
72.042   No prior notice, warning required
Parking on Business Properties
   
72.055   Purpose
   
72.056   Scope
   
72.057   Driveways and parking
   
72.058   Unlicensed, inoperable vehicles
   
72.059   Responsibility for violations
   
72.060   No prior notice, warning required
Special Stops
   
72.070   Railroads; obedience to signals; crossings
   
72.071   Primary roads designated as through highways
   
72.072   Emerging and yielding when emerging from private roadway, alley,
building or driveway
Habitual Violator Penalty and Procedures
   
72.085   Habitual violator
   
72.086   Removal and impoundment of illegally parked vehicles
   
72.087   Right of owner to redeem impounded vehicle
   
72.088   Right to hearing
   
72.089   Conduct of hearing
 
   
72.999   Penalty
GENERAL
§ 72.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. The same as defined in §
156.M.003 of this code of ordinances.
      BUSINESS. An organization or enterprising entity engaged in commercial,
industrial, or professional activities. Businesses can be for-profit entities
or non-profit organizations. Excludes home occupations (home-based businesses
defined in §
156.C.007.G(1)).
      BUSINESS DISTRICT. The same as defined in §
70.001 of this code of ordinances.
      CORNER LOT. A lot located at the junction of at least two streets or
private ways, or at least two segments of a curved street or private ways, at
which the angle of intersection is no greater than 135 degrees.
      CURB CUT or CURB DROP. A cut made through the street curb that has
previously been authorized and approved by the city.
      DRIVEWAY. A surface consisting of materials allowed in §
72.037 constructed and maintained in quality, quantity, and size to prevent the
creation of ruts in, or deterioration or damage to, the driveway surface or
soil beneath from the operation or parking of vehicles, trailers, or
recreational vehicles located within a yard and connected to an approved curb
drop or entrance.
      DRIVEWAY APRON. The portion of a driveway which is located in the street
right-of-way.
      DRIVEWAY EXTENSION. The portion of a driveway which is in excess of the
allotted driveway width, which is contiguous to a driveway which shall lead to
a curb drop or entrance, and which consists of materials allowed in §
72.037 constructed and maintained in quality, quantity, and size to prevent the
creation of ruts in, or deterioration or damage to, the driveway extension or
soil beneath from the operation or parking of vehicles, trailers, recreational
vehicles thereon.
      DWELLING; DWELLING, APARTMENT; DWELLING, DUPLEX; DWELLING, MULTIPLEX;
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED; DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED; DWELLING,
TOWNHOUSE; and DWELLING, UNIT. The same as defined in §
156.M.003 of this code of ordinances.
      ENTRANCE. A portion of the driveway that is the approved exit from a
street or alley onto private property, which has previously been authorized and
approved by the city.
      FRONTAGE. The length of a property line of any one premises abutting and
parallel to a public street right-of-way.
      FRONT YARD. The portion of the parcel that is between the street right-
of-way line and the front and closest face of the dwelling containing the
primary entrance. Refer to
Ch. 156, Zoning, for additional information.
      LOT. A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat.
      REAR YARD. The portion of the parcel that remains that is not classified
as either front, side street front, or side yard. Refer to
Ch. 156, Zoning, for additional information.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle designed for recreational use such as
camping (means a vehicular or portable unit designed to be mounted on a chassis
and wheels, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by
another vehicle, such as travel trailers, fifth wheel trailers, camping
trailers, motor homes, or truck campers which may be used as a temporary
dwelling or sleeping place).
      RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The same as defined in §
70.001 of this code of ordinances.
      RESIDENTIAL ZONE. Any area of the city designated by the official zoning
map of the city as Rural Residential (RR), Low-Density Residential (RL),
Medium-Density Residential (RM), High-Density Residential (RH), or Planned Unit
Development District with majority residential uses.
      SIDE STREET FRONT YARD. On a corner lot, the portion of the parcel
adjacent to street right-of-way that is between the front yard and parcel line
opposite of the side of the primary entrance of the primary structure or
dwelling. The side street front yard extends along the side of the structure/
dwelling and the side street to the rear lot line. Refer to
Ch. 156, Zoning, for additional information.
      SIDE YARD. The portion of the parcel that is between the front yard and
the rear and furthest face of the primary structure or dwelling that is not
adjacent to the street right-of-way. Refer to
Ch. 156, Zoning, for additional information.
      STREET. The same as defined in §
156.M.003 of this code of ordinances.
      TRAILER. The same as defined in §
70.001 of this code of ordinances.
      VEHICLE. The same as defined in §
70.001 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   All other words and terms, not enumerated in division (A) above shall
be defined as provided in other chapters of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
Cross-references:
   Traffic code definitions generally, see §
70.001
   Zoning provisions and definitions, see
Ch. 156
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING
§ 72.010 GENERAL PROHIBITION
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device,
in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk or portion thereof;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within five feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (G)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within ten feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
   (H)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when
parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light;
   (I)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when properly signed;
   (J)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (K)   On the roadway side of any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle
stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
   (L)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking;
   (M)   Upon any street within the corporate limits of the city when stopping,
standing, or parking is prohibited by a general ordinance of uniform
application relating to the removal of snow or ice from the streets;
   (N)   In front of a curb cut or ramp that is located on public or private
property in a manner that blocks access to the curb cut or ramp;
   (O)   On the terrace or easement area if visual hazard; and/or
   (P)   On any grass or dirt except as otherwise noted in this chapter or
Ch. 156, Zoning.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §§
71.999 and
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.358
§ 72.011 OVERTIME AND ALTERNATE PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle, trailer,
or recreational vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to
be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time at any location
designated.
   (B)   In reference to overtime parking, the method of parking shall be as
follows: Every vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle stopped or parked upon
a roadway shall be stopped or parked with the wheels parallel with and within
18 inches of the curb, and not closer than four feet end to end from another
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Overtime alternate parking shall apply to all streets within the
incorporated limits of the city, except as to streets or portions of streets
hereinafter expressly excluded or not signed as such.
      (2)   Overtime alternate parking shall apply to the entire length or
course of said street within the incorporated limits of the city, except as to
such portion hereinafter expressly excluded or not signed as such.
   (D)   Streets and avenues running in an easterly and westerly direction,
parking on the south side of said street or avenue before 9:00 a.m. is
prohibited on Monday, Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday, and on the north side of
said street or avenue before 9:00 a.m. on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday.
   (E)   Streets and avenues running in a northerly and southerly direction,
parking shall be prohibited on the west side of said streets and avenues before
9:00 a.m. Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, and on the east side of the street
or avenue before 9:00 a.m. Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday.
   (F)   This section shall have no application and is expressly declared to be
inapplicable to the existing parking ordinances or regulations regarding the
portions of streets and avenues bordering on and immediately adjacent to all
public-school grounds and also the portions of streets and avenues bordering on
and immediately adjacent to all parochial-school grounds.
   (G)   (1)   General.
         (a)   A street or avenue beginning in a straight course from Main
Street in a southerly and northerly direction, and then taking a diagonal
course, shall for the purpose of this section be classified throughout its
length as a north and south street or avenue. A street or avenue beginning in a
straight course from Center Street in an easterly and westerly direction and
then taking a diagonal course, shall, for the purpose of this section, be
classified throughout its length as an east and west street or avenue.
         (b)   All other diagonal streets or avenues shall be deemed north and
south streets if they angle less than 45 degrees from true north.
         (c)   All other diagonal streets or avenues shall be deemed east and
west streets or avenues if they angle more than 45 degrees from true north.
      (2)   Curved streets. Streets curved in part shall be classified as north
and south streets if the major portion thereof runs in a northerly and
southerly direction. Streets curved in part shall be classified as east and
west streets if the major portion thereof runs in an easterly and westerly
direction.
      (3)   Specific designations. Brentwood Road and Brentwood Place shall be
declared north and south streets or avenues for the purpose of this section.
Brentwood Terrace shall be deemed and so declared an east and west street or
avenue for the purpose of this section.
   (H)   (1)   The principle of the use of alternate sides for the control of
the parking or leave standing of vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle is
hereby established.
      (2)   The hour of change shall be at 9:00 a.m. on each day of the week on
the streets and avenues herein covered.
   (I)   Appropriate signs stating thereon “NO PARKING” followed by the days of
the week on which a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle shall not be
parked or left standing shall be placed and maintained by the Street Department
adjacent to the curb along the portions of the street included in the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.012 SEMI-TRACTORS, TRUCKS OR TRAILERS.
   (A)   The stopping, parking, or leaving standing of a semi-tractor, truck,
or trailer, either alone or in conjunction with each other with a five-and-one-
half-ton license or more for more than three hours is considered an overtime
parking violation and hereby prohibited in any residential zone in the city;
provided, however, that, the Police Department shall allow parking in excess of
three hours when the tractor, truck or trailer is parked to render a service in
the immediate vicinity.
   (B)   Semi-trailers located within residential or commercial zones must be
licensed, fully road operational, and may not be used for storage purposes
unless part of an active city-permitted construction project.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.013 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Scope of section. This section shall apply to all vehicles, trailers,
or recreational vehicles parked within the city in violation of ordinances
regulating parking.
   (B)   Owner’s responsibility. If any vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle is found stopped, standing, or parked in any manner violative of
ordinances concerning parking, when the identity of the operator cannot be
determined, the owner or person or corporation in whose name the vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie
responsible for the violation.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.014 REMOVAL OF UNATTENDED VEHICLE FROM BRIDGE, TUNNEL OR CAUSEWAY.
   Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle
unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such
officer is authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.357
§ 72.015 STOPPING ON TRAVELED WAY.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Upon any state or federal highway outside of a business or
residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the
paved or improved or main-traveled part of the state or federal highway when it
is practical to stop, park or so leave such vehicle, trailer or recreational
vehicle off such part of the state or federal highway, but in every event a
clear and unobstructed width of at least 20 feet of such part of the state or
federal highway opposite such standing vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view
of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such state or federal highway; provided, however, school buses
may stop on a state or federal highway for receiving and discharge pupils, and
all other vehicles shall stop for school buses which are stopped to receive or
discharge pupils, as provided in § 
71.089 of this code of ordinances.
         (b)   Upon any street outside of a business or residence district, no
person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, trailer or recreational
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the main-traveled portion of the
street designed for the through movement of vehicles, exclusive of auxiliary
lanes or designated parking lanes/areas thereon as otherwise permitted by the
city or as set forth in an approved ordinance; provided, however, school buses
may stop on a street for receiving and discharge of pupils, and all other
vehicles, trailers or recreational vehicles shall stop for school buses which
are stopped to receive or discharge pupils, as provided in §
71.089 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to a vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle making a turn as provided in §
71.040 of this code of ordinances.
      (3)   This section also does not apply to the stopping or parking of a
maintenance vehicle or trailer operated by a street authority on the main-
traveled way of any roadway when necessary to the function being performed and
when early warning devices are properly displayed.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to the driver of
any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle that is disabled while on the
paved or improved or main-traveled portion of a street in such manner and to
such extent that it is impossible to avoid so stopping and temporarily leaving
such disabled vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle in such position.
   (C)   Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle standing upon a street in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, such officer is authorized to move such vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle to move the vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle to a position off the paved or improved or main-traveled
part of such street.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 321.354 through 321.356
§ 72.016 MOVING ANOTHER’S VEHICLE.
   No person shall move a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle not owned
by such person into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance
as is unlawful.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
71.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.359
§ 72.017 THEATERS, HOTELS, AND AUDITORIUMS.
   A space of not to exceed 50 feet is reserved at the side of the street in
front of any theater, auditorium, or hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms,
or other building where large assemblages of people are being held, within
which space, when clearly marked as such, no vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped, except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.360
§ 72.018 PARKING AT RIGHT-HAND CURB.
   Except where angle or center parking or parking of a vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 18 inches
of the left-hand curb of a one-way roadway is permitted by ordinance, every
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there is an adjacent curb shall be so stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels of such vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle parallel with and
within 18 inches of the right-hand curb.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.361
§ 72.019 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   Whenever stalls or sections for vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles
are marked or painted upon the surface of any street or municipally owned or
leased parking lot, the driver or operator of any vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle shall park the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle
within the limits of one of the stalls or sections and not over or across the
lines.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.020 PARKING OVER 24 HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, trailer, recreational vehicle, machinery, mobile or movable equipment
of any kind upon any street, avenue, alley, or highway for more than 24
consecutive hours; however, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers
or recreational vehicles, machinery, mobile or movable equipment being used to
move, deliver and/or take articles to and from a yard or building or structure
located thereon or used in connection with providing a temporary service
thereon for a reasonable period of time while in the active process of such
use.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.021 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   It shall be unlawful to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle in any bus
stop or taxicab stand, except that a temporary stop may be made to load or
unload passengers.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.022 STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY AND TERRACE PARKING.
   Absent a designated parking area that does not create a visual hazard
pursuant to Table 156.B.008.a-1, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or
leave standing any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle on any street
right-of-way or terrace area between the outside curb line of any public
street, road or avenue and the outside walk line (if present) or right-of-way
property line of any street at any time or to use such terrace for the storage
or parking of any such vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle; however, this
section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or recreational vehicles,
machinery, mobile or movable equipment being used to move, deliver and/or take
articles to and from a yard or building or structure located thereon or used in
connection with providing a temporary service thereon for a reasonable period
of time while in the active process of such use.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.023 MEDIAN STRIPS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle on any part or portion of any median
strip.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.024 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle in any alley at any time, even for loading or
unloading, where the city has strictly prohibited blocking of such alley by the
posting of permanent or temporary signage. This section shall not apply to
garbage, refuse, or recycling collection where loading and unloading occurs
with the vehicle running; persons performing the collection services stay
within 30 feet of the vehicle at all times; services are immediately and
continuously rendered until the vehicle is moved; and services are anticipated
to take less than two minutes.
   (B)   If no designated signage prohibiting the blocking of an alley exists,
an alley may be blocked only to load or unload for a reasonable period of time,
and in no event shall exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.025 MUNICIPALLY OWNED PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Blocking access or traffic flow in parking lots. No vehicle, trailer,
or recreational vehicle shall be parked in any lot in any manner or of such
size to block the free access or flow of traffic in and through any parking
lot.
   (B)   Impoundment of vehicles left on municipally owned parking lots. Any
vehicle parked or left standing on any municipally owned or municipally leased
parking lot for longer than 72 continuous hours may be removed therefrom and
stored under the direction of the Police Department or Parking and Code
Enforcement Officer, and all costs of such removal and storage shall be payable
by the operator or owner thereof. Any expense incurred therefor shall be in
addition to the assessment of any fine or costs arising out of any violation of
this subchapter.
   (C)   Impoundment of semi-trucks, construction equipment, trailers, or
recreational vehicles left overnight in municipally owned parking lots. Any
semi-trucks, construction equipment, trailers, or recreational vehicles parked
or left standing on any municipally owned or municipally leased parking lot
overnight between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m., without authorization
from the Public Works Department, may be removed therefrom and stored under the
direction of the Police Department or Parking and Code Enforcement Officer, and
all costs of such removal and storage shall be payable by the operator or owner
thereof. Any expense incurred therefor shall be in addition to the assessment
of any fine or costs arising out of any violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.026 STREET PARKING NEAR INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle on any street or avenue within 20 feet of the
sidewalk extended to the curb at any street or avenue intersection. In areas
where no sidewalk exists, it shall be the extension of the street right-of-way
line.
   (B)   Upon application of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer at
designated intersections and school crossings, it shall be unlawful to stop,
park, or leave standing any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle on any
street or avenue within 40 feet of the sidewalk extended to the curb at any
street or avenue intersection or within 40 feet of a school crossing. In areas
where no sidewalk exists, it shall be the extension of the street right-of-way
line.
   (C)   Upon approval by the City Council as an ordinance, additional
prohibited parking areas may be designated.
   (D)   In divisions (B) and (C), above, it shall be indicated by appropriate
signage. Yellow striping of the curb may be used in addition, all consistent
with uniform practices.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
§ 72.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the residential parking regulations in this subchapter is to
prevent the unreasonable diminishing or impairment of established property
values and aesthetics within the city and to preserve public health, safety,
and welfare.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.036 SCOPE.
   (A)   The regulations in this subchapter apply to all residential-zoned
districts and residential-use properties, regardless of zone, within the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to conflict with or supersede
regulations in
Ch. 156, Zoning, Article E, Parking, Loading, and Stacking. All applicable
developments or use changes must meet
Ch. 156, Article E. Properties that have applied for and been approved for
limited use permit, special use permit, variance, or other zoning-related
requirements and waivers shall govern if a conflict in parking requirements are
specifically listed and included in the permit or variance approved.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.037 DRIVEWAYS; NUMBER, COMPOSITION, LOCATION AND SIZE.
   (A)   Composition of the driveway and entrance surface.
      (1)   Under this subchapter, a driveway and entrance shall be a surface
constructed of materials as follows:
 
                                        Allowable Front     Allowable Rear and
                    Allowable Driveway  Yard/Side Street    Side Yard Driveway
                    Approach Materials  Front Yard Driveway and Extension
                                        and Extension       Materials
                                        Materials
Driveways installed Concrete, asphalt,  Concrete, asphalt,  Concrete, asphalt,
prior to 2010 and   seal coat, solid    seal coat, solid    seal coat, solid
continuously        bricks, gravel, or  bricks, gravel, or  bricks, gravel, or
maintained          crushed stone       crushed stone       crushed stone
Driveways installed                                         Concrete, asphalt,
after 1-1-2010 and  Concrete, asphalt,  Concrete, asphalt,  seal coat, solid
prior to 10-1- 2024 or solid bricks     or solid bricks     bricks, gravel, or
                                                            crushed stone
                                                            Concrete, asphalt,
                                                            seal coat, or solid
                                                            bricks
                    Concrete (shall be                      Exception: Gravel
Driveways installed a minimum of 6                          or crushed stone
on or after 10-1-   inches) or asphalt  Concrete, asphalt,  shall be allowed if
2024                (shall be an        or solid bricks     directly connected
                    equivalent                              through the
                    strength)                               driveway to a
                                                            gravel street,
                                                            gravel alley, or
                                                            grassed alley.
 
      (2)   Driveways shall be maintained in quality, quantity, and size to
prevent the creation of ruts in or deterioration or damage to the driveway or
soil beneath from the operation or parking of vehicles, recreational vehicles,
or trailers.
   (B)   Location of driveway or parking areas.
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   Only one driveway shall be allowed in a front yard per street
frontage, except that a duplex with garages located at each end of the building
shall be permitted a driveway for each garage.
         (b)   No driveway shall be located in front of a dwelling, except for
any dwelling area portions attached to and located above or behind a garage.
         (c)   A driveway shall not lead perpendicularly to the side of a
garage where there is no garage door.
         (d)   A driveway shall be connected and lead to only one curb drop or
entrance, except for residences on a corner lot located on a major or minor
arterial or major collector roadway, as defined in the city’s Comprehensive
Plan and any future amendments to the plan, which can apply to the City
Engineer for permission to connect a driveway to two curb drops for the sole
purpose of allowing safe entry onto the roadway.
      (2)   Additional requirements.
         (a)   Parking of all vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers,
must be in a permanent roofed structure or on a driveway or driveway extension
meeting the materials allowed in this section.
         (b)   Driveway and parking areas must be connected to a driveway
leading from an approved curb drop or entrance.
         (c)   The maximum number of vehicles, recreational vehicles, and
trailers, allowed to be parked at one time on a parcel outside of a permanent
roofed enclosure shall be as follows:
            1.   Dwelling, single-family attached; dwelling, single-family
detached; dwelling, duplex; dwelling, townhouse; and dwelling, multiplex.
               a.   Maximum quantity shall be in accordance with §
156.E.004.
               b.   Any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle longer than
30-feet in length shall count as two.
               c.   There shall be a maximum of two trailers.
            2.   Dwelling, apartment.
               a.   Maximum quantity shall be in accordance with §
156.E.004.
               b.   Any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle longer than
30-feet in length shall count as two.
      (3)   The vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle wheels and any
component touching the ground must be located entirely on surfacing in
accordance with division (A) of this section.
      (4)   Maintenance.
         (a)   Existing gravel or crushed stone must be maintained and have a
minimum of four inches of depth, to be free from weeds and grass and to a depth
to prevent erosion and rutting.
         (b)   All other surfaces must meet the requirements of division (A)
above.
   (C)   Width of driveway.
      (1)   The maximum width of a driveway shall be based on the vehicle stall
count of the permanent roofed vehicle enclosure (garage) and be no wider than
the following:
 
Garage Capacity             Maximum Width
No connected garage         10 feet (plus a maximum of 1 driveway extension)
1-vehicle-stall-wide garage 12 feet (plus a maximum of 1 driveway extension)
2-vehicle-stall-wide garage 24 feet (plus a maximum of 1 driveway extension)
3-vehicle-stall-wide garage 24 feet (plus a maximum of 1 driveway extension)
                            All 4-vehicle-stall-wide garages and larger shall
                            be placed on the lot so all the garage doors do not
4-stall garages and larger  face the primary street. Some or all of the doors
                            shall be perpendicular to the street. The driveway
                            width in the front yard shall not be greater than
                            24 feet, plus 1 driveway extension
 
      (2)   The driveway width shall be measured at the property line, as shown
in the following exhibits.
      (3)   In cases where the garage is more than four feet wider than the
edge of a garage overhead door, the Engineering Office shall have the
discretion to reclassify the stall count or allow driveway tapering. All
approvals shall be noted on the driveway permit.
      (4)   A driveway extension shall be a maximum width of 10 feet. If a
driveway extension runs past the front face of the dwelling or garage as a
driveway extension, the driveway extension's maximum width shall be measured
perpendicular to the driveway extension at the location where the extension
passes the front face, as shown in the following exhibit.
      (5)   In situations where a driveway extension is located along the side
of a structure with a roof overhang that causes conflict between vehicles,
trailers, or recreational vehicles, the driveway extension may be increased in
width by the amount of the roof overhang, up to four feet. Driveway extension
tapering or width changes shall be utilized to reduce the allowable width back
to the requirements, as documented on the driveway permit.
      (6)   A curb cut or entrance may flare out between the property line and
an approved entrance or curb cut in accordance with Marshalltown Supplementary
Specifications to SUDAS, so long as not to cross a property line without
written/recorded permission from the adjacent property owner. (For reference
only: SUDAS 2024 allows three- to five-foot flare.)
   Parking Rules
   City of Marshalltown, Iowa
   Driveway Extension Exhibits
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3323.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3325.png]
 
   (D)    Exemption for large lots. Residential lots greater than one-half acre
and with a front yard depth greater than 75 feet are exempt from the provisions
of division (B) above and §
72.038 of this chapter, with the exception of paving requirements. A driveway
permit application is required to be submitted and approved by the city to
verify that the lot qualifies as a large lot. The driveway width at the
property line shall not be greater than 24 feet with no opportunity for a
driveway extension.
   (E)   Exemption for approved planned unit developments (PUD).
      (1)   Residential PUDs that have been approved by the Plan and Zoning
Commission and the City Council are exempt from the provisions of divisions (B)
and (C) above and §
72.038 of this chapter only if driveway regulations are included in the
approved PUD plans.
      (2)   All front yard driveways and driveway extensions must be paved in
accordance with divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (F)   Responsibilities of owners. Any person, corporation, or legal entity
who is the owner, whether the legal or equitable titleholder, of a residential
lot, shall be responsible for any violation of the driveway regulations
provided in divisions (A), (B), and (C) above.
   (G)   Reasonable variations from these requirements may be approved by the
City Engineer and the Planning Department jointly for unforeseen situations or
unusual property configurations.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.038 DRIVEWAY EXTENSIONS IN FRONT YARDS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Prior written authorization of the Engineering Department or
other authorized designee is required for all driveways and driveway extensions
in front yards and regulations for authorization. No driveway extension shall
be installed or construction thereon begun in any residential front yard
without the prior written authorization of the Engineering Department or other
authorized designee, issued to the owner, whether the legal or equitable title
holder, of the lot.
      (2)   Prior to the Engineering Department or other authorized designee’s
consideration of any request for or issuance of a written authorization for any
driveway or driveway extension in any residential front yard, any owner,
whether the legal or equitable title holder, of the lot, shall submit a written
application and pay to the City Clerk a fee set by resolution.
      (3)   The Engineering Department or other authorized designee shall issue
a written authorization for a driveway extension in a residential front yard to
an owner, whether the legal or equitable title holder, of a residential lot,
upon submission of an application by the owner and payment of the fee therefor
and only if a proposed driveway extension will comply with all of the
following, which shall be specified in writing in each written authorization
issued:
         (a)   One driveway extension no wider than ten feet in width shall be
permitted in a front yard;
         (b)   A driveway extension must be contiguous and parallel to the
driveway;
         (c)   A driveway extension must be located between the driveway and
the side property line in the direction away from the dwelling if there is
sufficient space for placement between the driveway and that side property
line; and
         (d)   The surface of a driveway extension must be a surface material
allowed in §
72.037 and constructed and maintained in quality, quantity, and size to prevent
the creation of ruts in or deterioration or damage to the driveway extension or
soil beneath from the operation or parking of vehicles, recreational vehicles
or trailers.
      (4)   Any person, corporation, or legal entity who is the owner, whether
the legal or equitable title holder, of a residential lot, shall be responsible
for any violation of this section pertaining to driveways or driveway
extensions.
   (B)   (1)   The following driveways and driveway extensions, in existence on
or before 2-26-2001, are excepted or grandfathered from any of the regulations
in §
72.037 of this chapter and division (A) above that would otherwise prohibit
them:
         (a)   Driveway extensions that otherwise conform to the driveway
extension regulations prescribed by divisions (A)(3)(a), (A)(3)(b), (A)(3)(c),
and (A)(3)(d) above without the necessity for Engineering Department or other
authorized designee for a driveway extension that is located on the side of the
driveway towards the dwelling, regardless if there exists sufficient space to
have located the extension on the side of the driveway in the direction away
from the dwelling;
         (b)   Driveways connected and leading to one or two approved existing
curb cuts or entrances, which is in the nature of a circle-type or horseshoe-
type driveway, whether located in front of a dwelling that otherwise conforms
to the driveway regulations prescribed by §
72.037 of this chapter; or
         (c)   Driveways connected and leading to only one entrance from a
street or alley, although the entrance has not been authorized and approved by
the city, that otherwise conforms to the driveway regulations prescribed by §
72.037 of this chapter.
      (2)   The grandfather exceptions provided in this section shall
automatically terminate for any driveway or driveway extension that is
replaced, altered, or expanded on or after 2-26-2001. However, maintenance,
without changing the configuration, of a grandfathered driveway or driveway
extension will not terminate its grandfathered status.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.039 RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
   (A)   Residential parking off driveway or driveway extension prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or legal entity to park a
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle in the yard of any residential lot
unless the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle is parked completely upon
a driveway, driveway extension, or combination thereof, a parking pad meeting
the requirements of division (B) of this section, or in a permanent roofed
enclosure. However, this section shall not apply to vehicles, trailers, or
recreational vehicles being used to move, deliver, and/or take articles to and
from a yard or building or structure located thereon or used in connection with
providing a temporary service thereon for a reasonable period of time while in
the active process of such use.
   (B)   Parking pad. A residential property is allowed one parking pad not
connected to a driveway provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Size. The parking pad shall be no larger than 324 square feet.
Additionally, the combination of any accessory structure and parking pad shall
not exceed what would be allowed by the lesser of the maximum footprint/floor
area as shown in
Table 156.C.007-1, Accessory Structure Dimensional Requirements.
      (2)   Material. The parking pad shall be concrete, asphalt, solid brick/
pavers.
      (3)   Setbacks. Unconnected parking pads shall not be located in front,
side street, or side yards; they must be entirely in the rear. They shall have
a minimum of five-feet setback from all property lines.
      (4)   Separation. No parking pad shall be located closer than five feet
to any other structure on three sides of the pad. One side of the pad may be
adjacent to a structure on the property.
      (5)   Commercial use. Parking pads located on residentially zoned or used
property shall not be used for commercial purposes or for the storage of
commercial vehicles or equipment, other than home occupations that comply with
Ch. 156.
      (6)   License/registration. Any vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle
parked on the parking pad shall be licensed or registered by the property owner
or tenant.
      (7)   Access route. The access route to the parking pad shall be
maintained with vegetation establishment without ruts. Wear marks from tire
tracks that are bare from vegetation shall not be allowed.
      (8)   Easements. Any parking pad placed within an easement, if allowed,
shall be the property owner’s sole risk, financial obligation, and maintenance
responsibility to remove, repair, or replace in the event the easement holder
removes or damages the pad.
   (C)   Parking of trucks, other than panel or pickup trucks of less than or
equal to one-ton chassis capacity, is prohibited in residential areas, except
to load/unload. Heavy commercial vehicles (including tractor-cab units rated
over one ton) shall not be parked at any time in residential zoning districts
except when work is being performed on that property.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.040 UNLICENSED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or legal entity to park or
store an unlicensed or inoperable vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle
anywhere in the front, side, side street front, or rear yard, including upon
any driveway or driveway extension unless the vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle is parked or stored in a permanent roofed enclosure. Mere licensing of
an inoperable vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that such
vehicle violates this section.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
Cross-reference:
   Nuisance vehicle removal, storage, redemption, or disposal, see §
95.010
§ 72.041 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   When the identity of the operator of a vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle cannot be determined, any person, corporation, or legal entity who was
the registered owner of such vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle and any
person, corporation, or legal entity who was in lawful possession of the
residential lot where the violation occurred at the time of a violation shall
be held prima facie responsible for any violation of the provisions of §§
72.039 and
72.040 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.042 NO PRIOR NOTICE, WARNING REQUIRED.
   The offenses enumerated in this subchapter do not contain elements that
require any prior notice or warning to be given to an offender regarding any
offense.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
PARKING ON BUSINESS PROPERTIES
§ 72.055 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the business parking regulations in this subchapter is to
prevent the unreasonable diminishing or impairment of established property
values and aesthetics within the city and to preserve public health, safety,
and welfare.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.056 SCOPE.
   (A)   The regulations in this subchapter apply to all commercial-zoned
districts and business-use properties, in a residential zone, within the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter is intended to conflict with or supersede
regulations in
Ch. 156, Zoning, Article E, Parking, Loading, and Stacking. All applicable
developments or use changes must meet
Ch. 156, Article E. Properties that have applied for and been approved for
limited use permit, special use permit, variance, or other zoning-related
requirements and waivers shall govern if a conflict in parking requirements is
specifically listed and included in the permit or variance approved.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.057 DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING.
   (A)   Composition of driveway and entrance surface. Under this subchapter, a
driveway and entrance shall be a surface constructed of materials per §
72.037(A). Driveways shall be maintained in quality, quantity, and size to
prevent the creation of ruts in or deterioration or damage to the driveway or
soil beneath from the operation or parking of vehicles, trailers, recreational
vehicles, or any thereon. Existing gravel or crushed stone must be maintained
and have a minimum of six inches of depth, and be free of weeds and grass.
   (B)   Location of driveway and parking.
      (1)   Front yard.
         (a)   Parking of all vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers,
must be parked in a permanent roofed structure or on a driveway meeting the
materials allowed in this section or applicable sections of
Ch. 156, Zoning.
         (b)   Only one driveway shall be allowed in front yard per street
frontage except where the driveway was approved as part of a parking lot.
         (c)   No driveway shall be located in front of a dwelling unless it is
the entrance to an approved parking lot.
         (d)   A driveway shall not lead perpendicularly to the side of a
garage where there is no garage door.
         (e)   A driveway shall be connected and lead to only one curb drop or
entrance, except for businesses on a corner lot located on a major or minor
arterial or major collector roadway, as defined in the city’s Comprehensive
Plan and any future amendments to the plan, which can apply to the City
Engineer for permission to connect a driveway to two curb drops for the sole
purpose of allowing safe entry onto the roadway.
      (2)   Rear and side yards.
         (a)   Parking of all vehicles, including licensed and operable
vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers, must be parked in a permanent
roofed structure or on a driveway meeting the materials allowed in this section
or applicable sections of
Ch. 156, Zoning.
         (b)   Driveway and parking areas in a side yard or rear yard must be
connected to a driveway leading from an approved curb drop or entrance.
      (3)   Exceptions.
         (a)   For businesses with a majority of sales being agricultural
products or equipment and the lot(s) owned by the business site total over four
acres, the product or equipment for sale may be displayed on grass or gravel.
         (b)   For a group gathering (party, club, reception, meeting,
community event, etc.) an unlimited number of vehicles may be parked anywhere
on a lot for a maximum of eight hours but not overnight.
         (c)   Marshall County Fairgrounds shall be exempted from these
regulations.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.058 UNLICENSED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or legal entity to park or
store an unlicensed or inoperable vehicle anywhere unless it is parked or
stored in a permanent roofed enclosure or allowed by
Ch. 156, Zoning. Mere licensing of an inoperable vehicle shall not constitute a
defense to the finding that such vehicle violates this section.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.059 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   When the identity of the operator of a vehicle cannot be determined, any
person, corporation, or legal entity who was the registered owner of such
vehicle and any person, corporation, or legal entity who was in lawful
possession of the lot where the violation occurred at the time of a violation
may be held prima facie responsible for any violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.060 NO PRIOR NOTICE, WARNING REQUIRED.
   The offenses enumerated in this subchapter do not contain elements that
require any prior notice or warning to be given to an offender regarding any
offense.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
SPECIAL STOPS
§ 72.070 RAILROADS; OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS; CROSSING.
   (A)   Obedience to signal of a train.
      (1)   Whenever any driver approaches a railroad grade crossing and
warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a flag person or
otherwise of the immediate approach of a train, the driver shall stop within 50
feet, but not less than 15 feet from the nearest track of such railroad and
shall not proceed until they can do so safely.
      (2)   The driver shall stop and remain standing and shall not traverse
such a grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a human flag
person gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a
train.
   (B)   Stopping at a railroad crossing. The driver approaching a railroad
grade crossing across which traffic is regulated by a stop sign, a railroad
sign directing traffic to stop or an official traffic control signal displaying
a flashing red or steady circular red-colored light shall stop before crossing
the railroad at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or
at a point near the crossing where the driver has a clear view of the
approaching railroad traffic.
   (C)   Certain vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles required to stop
at railroad crossings.
      (1)   (a)   A driver carrying passengers for hire, a school bus or a
vehicle carrying hazardous material and required to stop before crossing a
railroad track by motor carrier safety rules adopted under I.C.A. § 321.449,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop within 50 feet,
but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail.
         (b)   While stopped, the driver shall listen and look in both
directions for an approaching train and signals indicating the approach of a
train and shall not proceed until the driver can do so safely.
      (2)   No stop needs to be made at a crossing where a peace officer or a
traffic control device directs traffic to proceed. No stop need be made at a
crossing designated by an “exempt” sign. An exempt sign shall be posted only
where the tracks have been partially removed on either side of the roadway.
   (D)   Heavy equipment at railroad crossing.
      (1)   No person shall operate or move any caterpillar tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less mph or a vertical body or load clearance of less
than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway upon or across any tracks
at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section.
      (2)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a
superintendent of such railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to such
railroad to provide proper protection at such crossing.
      (3)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the vehicle or equipment not less
than ten feet or more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railway and
while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for
any approaching train and signals indicating the approach of a train and shall
not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
      (4)   No such crossing shall be made when a warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flag person or otherwise of the immediate
approach of a railroad train or car.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
10.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§
321.341 through
321.344
§ 72.071 PRIMARY ROADS DESIGNATED AS THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   Primary roads and extensions of primary roads within the city are designated
as through highways.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.350
§ 72.072 EMERGING AND YIELDING WHEN EMERGING FROM PRIVATE ROADWAY, ALLEY,
BUILDING OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto the sidewalk
area and, thereafter, the driver shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when
the driver can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic, and the driver shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the
driver’s vehicle is entering.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
71.999
HABITUAL VIOLATOR PENALTY AND PROCEDURES
§ 72.085 HABITUAL VIOLATOR.
   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a notice of parking violation
that has not been paid within 60 days of the violation date is considered
delinquent.
   (B)   Any person who has five or more delinquent notices of parking
violations issued on a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle or
registration plate shall be deemed a habitual violator.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle and
permit it to remain standing upon any public street or municipal lot in the
city when there are five or more delinquent notices of parking violations
outstanding against that vehicle or registration plate.
   (D)   A violation of this section shall place such vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle in the status of an illegally parked vehicle, and the
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle may be dealt with according to §
72.086 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.086 REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   The Police Department or Parking and Code Enforcement Officer may remove and
impound vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles that are stopped or parked
in violation of this chapter or other city ordinances and, in so doing, may
employ such means as are reasonably necessary. Impounded vehicles, trailers, or
recreational vehicles shall be stored in a location designated by the city.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.087 RIGHT OF OWNER TO REDEEM IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   The registered owner or person having a legal entitlement to
possession of a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle impounded pursuant to
§
72.086 of this chapter may claim said vehicle by paying the associated city
fees and the towing contractor fees for all charges attributable to the
impoundment and storage of the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle.
   (B)   If a hearing pursuant to §
72.089 of this chapter is held and a hearing officer determines there was no
probable cause to impound the vehicle, the costs attributable to the
impoundment shall be refunded upon the presentation to the city’s Finance
Director of:
      (1)   A certificate of no probable cause issued by the city; and
      (2)   The receipt for payment of charges attributed to the impound and
storage.
   (C)   If a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle was impounded pursuant
to §
72.085 of this chapter, all delinquent notices of parking violations must be
satisfied. An administrative fee of $50 will be required, payable to the City
of Marshalltown.
   (D)   If the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle is not claimed until
after a hearing requested pursuant to §
72.088 of this chapter, the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle may be
claimed upon:
      (1)   Payment of all charges referred to in §
72.089 of this chapter; or
      (2)   Presentation of a certificate of no probable cause within two
working days of its issuance to the party in possession of the vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle.
   (E)   Failure to timely present such a certificate will result in assumed
liability on the part of the owner or person having legal entitlement to
possession of the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle for all related
towing and storage charges.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.088 RIGHT TO HEARING.
   (A)   The registered owner or person having legal entitlement to possession
of a vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle impounded pursuant to this
subchapter has a right to a post-seizure administrative hearing before a
hearing officer designated by the City Administrator, to determine whether
there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle and any personal property contained within; provided, the registered
owner or person having legal entitlement to possession files a written demand
with the City Clerk’s office within five business days from the date of the
impoundment. A copy of this subchapter shall be given to the person requesting
a hearing.
   (B)   Failure to request a hearing within five business days or to attend a
scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such a
hearing.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.089 CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   (A)   The post-seizure administrative hearing held under this subchapter
shall be conducted before the hearing officer designated by the City
Administrator within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed 15 business
days from the date of receipt of a written demand. Such hearing may be
continued for good cause. The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be
whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle and personal property contained within the vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle in question. The department causing the
vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle to be impounded shall carry the
burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle in question. The hearing officer shall decide
only that either there was or was not probable cause to impound the vehicle,
trailer, or recreational vehicle and contents. If the hearing officer
determines there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, trailer, or
recreational vehicle and contents, the registered owner or person having a
legal entitlement to possession of the vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle is responsible for payment of all charges attributable to the
impoundment and storage of the vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle and
the costs of the administrative hearing. If the hearing officer determines
there was no probable cause, the hearing officer shall prepare a certificate of
no probable cause and the charges paid shall be refunded pursuant to §
72.087 of this chapter.
   (B)   The proceedings at the administrative hearing shall be recorded by the
hearing officer. Such recording shall serve as the official record of the
administrative hearing. The City Clerk shall retain all such recordings until
the retention period has expired.
   (C)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and in no way
affect any criminal proceeding in connection with the impoundment in question.
   (D)   Criminal charges, if any, may only be challenged in the appropriate
court.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The penalty for violating any alternate, sidewalk, terrace,
overtime parking, over line, blocking drive, not a space, parked 24 hours,
parked 48 hours, no parking 2:30 to 5:30 a.m., no parking anytime, left side to
curb, yellow curb, 18 inches from curb, here to corner, permit violation,
occupy two parking spaces, or here to alley parking provisions shall be a fine
of $20 if paid within 30 days of the violation. The penalty for violating snow
ordinance parking provisions shall be a fine of $25 if paid within 30 days of
the violation. The penalty for violating fire lane and yard parking provisions
shall be a fine of $30 if paid within 30 days. The penalty for violating
disabilities parking provisions shall be a fine of $100.
      (2)   A late fee of $5 shall be assessed to any notice of parking
violation that is not paid within 30 days of the violation date with the
exception of disabilities parking violations.
      (3)   Fines shall not be paid in pennies. Payment of fines may be made by
depositing the money in the notice of parking violation envelope provided and
dropping in the courtesy payment box located at City Hall or the Police
Department, by paying in-person at City Hall, or by mailing the fee in the
envelope provided with sufficient U.S. postage.
      (4)   Each subsequent hour that the vehicle, trailer, or recreational
vehicle shall remain improperly parked after each summons is issued shall
constitute a new and separate violation and shall incur the same penalty.
      (5)   If sufficient U.S. postage is not affixed when the citation is
mailed such penalty shall be $5.
      (6)   To contest a notice of parking violation you must personally appear
at the Police Department within 30 days for processing of a court citation and
shall be subject to such costs as determined by the court.
      (7)   A vehicle registration hold may be placed on a vehicle with a
delinquent notice of parking violation. All fines must be paid before a
registration hold is released. Further collection efforts may be taken by
submitting delinquent fines to the State of Iowa Setoff Program for collection
from state tax refunds.
   (B)   (1)   Composition, location, and size of driveways and driveway
extensions. Any person, corporation, or legal entity who is the owner, whether
the legal or equitable title holder, of a residential lot who violates any of
the regulations for the composition, location, or size of driveways and
driveway extensions contained in this chapter may be charged either with a
simple misdemeanor, which, upon conviction, is punishable pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances or a municipal infraction, which, upon
judgment entered against a defendant, is punishable by the civil penalties and
subject to the remedies defined in I.C.A. § 364.22 or any amendments thereto.
      (2)   Number of parked vehicles, trailers, or recreational vehicles. Any
person, corporation, or legal entity who is the owner, whether the legal or
equitable title holder, of a residential lot who violates any of the
regulations for the number of parked vehicles, trailers, or recreational
vehicles contained in this chapter may be issued a notice of parking violation
or charged with either a simple misdemeanor for subsequent offenses, which,
upon conviction, is punishable pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances; or a municipal infraction, which, upon
judgment entered against a defendant, is punishable by the civil penalties and
subject to the remedies defined in I.C.A. § 364.22 or any amendments thereto.
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate offense, whether charged as a notice of parking violation, simple
misdemeanor, or municipal infraction.
   (C)   Habitual violators as outlined in §
72.085 must pay all delinquent notices of parking violations and the
administrative fee of $50 before the city will authorize the release of said
vehicle. The violator must then pay all towing and storage fees to the tow
company before the release.
(Ord. 15092, passed 11-11-2024)
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.001   Definitions
   
73.002   Camper use prohibited
   
73.003   Prohibition on ATVs/UTVs
Bicycles
   
73.015   Business district defined
   
73.016   Observing traffic laws
   
73.017   Use on sidewalks restricted
   
73.018   Brakes
   
73.019   Lights required
   
73.020   Proper riding of a bicycle
Snowmobiles
   
73.040   Definitions
   
73.041   Operation to comply with state law
   
73.042   Operator qualifications
   
73.043   Places where operation prohibited
   
73.044   Operation on sidewalk
   
73.045   Obedience to traffic rules, signs and signals and police
   
73.046   Use for pleasure prohibited
   
73.047   Speed
   
73.048   Operation in single file
   
73.049   Crossing streets
   
73.050   Weapons
   
73.051   Right-of-way
   
73.052   Operation by two persons; towing objects
   
73.053   Hours of operation
   
73.054   Equipment
   
73.055   Leaving unattended
Golf Cars
   
73.080   Definitions
   
73.081   Operation of golf cars
 
   
73.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPER. Any vehicle designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational,
or sporting purposes, and whether self-propelled or towed by another vehicle.
CAMPERS include, but are not limited to travel trailers, fifth wheels, RVs,
motorcoaches, and any bus, van, truck, utility trailer, or other vehicle
modified for such use.
(Ord. 15078, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 73.002 CAMPER USE PROHIBITED.
   At no time shall a camper parked on a roadway, park, or other public
property be occupied or used for dwelling purposes for any period of time
except in such areas in parks so designated by the Director of Parks and
Recreation. At no time shall a camper parked on private property be occupied or
used for dwelling purposes, except on a parcel permitting agricultural or
single-family residential use, provided such use or occupancy shall not exceed
14 cumulative days in any calendar year. This provision shall not apply to a
camper parked upon private property lawfully operated as a campground.
(Ord. 15078, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 73.003 PROHIBITION ON ATVS/UTVS.
   No person shall be allowed to operate an all-terrain vehicle or off-road
utility vehicle on any primary highway, principal or minor arterial roadway,
primary or secondary road, or city, collector, or local street within city
limits or on any city-owned property, with the exception of the Iowa River OHV
Park. The operation of all-terrain vehicles or off-road utility vehicles may be
permitted during parades, special events, or other public purposes as
specifically authorized by the City Council or its designee. This prohibition
shall not apply to operation of an all-terrain vehicle or off-road utility
vehicle by the city or city employees for public safety services or other city-
service related uses.
(Ord. 15051, passed 10-10-2022)
BICYCLES
§ 73.015 BUSINESS DISTRICT DEFINED.
   For purposes of this subchapter only, the business district includes the
following streets: Main Street from 2nd Street to 3rd Avenue; 2nd Street from
State Street to Church Street; 1st Street from State Street to Church Street;
Center Street from State Street to Church Street; 1st Avenue from State Street
to Church Street; 2nd Avenue from State Street to Church Street.
(2013 Code, § 20-281) (Ord. 13710, passed 4-14-1980; Ord. 14769, passed 8-8-
2005)
§ 73.016 OBSERVING TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Every person, including peace officers, riding a bicycle upon any street,
alley or sidewalk within the city shall observe and obey the traffic laws and
traffic signals of the city and of the state, so far as the laws and signals
apply to the riding of bicycles and, specifically and without limitations,
shall include traffic rules relating to traffic lights and highway stop signs,
and every such person riding a bicycle must signal any change of direction in
the course of travel and must travel on the right-hand side of the center of
the street and shall not turn to the right or left in traffic, except at the
regular street intersections and shall not weave in and out of the line of
traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-283) (Ord. 13710, passed 4-14-1980; Ord. 15047, passed 9-26-
2022) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.017 USE ON SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, at any time, on a
public sidewalk in any business district of the city. However, the only
exception to this is that any member of the public may ride a bicycle on any
public sidewalk adjacent to Highway 14 in the city. However, the rider of any
such bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians by dismounting the
bicycle and walking the bicycle until the pedestrians have been passed, whether
the pedestrians are walking in the same direction as the bicycle is being
ridden or walking toward the bicycle.
(2013 Code, § 20-286) (Ord. 13710, passed 4-14-1980) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.018 BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle within the
city limits without having the bicycle properly equipped with workable and safe
brakes.
(2013 Code, § 20-289) (Ord. 13710, passed 4-14-1980) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.019 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white
light, at the times specified in I.C.A. § 321.384, visible from a distance of
at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear; except that, a red
reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light. A peace officer riding a police
bicycle is not required to use either front or rear lamps if duty so requires.
(2013 Code, § 20-290) (Ord. 13710, passed 4-14-1980) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.020 PROPER RIDING OF A BICYCLE.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle on the highway shall not ride other than
upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle.
   (B)   A person shall not use a bicycle on the highway to carry more persons
at one time than the number of persons for which the bicycle is designed and
equipped.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade
authorized by proper permit from local authorities.
(Ord. 15047, passed 9-26-2022)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 73.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, and does not include sidewalks or parkings or any area of
public property between the roadway portion of the street and the abutting
private property line.
   SAFETY OR DEADMAN THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is removed from
the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the
driving track.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle weighing less than 1,000 pounds which
utilizes wheels with low pressure tires and which is designed to operate on
land or ice or is equipped with sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type
tread or any combination thereof, and which is designed for travel upon snow,
land or ice, except any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle under I.C.A. Ch.
321.
(2013 Code, § 20-346) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973)
Statutory reference:
   Snowmobiles, see I.C.A. § 321G.1
§ 73.041 OPERATION TO COMPLY WITH STATE LAW.
   A snowmobile shall be operated in accordance with the state law at all
times.
(2013 Code, § 20-347) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.042 OPERATOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   Every operator of a snowmobile shall have a valid motor vehicle operator’s
license and shall be at least 16 years of age.
(2013 Code, § 20-348) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973)
§ 73.043 PLACES WHERE OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the following:
      (1)   On the following streets:
         (a)   All state or federal highways within the city;
         (b)   On any street or highway designated as a one-way street;
         (c)   On Anson Street;
         (d)   On South 3rd Avenue from Anson Street to Linn Street;
         (e)   Within any portion of an area bounded on the north by the north
curb line of Webster Street, on the west by the west curb line of 3rd Street,
on the south by the south curb line of Boone Street and on the east by the east
curb line of 3rd Avenue;
         (f)   Twelfth Street between Main Street and Summit Street;
         (g)   Thirteenth Street between Main Street and Summit Street;
         (h)   Fourth Avenue between Church and State Street;
         (i)   Olive Street between 4th Street and 2nd Avenue;
         (j)   East Meadow Lane from Center Street to 2nd Avenue;
         (k)   Sixth Street from Olive Street to Madison Street; and/or
         (l)   Southridge Road from Center Street to 3rd Avenue.
      (2)   Within 300 feet of a school, college, church, hospital or nursing
home;
      (3)   Upon any cemetery, school ground, park, playground, recreational
area, golf course or private property of any person unless express permission
to so operate has been secured by the proper authority; and/or
      (4)   Upon the grounds of the Iowa Veterans Home and Iowa Veterans Home
Cemetery.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, a snowmobile may be operated upon
such city streets when the operator thereof resides on one of the prohibited
streets, but only when arriving or leaving the premises and only on the most
direct route from his or her residence to the nearest street where operation is
permitted.
(2013 Code, § 20-349) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973; Ord. 14497, passed 2-27-
1995) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit operation of snowmobiles, see I.C.A. § 321G.9(4)a
§ 73.044 OPERATION ON SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon a sidewalk,
except to cross it.
(2013 Code, § 20-350) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.045 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES, SIGNS AND SIGNALS AND POLICE.
   Snowmobiles shall observe and obey all traffic rules, signs and signals, as
well as all directions of a police officer.
(2013 Code, § 20-352) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.046 USE FOR PLEASURE PROHIBITED.
   No snowmobile shall be operated solely for entertainment or pleasure, but
only for the most direct ingress and egress from the city.
(2013 Code, § 20-353) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.047 SPEED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile at a
speed in excess of 15 mph or at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or
proper under all existing circumstances.
(2013 Code, § 20-354) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Speed, see I.C.A. § 321G.13(1)
§ 73.048 OPERATION IN SINGLE FILE.
   No snowmobile shall be operated in conjunction with another or others unless
they are operated in a single file fashion and as closely to the curb or edge
of the road as is possible.
(2013 Code, § 20-358) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.G.9(3)d
§ 73.049 CROSSING STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of a snowmobile to make a direct
crossing of a street or highway unless:
   (A)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before entering upon the
traveled portion of the street;
   (B)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents or
obscures oncoming traffic. The operator shall yield the right-of-way to all
oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard; and/or
   (C)   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-359) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.G.9(2)
§ 73.050 WEAPONS.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile with any firearm in his or her
possession unless it is unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case or any bow
unless it is unstrung or enclosed in a carrying case.
(2013 Code, § 20-360) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321G.13(11)
§ 73.051 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Snowmobiles shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicular
traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-361) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.052 OPERATION BY TWO PERSONS; TOWING OBJECTS.
   No more than two persons shall ride a snowmobile at one time. No sled,
wagon, trailer or any other object shall be towed or pulled by a snowmobile.
(2013 Code, § 20-363) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.053 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles shall be operated only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through
11:00 p.m., except in an emergency or when used as a supplement force of the
Police or Fire Department or hospital or at any other time of emergency by
permission of the Mayor.
(2013 Code, § 20-364) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.054 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile that is
not equipped as required by state law.
(2013 Code, § 20-365)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
public road or street without a bright color pennant or flag displayed at least
60 inches above the ground. The pennant or flag shall be a minimum of six
inches by nine inches, shall be orange and shall provide a fluorescent effect.
(2013 Code, § 20-366)
   (C)   No person shall operate a snowmobile at any time on the streets
without the required headlight and taillight being in continuous operation
while the snowmobile is being operated.
(2013 Code, § 20-367)
(Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.055 LEAVING UNATTENDED.
   It shall be unlawful to leave a snowmobile unattended while the motor is
running or the keys left in the ignition.
(2013 Code, § 20-368) (Ord. 12376, passed 12-26-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
GOLF CARS
§ 73.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CAR. A three or four-wheeled recreational vehicle that is generally
used for the transportation of persons in the sport of golf on a golf course.
(Ord. 15069, passed 8-14-2023)
§ 73.081 OPERATION OF GOLF CARS.
   The use and operation of golf cars on the city streets is authorized with
the following provisions.
   (A)   The operator of any golf car on a city street shall possess a valid
operator’s license.
   (B)   Golf cars shall not be operated upon a city street which is a primary
road extension through the city but shall be allowed to cross a city street
which is a primary road extension through the city.
   (C)   The golf car shall be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle sign and a
bicycle safety flag.
   (D)   The golf car shall be operated on city streets only from sunrise to
sunset.
   (E)   Golf cars shall be equipped with adequate brakes.
   (F)   The operator of the golf cart shall obey any posted speed limit but
may not exceed a speed of 35 miles per hour.
(Ord. 15069, passed 8-14-2023)
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
CHAPTER 74: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Section
   
74.001   Vehicles over eight tons; exceptions; sign placement
   
74.002   Use of bus stop areas by unauthorized vehicles
 
   
74.999   Penalty
§ 74.001 VEHICLES OVER EIGHT TONS; EXCEPTIONS; SIGN PLACEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the exceptions set out in division (B) below, no
person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle in excess of a registered weight
of eight tons on the city streets designated in this section by the City
Council.
      (2)   The following streets and portions of streets are established as
restricted portions of streets and avenues for the use, movement or through
travel thereon of all types of motor vehicles, however operated, having a total
weight of the vehicle and load in excess of 16,000 pounds or eight tons as
authorized under I.C.A. § 321.473:
         (a)   East Boone Street from S. 14th Avenue to S. 17th Avenue;
         (b)   East Nevada Street between S. 12th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue;
         (c)   Norris Place;
         (d)   In the area north of Marion Street and east of N. 3rd Avenue;
         (e)   South 15th Avenue from E. Linn Street south to Norris Place;
         (f)   South 16th Avenue from E. Linn Street to East Nevada Street;
         (g)   South 17th Avenue from E. Linn Street south to Norris Place;
         (h)   North 12th Avenue between Marion Street and State Street; and
         (i)   W. Main Street between 9th Street and 3rd Avenue.
      (3)   This section shall not be construed so as to allow parking of
trucks in residential areas if doing so would be contrary to any city
ordinance.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the term THROUGH TRAFFIC is
defined as operation of a motor vehicle in excess of a registered weight of
eight tons on the streets designated pursuant to this division (A) for purposes
other than those designated in division (B) below.
(2013 Code, § 25-16)
   (B)   Division (A)(4) above shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Garbage trucks;
      (2)   Utility trucks;
      (3)   Buses, including municipal and public buses;
      (4)   Municipal fire apparatus or road maintenance equipment owned or
leased by the city, county or state;
      (5)   Delivery or moving trucks;
      (6)   Trucks journeying to and from a truck terminal; and/or
      (7)   Implements of husbandry, as defined in I.C.A. § 321.1(16), and
implements of husbandry loaded on hauling units for transporting the implements
to locations for purposes of repair.
(2013 Code, § 25-17)
   (C)   Placement of signs under division (A) above. The Director of Public
Works/City Engineer shall cause to be placed and maintained appropriate signs
designating such restricted portions of streets or avenues and the weight limit
thereon so as to warn the driver or operator of any vehicle, with load,
weighing in excess of the weight prohibited in division (A) above, from using
such restricted portions of streets or avenues.
(2013 Code, § 25-18)
(Ord. 14365, passed 12-23-1991; Ord. 14367, passed 12-23-1991; Ord. 14408,
passed 12-28-1992; Ord. 14414, passed 2-8-1993) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 74.002 USE OF BUS STOP AREAS BY UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, other than
a passenger carrying bus operating under a proper city license, in any bus stop
or bus stop area established, except in obedience to the directions of a police
officer or to avoid an accident or collision.
(2013 Code, § 25-35) (Ord. 38, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 11765, passed 11-10-1970)
Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 74.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section and §
74.001(B) and (C) of this chapter, the term THROUGH TRAFFIC is defined as
operation of a motor vehicle in excess of a registered weight of eight tons on
the streets designated pursuant to §
74.001(A) of this chapter for purposes other than those designated in §
74.001(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
74.001(A) and (B) of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more
than $100.
(2013 Code, § 25-16) (Ord. 14367, passed 12-23-1991; Ord. 14408, passed 12-28-
1992; Ord. 14414, passed 2-8-1993)
CHAPTER 75: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
75.001   Obedience to signals
   
75.002   Walking on left side of road
   
75.003   Right-of-way
   
75.004   Crossing at other than crosswalk
   
75.005   Use of crosswalk
   
75.006   Hitchhiking
   
75.007   Blind pedestrians
   
75.008   Drivers to exercise due care and yield right-of-way
§ 75.001 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals at intersections as
declared in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded
the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-151) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.325
§ 75.002 WALKING ON LEFT SIDE OF ROAD.
   Pedestrians shall, at all times when walking on or along a highway, walk on
the left side of such highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-152) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.326
§ 75.003 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be
to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk
or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-153) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.327
§ 75.004 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Where traffic control signals are in operation at any place not an
intersection, pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in a marked
crosswalk.
(2013 Code, § 20-154) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.328
§ 75.005 USE OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(2013 Code, § 20-155) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.330
§ 75.006 HITCHHIKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
   (B)   Nothing in this section or this chapter shall be construed so as to
prevent any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway,
not ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-156) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.331
§ 75.007 BLIND PEDESTRIANS.
   (A)   Any driver of a vehicle or operator of a motor-driven vehicle who
approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly or partially blind carrying
a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red or being led by
a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on either side of or slightly in
front of the blind person shall immediately come to a complete stop and take
such precautions as may be necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person
carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white tipped with red or
being led by a guide dog.
   (B)   For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public
thoroughfares, it shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or
partially blind to carry or use on the streets, highways and public places of
the state any white canes or walking sticks which are white in color or white
tipped with red.
(2013 Code, § 20-157) (Ord. 58, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 321.332, 321.333
§ 75.008 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
75.004 of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise due care upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
   (B)   Every driver shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrian workers
engaged in maintenance or construction work on a highway whenever a flag person
or warning sign notifies the driver of the presence of such workers.
(2013 Code, § 20-158) (Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
70.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 321.329
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck routes; major thoroughfare plan
      
II.   One-way streets
      
III.   Recreational bike trails
      
IV.   Stop intersections
      
V.   Yield intersections
      
VI.   Traffic signal locations
      
VII.   School zones
      
VIII.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES; MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
“shall” is mandatory and not directory.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum distance between a
building and its front property line.
Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances establishes the minimum distance.
      MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A street designated by the City Council as used for
through traffic in, by or through the city.
      RESTRICTED OR LIMITED ACCESS STREET. A street where access is permitted
only at specifically designated points.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area owned by the city or state or dedicated for public
use for street purposes lying between the individual property lines.
      ROADWAY. The portion of the right-of-way developed for the purpose of
moving traffic.
      TRAFFIC MOVING LANE. The portion of the roadway devoted to the movement
of a single line of traffic, varying in widths from ten feet to 12 feet in
width.
      TRUCK ROUTE. A street designated by the City Council as used for truck
traffic in or through the city.
(2013 Code, § 26-87)
   (B)   Major thoroughfares.
      (1)   Major thoroughfares shall be as designated as existing and future
major and minor arterial streets and collector streets on the major street plan
as shown in the city’s Comprehensive Plan and the city’s Transportation Plan.
      (2)   The Transportation Plan containing the Major Thoroughfare Map shall
be updated from time to time by the City Engineer and approved by the City
Council and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(2013 Code, § 26-88)
   (C)   General provisions.
      (1)   Building setback lines shall be measured from the future right-of-
way as established by this schedule. Where setback requirements have been
established along primary, state and federal highways by the state’s Department
of Transportation, the requirements of the state shall apply. The right-of-way
widths shall be as required in the Transportation Plan, but in no case shall
the right-of-way width be less than 60 feet.
      (2)   The cost of minimum improvements as provided in the city’s
subdivision regulations shall be assessed to the benefited property. The cost
of added widths and thickness of the roadway in excess of the minimum
improvements to meet major street design shall be paid for by the city, except
as provided in division (C)(1) above.
      (3)   When the street is abutted by a Commercial or Industrial District
as designated by the district map of the Zoning Ordinance, the established
roadway width shall be not less than 37 feet, unless approved by the Council,
and all the cost, regardless of width and thickness shall be assessed to the
benefitted property.
(2013 Code, § 26-89)
   (D)   Extension of major thoroughfares. The platting or subdivision of an
area within or adjacent to the city, which requires approval of the Council as
provided by I.C.A. Ch. 354 or § 558.65 and into which or through which a major
thoroughfare would be extended upon annexation to said city, shall conform to
the provisions of this schedule as a condition or requirement for such Council
approval.
(2013 Code, § 26-90)
   (E)   Truck routes. Truck routes are established as follows:
Street Location
Street                    Location
18th Avenue               From US Highway 30 to Marion Street
E. Main Street            From 12th Avenue to east corporate limits
E. Nevada Street          From S. 3rd Avenue Ramp to S. 12th Avenue
Edgewood Street           From N. 3rd Avenue (IA Highway 14) to N. 8th Avenue
Marion Street             From N. 8th Avenue to N. 18th Avenue
N. 3rd Avenue             From Edgewood Street to the north corporate limits
N. 8th Avenue             From Edgewood Street to Marion Street
S. 3rd Avenue (IA Hwy 14) From south corporate limits to US Highway 30
S. 3rd Avenue Ramps       From S. 3rd Avenue (IA Highway 14) to W./E. Madison
                          Street and E. Nevada Street
S. 12th Avenue            From E. Nevada Street to E. Main Street
W. Lincoln Way            From west corporate limits to W. Madison Street
W./E. Madison Street      From W. Lincoln Way to S. 3rd Avenue Ramp
 
(2013 Code, § 26-91)
   (F)   Truck route signing. Directional signing shall be erected at
appropriate locations throughout the city to guide through trucks to the
designated truck routes and facilitate their use.
(2013 Code, § 26-92)
(Ord. 15074, passed 10-23-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   One-way streets designated. The following streets are hereby
established as one-way streets for the movement of vehicular traffic thereon:
 
Street           Location
                 Commencing at the west line of S. 7th Avenue and extending
Church Street    west on Church Street to the east line of S. 9th Street, which
                 shall be only in a west direction of movement on said Church
                 Street within the limits herein described
                 Commencing at the east line of S. 9th Street and extending
Linn Street      east on Linn Street to the west line of S. 8th Avenue, which
                 shall be only in an east direction of movement on said Linn
                 Street within the limits herein described
                 Commencing at the north line of E. Boone Street and extending
S. 4th Avenue    north on S. 4th Avenue to the south line of E. Church Street,
                 which shall be only in a north direction of movement on said
                 S. 4th Avenue within the limits herein described
S. 6th Avenue    Commencing at Main Street and extending south on S. 6th Street
                 to Madison Street, which shall be only in a south direction
                 Viaduct frontage roads on the westerly side shall be only in a
S. Center Street south direction between Boone and Madison Streets and on the
                 easterly side shall be only in a north direction between
                 Madison Street and Nevada Street
 
(2013 Code, § 26-93)
   (B)   Turning at intersections. The turning at intersections on any one-way
street shall be as follows.
      (1)   The driver of any vehicle intending to turn right on or off a one-
way street shall approach such intended turn in the right-hand lane in the
direction of movement and turn right as close as practical to the right-hand
curb of the intersecting street or avenue.
      (2)   The driver of any vehicle intending to enter on any one-way street
and turn left in the direction of movement of vehicles thereon shall make such
turn left as close as practical into the left lane of traffic on such one-way
street.
      (3)   The driver of any vehicle intending to turn left from a one-way
street onto a two-way street shall approach such intersection in the left-hand
lane of the one-way street and pass beyond the center line of the intersecting
street before making such turn and leaving the intersection.
      (4)   The driver of any vehicle intending to turn left from a one-way
street onto a one-way street shall approach such intended turn in the left-hand
lane in the direction of movement and turn left as close as practical to the
left-hand curb of the intersecting street or avenue
(2013 Code, § 26-94)
   (C)   Traffic control devices. All moving traffic on or entering onto one-
way streets shall observe all traffic control devices installed at all
locations thereon.
(2013 Code, § 26-95)
   (D)   Changing traffic lanes. Operators of moving vehicles on one-way
streets in changing traffic lanes shall keep a proper look out for all traffic
approaching from the rear and make sure that such change in a traffic lane may
be made in safety.
(2013 Code, § 26-96)
   (E)   Signing. Signs indicating and controlling one-way streets shall be
erected and maintained by the Street Division according to the Federal Highway
Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(2013 Code, § 26-97)
(Ord. 15074, passed 10-23-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
SCHEDULE III. RECREATIONAL BIKE TRAILS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this schedule, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLASS 1 - SHARED USE PATH. A recreational bikeway trail physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the roadway right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.
Bicyclists, pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers and other non-
motorized users may use SHARED USE PATHS.
      CLASS 2 - BICYCLE LANE. A portion of a roadway, which has been designated
by striping, signing and pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicyclists. Other non-motorized users may use bicycle lanes when there
is no adjacent sidewalk or path facility.
      CLASS 3 - SIGNED SHARED ROADWAY. A shared roadway, which has been
designated by signing as a preferred route for bicycle use.
      RECREATIONAL BIKEWAY TRAIL. A generic term for any road, path or travel
way, which in some manner is specifically designated for bicycle travel
regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of
bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes. Recreational
Bikeway Trail Standards are more specifically described in the most current
version of the Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards Manual (SUDAS) Ch. 8 as
published by Iowa State University Center for Transportation Research and
Education.
      SHARED ROADWAY. A roadway, which is open to both bicycle and motor
vehicle travel. This may be an existing roadway, street with wide curb lanes,
or road with paved shoulders. Standards for Shared Roadways are more
specifically described in the most current version of the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the
Development of Bicycle Facilities.
(2013 Code, § 26-100)
   (B)   Bikeways designated. The following roads, paths or travel ways are
hereby officially established as part of the city’s Recreational Bikeway Trails
Network System:
Street Location
Street                                 Location
CLASS 1 - SHARED USE PATHS
   E. Southridge Detention Pond     From Plaza Heights Road to E. Southridge
                                       Road
   Highway 14/S. Center Street      From Marshalltown Community College to
                                       Merle Hibbs Boulevard
   Linn Creek/Iowa River Levee TrailFrom Grimes Farm Trail to Riverview Park
   Merle Hibbs Boulevard            From S. 6th Street Detention Pond to
                                       Melissa Lane
CLASS 2 - BICYCLE LANES - WITH PARKING
   Main Street                      From 13th Street to 5th Avenue
CLASS 2 - BICYCLE LANES - NO PARKING
   233rd Street                     From city limits to Campbell Drive
   Campbell Drive                   From 233rd Street to Westwood Drive
   S. 6th Street                    From W. Merle Hibbs Boulevard to S. 3rd
                                       Street Viaduct
   W. Main Street                   From Highland Acres Road to 19th Street
   Westwood Drive                   From Campbell Drive to S. 6th Street
CLASS 3 - SIGNED SHARED ROADWAY
   7th Avenue                       From Main Street to Woodbury Street
   13th Street                      From W. Boone Street to Summit Street
   Bromley Street                   From N. 4th Avenue to N. 7th Avenue
   Campbell Drive                   From Westwood Drive to Grimes Farm Trail
                                       Cutoff
   E. Olive Street                  From Edgebrook Drive to 12th Avenue
   Edgebrook Drive                  From E. Southridge Road to E. Olive
                                       Street
   Glenda Drive                     From Marshalltown Center Drive to S. 2nd
                                       Avenue
   Highland Acres Road              From Lincoln Way to W. Main Street
   Jerome Street                    From N. 9th Street to N. 3rd Street
   Main Street                      From 5th Avenue to 7th Avenue
   May Street                       From S. 7th Avenue to Anson/Linn Creek
                                       Levee Trail
   Meadow Lane                      From S. 6th Street to S. 2nd Avenue
   Melissa Lane/Marshalltown Center From E. Merle Hibbs to Glenda Drive
Drive
   Merle Hibbs Boulevard            From Center Street to 6th Street
   N. 3rd Street                    From Main Street to N. Center Street
   N. 4th Avenue                    From Bromley Street to Woodland Street
   N. 9th Street                    From Summit Street to Jerome Street
   N. 19th Street                   From W. Main Street to Summit Street
   N. Center Street                 From N. 3rd Street to Riverside Street
   Nevada Street                    From 2nd Street to 3rd Street
   Plaza Heights Road               From S. 2nd Avenue to E. Southridge
                                       Detention Pond
   Riverside Street                 From N. Center Street to N. 4th Avenue
   S. 2nd Avenue                    From Glenda Drive to Plaza Heights Road
   S. 2nd Avenue                    From Meadow Lane to Thomas Drive
   S. 2nd Street                    From Main Street to Nevada Street
   S. 7th Avenue                    From E. Olive Street to May Street
   S. 12th Street                   From Linn Creek Trail to W. Boone Street
   Summit Street                    From N. 19th Street to N. 9th Street
   Thomas Drive                     From S. 2nd Avenue to Edgebrook Drive
   W. Boone Street                  From S. 13th Street to S. 12th Street
   W. Main Street                   From 19th Street to 13th Street
   Woodbury Street                  From N. 7th Avenue to Linn Creek Levee
                                       Trail
   Woodland Street                  From N. 4th Avenue to Iowa River Levee
                                       Trail
 
(2013 Code, § 26-101)
   (C)   Signing and pavement markings. Signs and pavement markings indicating
and controlling bikeways shall be installed, erected and maintained by the
Public Works Street Division according to the Federal Highway Administration
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
(2013 Code, § 26-102)
   (D)   Traffic control and parking along bikeways.
      (1)   All bicyclists, pedestrians, traffic and other users entering or
traveling along designated recreational bikeway trails shall observe all
traffic control devices installed at all locations thereon.
      (2)   Unless specifically designated or otherwise approved by the City
Engineer and/or Police Chief it shall be unlawful to park on or block off any
designated Class 1 - Shared Use Path or Class 2 - Bicycle Lane, except for
reasonable temporary emergency or facility maintenance purposes.
(2013 Code, § 26-103)
(Ord. 14781, passed 3-27-2006; Ord. 14840, passed 8-11-2008)
SCHEDULE IV. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Stop sign locations. Moving vehicular or automotive traffic on the
following designated streets, Avenues, roads or drives shall stop before
entrance into an intersection from the directions herein designated at the
following named intersections:
Direction Street/Intersection
Direction  Street/Intersection
Eastbound  On Creekside at. 6th Street
Eastbound  On 3rd Avenue at east ramp and west ramp
Westbound  On 3rd Avenue at east ramp and west ramp
Westbound  On 3rd Avenue at E. Boone Street
Northbound On Airport Road at N. 3rd Street and N. Center Street
Southbound On Ann Rutledge Road at Lincoln Way
Eastbound  On Anson Circle at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On Arlington Drive at S. 6th Street
Westbound  On Arlington Drive at S. 6th Street
Westbound  On Arnold Drive at Highland Acres Road
Northbound On Austin Place at Merritt Road
Eastbound  On Bailey Drive at Edgebrook Drive
Southbound On Bailey Drive at Thunderbird Drive
Eastbound  On Beer Garden Road at E. Nevada Street RR Crossing
Westbound  On Beer Garden Road at E. Nevada Street RR Crossing
Southbound On Bel Aire Drive at Lincoln Way
Eastbound  On Benjamin Drive at Governor Road
Westbound  On Benjamin Drive at Joan Terrace
Southbound On Benjamin Drive at Keyster Road
Northbound On Bittersweet Road at Westwood Drive
Northbound On Blossom Lane at Thomas Drive
Southbound On Blossom Lane at Thunderbird Drive
Eastbound  On Bohen Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On Bohen Street at S. Center Street
Northbound On Brentwood Place at Brentwood Road
Northbound On Brentwood Place at Lincoln Tower Circle and Lincoln Way
Southbound On Brentwood Place at Lincoln Tower Circle and Lincoln Way
Northbound On Brentwood Road at Lincoln Tower Drive and Lincoln Way
Southbound On Brentwood Road at Lincoln Tower Drive and Lincoln Way
Southbound On Brentwood Terrace at Brentwood Road (x2)
Northbound On Broadmore Drive at E. High Street
Southbound On Broadmore Drive at E. South Street
Northbound On Brookside Road at W. Olive Street
Westbound  On Bryngelson Drive at S. 4th Street
Southbound On Burns Road and S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On Burns Road at Governor Road at city limits
Westbound  On Byron Street at N. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On Byron Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On Campbell Drive at Westwood Drive
Westbound  On Carson Drive at S. 6th Street
Southbound On Carson Drive at Cooper Lane
Northbound On Catalina Place at Santa Barbara Drive
Eastbound  On Central Iowa Drive, College Drive and Marshalltown Comm. Coll.
Eastbound  On Cherry Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On Clinton Street at W. Olive Street
Westbound  On College Drive (north) at Marshalltown Comm. Coll. South Entrance
Northbound On Columbus Drive at Crestview Drive
Southbound On Columbus Drive at Huisman Circle
Northbound On Columbus Drive at S. 1st Street
Southbound On Columbus Drive at S. 1st Street
Westbound  On Columbus Drive at S. 2nd Street
Eastbound  On Columbus Drive at S. 2nd Street
Westbound  On Columbus Drive at S. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Columbus Drive at S. Center Street
Northbound On Country Club Lane at W. Olive Street
Eastbound  On Craig Circle at Edgebrook Drive
Eastbound  On Creekside Lane at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Crestview Drive at S. Center Street
Northbound On Crestview Drive at W. Olive Street
Southbound On Crestview Drive at W. Olive Street
Westbound  On Debra Drive at S. 6th Street
Southbound On Debra Drive at Westwood Drive
Southbound On Denmead Boulevard at W. Main Street
Northbound On Denmead Boulevard at W. State Street
Southbound On Dubois Circle at E. Southridge Road
Northbound On East Anson Street at Finkle Avenue
Eastbound  On East Anson Street at Governor Road
Westbound  On East Anson Street at Governor Road
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 6th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 9th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 9th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 10th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 11th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at S. 14th Avenue
Southbound On East Anson Street at S. 15th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Anson Street at S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Anson Street at S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On East Anson Street at Stegman
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Westbound  On East Boone Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 4th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 6th Avenue
Southbound On East Boone Street at S. 6th Avenue
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Boone Street at S. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 12th Avenue Pl.
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 14th Avenue
Southbound On East Boone Street at S. 14th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 15th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 15th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 16th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 16th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 17th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 4th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East Bromley Street at N. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Bromley Street at N. 5th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 9th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 9th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 10th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 10th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 11th Avenue
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at N. 12th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Northbound On East Church Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Church Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East Church Street at S. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East Church Street at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Church Street at S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East Church Street at S. 6th Avenue
Southbound On East Church Street at S. 6th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Church Street at S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On East Ferner Street at Glenwood Terrace
Eastbound  On East Ferner Street at Glenwood Terrace
Westbound  On East Ferner Street at Glenwood Terrace
Northbound On East Ferner Street at S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Ferner Street at S. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East Ferner Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On East Ferner Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Ferner Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Ferner Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Ferner Street at S. Center Street
Westbound  On East High Street at Finkle Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East High Street at S. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East High Street at S. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East High Street at S. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 9th Avenue
Westbound  On East High Street at S. 9th Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at 10th Avenue
Westbound  On East High Street at 10th Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East High Street at S. Center Street and W. High Street
Westbound  On East High Street at S. Center Street and W. High Street
Eastbound  On East Ingledue Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On East Ingledue Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Ingledue Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Ingledue Street at S. Center Street and W. Ingledue Street
Westbound  On East Ingledue Street at S. Center Street and W. Ingledue Street
Westbound  On East Lee Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lee Street at N. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lee Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Lee Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lee Street at N. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East Lee Street at N. 11th Avenue
Southbound On East Lee Street at N. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lee Street at N. 11th Avenue
Westbound  On East Lee Street at N. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lee Street at N. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East Lincoln Street at N. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Lincoln Street at N. 1st Avenue
Northbound On East Lincoln Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Lincoln Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Lincoln Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On East Lincoln Street at N. Center Street and W. Lincoln Street
Southbound On East Lincoln Street at N. Center Street and W. Lincoln Street
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Linn Street at S. 1st Avenue
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Linn Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Linn Street at S. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Linn Street at S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 6th Avenue
Southbound On East Linn Street at S. 6th Avenue
Northbound On East Linn Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Linn Street at S. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Linn Street at S. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Linn Street at S. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Linn Street at S. 18th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Madison Street at 12th Avenue
Southbound On East Madison Street at S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Madison Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Madison Street at S. Center Street and W. Madison Street
Southbound On East Madison Street at west ramp
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 1st Avenue and S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 1st Avenue and S. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East Main Street at N. 1st Avenue and S. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East Main Street at N. 1st Avenue and S. 1st Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 2nd Avenue and S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 2nd Avenue and S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Main Street at N. 2nd Avenue and S. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On East Main Street at N. 2nd Avenue and S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 5th Avenue and S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 5th Avenue and S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at S. 6th Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 7th Avenue and S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 7th Avenue and S. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Main Street at N. 7th Avenue and S. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Main Street at N. 7th Avenue and S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 8th Avenue and S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 8th Avenue and S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 9th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 10th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 11th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at S. 12th Avenue/Lennox Drive
Eastbound  On East Main Street at S. 12th Avenue/Lennox Drive
Westbound  On East Main Street at S. 12th Avenue/Lennox Drive
Northbound On East Main Street at N. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Southbound On East Main Street at N. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Main Street at N. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Main Street at N. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On East Main Street at N. Center Street and S. Center Street and W.
           Main Street
Southbound On East Main Street at N. Center Street and S. Center Street and W.
           Main Street
Westbound  On East Main Street at N. Center Street and S. Center Street and W.
           Main Street
Eastbound  On East Main Street at N. Center Street and S. Center Street and W.
           Main Street
Northbound On East Main Street at PW Facility west entrance
Eastbound  On East Marion Street at N. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East Marion Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Marion Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 4th Avenue
Southbound On East Marion Street at N. 4th Avenue
Southbound On East Marion Street at N. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 6th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 7th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 10th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 13th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 14th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 15th Avenue
Northbound On East Marion Street at N. 18th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Marion Street at N. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Marion Street at N. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Marion Street at N. Center Street
Northbound On East Marion Street at Sharon Avenue
Eastbound  On East Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Street
Westbound  On East Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 18th Avenue and S. 18th Street
Westbound  On East Merle Hibbs Boulevard at Governor Road
Southbound On East Merle Hibbs Boulevard at Knollway Drive
Southbound On East Nevada Street at east ramp
Eastbound  On East Nevada Street at S. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East Nevada Street at S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 4th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 12th Avenue Pl.
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 14th Avenue
Northbound On East Nevada Street at S. 15th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. 16th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Nevada Street at S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Nevada Street at S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On East Nevada Street at Governor Road and S. 12th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at Governor Road and S. 12th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Nevada Street at Governor Road and S. 12th Avenue
Westbound  On East Nevada Street at Governor Road and S. 12th Avenue
Southbound On East Nevada Street at Marshall Drive
Southbound On East Nevada Street at PW Facility Drive
Northbound On East Nevada Street at S. Center Street and W. Nevada Street
Southbound On East Nevada Street at S. Center Street and W. Nevada Street
Eastbound  On East Nevada Street at S. Center Street and W. Nevada Street
Eastbound  On East North Street at N. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East North Street at N. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East North Street at N. Center Street and W. North Street
Westbound  On East North Street at N. Center Street and W. North Street
Northbound On East Olive Street at Edgebrook Drive
Northbound On East Olive Street at Olson Way
Northbound On East Olive Street at Rainbow Drive
Northbound On East Olive Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East Olive Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On East Olive Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Olive Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East Olive Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On East Olive Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Olive Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Olive Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On East Olive Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Olive Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East Olive Street at S. 10th Avenue
Southbound On East Olive Street at S. 17th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Olive Street at S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Olive Street at S. 18th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at Finkle Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 1st Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East South Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East South Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East South Street at S. 9th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 9th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 10th Avenue
Southbound On East South Street at S. 11th Avenue
Southbound On East Southridge Road at Edgebrook Drive
Eastbound  On East Southridge Road at Governor Road
Northbound On East Southridge Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On East Southridge Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Southridge Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Southridge Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On East Southridge Road at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East Southridge Road at Sugar Creek Lane
Northbound On East State Street at N. 1st Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 1st Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 4th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 4th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 5th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 5th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 7th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East State Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East State Street at N. 7th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 8th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 9th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 9th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 10th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 10th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. 11th Avenue
Southbound On East State Street at N. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East State Street at N. 12th Avenue
Westbound  On East State Street at N. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East State Street at N. Center Street and W. State Street
Southbound On East State Street at N. Center Street and W. State Street
Eastbound  On East State Street at N. Center Street and W. State Street
Westbound  On East State Street at N. Center Street and W. State Street
Westbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 4th Avenue
Westbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Swayze Street at N. 12th Avenue
Westbound  On East Union Street at N. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Union Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Union Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Union Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Union Street at N. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Webster Street at N. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East Webster Street at N. 1st Avenue
Eastbound  On East Webster Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On East Webster Street at N. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Webster Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Webster Street at N. Center Street and W. Webster Street
Westbound  On East Webster Street at N. Center Street and W. Webster Street
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 4th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 10th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 11th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 11th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 12th Avenue
Westbound  On East Woodbury Street at N. 12th Avenue
Northbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 13th Avenue
Southbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 13th Avenue
Northbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 14th Avenue
Southbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 14th Avenue
Northbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 15th Avenue
Southbound On East Woodbury Street at N. 15th Avenue
Northbound On East Woodbury Street at Sharon Avenue
Southbound On East Woodbury Street at Sharon Avenue
Eastbound  On Eastview Road at Edgebrook Drive
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at Friendly Drive
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at Newcastle Road
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at S. 5th Avenue
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at Thomas Drive
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at Thunderbird Drive
Eastbound  On Edgebrook Drive at Walters Circle
Northbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 3rd Street
Southbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 3rd Street
Northbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 4th Street
Southbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Edgeland Drive at S. 4th Street
Westbound  On Edgeland Drive at S. 4th Street
Northbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 5th Street
Southbound On Edgeland Drive at S. 5th Street
Westbound  On Edgeland Drive at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Edgeland Drive at S. Center Street2021 S-4
Westbound  On Edgeland Drive at S. Center Street
Westbound  On Edgewood Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Edgewood Street at N. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On Edgewood Street at N. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On Elder Drive at S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On Elmwood Drive at Hillcrest Road
Southbound On Elmwood Drive at Hillcrest Road
Westbound  On Elmwood Drive at Hillcrest Road
Eastbound  On Elmwood Drive at S. 6th Street and Sunset Lane
Westbound  On Elmwood Drive at S. 6th Street and Sunset Lane
Northbound On Elmwood Drive at Timberline Road
Eastbound  On Elmwood Drive at Timberline Road
Westbound  On Elmwood Drive at Timberline Road
Northbound On Elmwood Drive at W. Olive Street
Northbound On Freiberg Court at Westwood Drive
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 3rd Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 4th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 5th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 5th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 6th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 7th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 7th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 8th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 9th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 10th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 10th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 11th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 11th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 12th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 12th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 13th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 16th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 16th Street
Eastbound  On Fremont Street at N. 19th Street
Westbound  On Fremont Street at N. 19th Street
Westbound  On Friendly Drive at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Frontage Road at Merle Hibbs Boulevard
Southbound On Frontage Road at Merle Hibbs Boulevard
Northbound On Frontage Road at Nicholas Drive
Southbound On Frontage Road at Nicholas Drive
Northbound On Frontage Road at S. Center Street
Southbound On Frontage Road at S. Center Street
Eastbound  On Frontage Road at S. Center Street
Westbound  On Frontage Road at S. Center Street
Southbound On Frontage Road at W. Berle Road
Northbound On Frontage Road at W. Southridge Road
Southbound On Frontage Road at W. Southridge Road
Northbound On Frontage Road at Westwood Drive
Southbound On Gethmann Lane at Westwood Drive
Westbound  On Glenda Drive
Eastbound  On Glenda Drive at S. 2nd Avenue
Westbound  On Glenda Drive at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On Governor Road at Industrial Boulevard
Northbound On Governor Road at Iowa Avenue E.
Southbound On Governor Road at Iowa Avenue E.
Southbound On Governor Road at Iowa Avenue E. right turn lane
Eastbound  On Governor Road at Jackson Street
Westbound  On Governor Road at Jackson Street
Eastbound  On Governor Road at May Street
Eastbound  On Governor Road at Turner Street
Northbound On Greenfield Drive at S. 14th Street
Southbound On Greenfield Drive at S. 14th Street
Eastbound  On Harmony Drive at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Harrison Drive at W. Boone Street
Westbound  On Henry Drive at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On Henry Drive at S. 9th Avenue
Eastbound  On Highland Acres at Frontage Road North
Eastbound  On Highland Acres at Frontage Road South
Southbound On Highland Acres Road at Lincoln Way
Northbound On Highland Acres Road at Lincoln Way
Northbound On Highland Acres Road at Main Street Road
Westbound  On Highland Acres Road at Nelson Road
Northbound On Hillcrest Road at W. Olive Street
Eastbound  On Hughes Street at N. 4th Street
Westbound  On Hughes Street at N. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Innes Boulevard at N. 3rd Street
Northbound On Innes Boulevard at N. 4th Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue E. at 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On Iowa Avenue E. at 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Eastbound  On Iowa Avenue E. at 18th Avenue and S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On Iowa Avenue E. at Frontage Road/Governor Road
Northbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at S. 2nd Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at S. 2nd Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at S. 8th Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at S. 12th Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at S. 14th Street
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at Maytag Road
Northbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at Parker Avenue
Southbound On Iowa Avenue W. (Old US 30) at Village Circle
Eastbound  On Iowa Veterans Home at Jerome Street and N. 9th Street
Northbound On Iowa Veterans Home at Summit Street
Southbound On Iowa Veterans Home at Summit Street
Eastbound  On Iowa Veterans Home at Summit Street
Westbound  On Iowa Veterans Home at Summit Street
Southbound On Jackie Terrace at Carson Drive
Westbound  On Jackson Street at S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On Jackson Street at S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On Jackson Street at S. 8th Avenue
Eastbound  On Jackson Street at S. 9th Avenue
Westbound  On Jackson Street at S. 9th Avenue
Eastbound  On Jerome Street at N. 3rd Street
Northbound On Jerome Street at N. 4th Street
Southbound On Jerome Street at N. 4th Street
Northbound On Jerome Street at N. 5th Street
Southbound On Jerome Street at N. 5th Street
Northbound On Joan Terrace at Leland Court
Northbound On Knollway Drive at W. Southridge Road
Southbound On Knollway Drive at W. Southridge Road
Northbound On Knollwood Drive at W. Olive Street
Eastbound  On Koeper Drive at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On Larkfield Court at Rolling Meadows Road
Eastbound  On Larkfield Court at S. 12th Street
Eastbound  On Lee Street at N. 6th Avenue
Westbound  On Lee Street at N. 6th Avenue
Eastbound  On Leo Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Lincoln Tower Circle at Lincoln Way
Southbound On Lincoln Way at Belaire Drive
Northbound On Lincoln Way at Merritt Road
Southbound On Lincoln Way at Orchard Drive
Westbound  On Lincoln Way at S. 6th Street
Northbound On Lincoln Way at S. 7th Street
Northbound On Lincoln Way at S. 9th Street
Southbound On Lincoln Way at S. 9th Street
Northbound On Lincoln Way at S. 12th Street
Southbound On Lincoln Way at S. 12th Street
Southbound On Lincoln Way at S. 14th Street
Westbound  On Linnwood Street at N. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Linnwood Street at N. 4th Avenue
Southbound On Linnwood Street at N. 4th Avenue
Northbound On Linnwood Street at N. 5th Avenue
Southbound On Linnwood Street at N. 5th Avenue
Eastbound  On Linnwood Street at N. 5th Avenue
Northbound On Main Street Road at S. 29th Street
Southbound On Main Street Road at Valley View Road and W. Main Street
Southbound On Maple Boulevard at W. Southridge Road
Northbound On Maple Boulevard at Westwood Drive
Westbound  On Market Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On Market Street at West ramp
Westbound  On Market Street at West ramp
Westbound  On Marshalltown Comm. Coll. at Reed Avenue
Westbound  On May Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On May Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On May Street at S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On May Street at S. 7th Avenue
Southbound On May Street at S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On May Street at S. 8th Avenue
Southbound On May Street at S. 8th Avenue
Northbound On May Street at S. 9th Avenue
Southbound On May Street at S. 9th Avenue
Westbound  On Maytag Road at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Maytag Road at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Maytag Road at S. 8th Street
Westbound  On Maytag Road at S. 8th Street
Northbound On Meadow Lane at S. 4th Street
Southbound On Meadow Lane at S. 4th Street
Westbound  On Meadow Lane at S. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Meadow Lane at S. 4th Street
Westbound  On Meadow Lane at S. 6th Street
Northbound On Melissa Lane
Southbound On Melissa Lane at E. Merle Hibbs Boulevard
Westbound  On Melody Lane at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 2nd Street
Southbound On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 2nd Street
Northbound On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 6th Street
Southbound On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 6th Street
Westbound  On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 6th Street
Southbound On Merle Hibbs Boulevard at S. 8th Street
Westbound  On Newcastle Road at S. 1st Avenue
Northbound On Newcastle Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Southbound On Newcastle Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On Newcastle Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Newcastle Road at S. 3rd Avenue
Northbound On Newcastle Road at S. 5th Avenue
Southbound On Newcastle Road at S. 5th Avenue
Northbound On Nicholas Drive at S. 2nd Street
Southbound On Nicholas Drive at S. 2nd Street
Westbound  On Nicholas Drive at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Norris Place at S. 16th Avenue
Westbound  On Norris Place at S. 16th Avenue
Eastbound  On North 1st Avenue at E. Grant Street
Northbound On North 1st Avenue at Riverside Street
Northbound On North 1st Street at N. Center Street
Southbound On North 1st Street at N. Center Street
Northbound On North 1st Street at S. 1st Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 1st Street at S. 1st Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 1st Street at S. 1st Street and W. Main Street
Westbound  On North 1st Street at S. 1st Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 1st Street at W. Grant Street
Westbound  On North 1st Street at W. Grant Street
Northbound On North 1st Street at W. Lincoln Street
Southbound On North 1st Street at W. Lincoln Street
Eastbound  On North 1st Street at W. North Street
Westbound  On North 1st Street at W. North Street
Northbound On North 1st Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 1st Street at W. State Street
Eastbound  On North 1st Street at W. Webster Street
Westbound  On North 1st Street at W. Webster Street
Northbound On North 2nd Avenue at Riverside Street
Southbound On North 2nd Avenue at Riverside Street
Northbound On North 2nd Street at N. Center Street
Northbound On North 2nd Street at S. 2nd Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 2nd Street at S. 2nd Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 2nd Street at S. 2nd Street and W. Main Street
Westbound  On North 2nd Street at S. 2nd Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 2nd Street at W. Grant Street
Westbound  On North 2nd Street at W. Grant Street
Northbound On North 2nd Street at W. Lincoln Street
Southbound On North 2nd Street at W. Lincoln Street
Northbound On North 2nd Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 2nd Street at W. State Street
Westbound  On North 2nd Street at W. Webster Street
Westbound  On North 3rd Avenue at Woodland Street
          On North 3rd Street alley north of Park Street
Eastbound  On North 3rd Street at Park Street
Northbound On North 3rd Street at S. 3rd Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 3rd Street at S. 3rd Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 3rd Street at S. 3rd Street and W. Main Street
Westbound  On North 3rd Street at S. 3rd Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 3rd Street at Summit Street
Westbound  On North 3rd Street at W. Grant Street
Westbound  On North 3rd Street at W. Lincoln Street
Northbound On North 3rd Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 3rd Street at W. State Street
Eastbound  On North 3rd Street at W. State Street
Westbound  On North 3rd Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 4th Avenue at Edgewood Street
Southbound On North 4th Avenue at Edgewood Street
Eastbound  On North 4th Avenue at Riverside Street
Westbound  On North 4th Avenue at Riverside Street
Eastbound  On North 4th Street at Park Street
Westbound  On North 4th Street at Park Street
Northbound On North 4th Street at S. 4th Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 4th Street at S. 4th Street and W. Main Street
Northbound On North 4th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 4th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 4th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 4th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 5th Street at Edgewood Street
Southbound On North 5th Street at Edgewood Street
Northbound On North 5th Avenue at Woodland Street
Northbound On North 5th Street at S. 5th Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 5th Street at S. 5th Street and W. Main Street
Northbound On North 5th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 5th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 5th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 5th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 6th Avenue at Woodbury Street
Northbound On North 6th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 6th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 6th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 6th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 6th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 7th Street at S. 7th Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 7th Street at S. 7th Street and W. Main Street
Northbound On North 7th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 7th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 7th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 7th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 8th Avenue at Edgewood Street
Southbound On North 8th Avenue at E. Marion Street
Northbound On North 8th Street at S. 8th Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 8th Street at S. 8th Street and W. Main Street
Northbound On North 8th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 8th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 8th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 8th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 9th Street at S. 9th Street and W. Main Street
Southbound On North 9th Street at S. 9th Street and W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 9th Street at S. 9th Street and W. Main Street
Westbound  On North 9th Street at S. 9th Street and W. Main Street
Northbound On North 9th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 9th Street at Summit Street
Eastbound  On North 9th Street at W. State Street
Westbound  On North 9th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 10th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 10th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 10th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 10h Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 11th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 11th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 11th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 11th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 12th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 12th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 12th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 12th Street at W. State Street
Eastbound  On North 13th Street at Summit Street
Westbound  On North 13th Street at Summit Street
Westbound  On North 13th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 14th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 14th Street at W. Main Street
Southbound On North 15th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 15th Street at Summit Street and Taft Street
Southbound On North 15th Street at Summit Street and Taft Street
Southbound On North 16th Street at Summit Street
Eastbound  On North 16th Street at W. State Street
Westbound  On North 16th Street at W. State Street
Southbound On North 17th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 17th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 18th Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 19th Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 19th Street at W. Main Street
Eastbound  On North 19th Street at W. State Street
Westbound  On North 19th Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 21st Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 21st Street at W. State Street
Northbound On North 22nd Street at Summit Street
Southbound On North 25th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On North 27th Street at Summit Street
Westbound  On North Center Street at Riverside Street
Northbound On North Center Street at W. Grant Street
Southbound On North Center Street at W. Grant Street
Eastbound  On North Center Street at W. Grant Street
Westbound  On North Center Street at W. Grant Street
Westbound  On Olson Way at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Olson Way at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Palmer Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On Palmer Street at S. Center Street
Westbound  On Pine Street at S. 2nd Avenue
Eastbound  On Pine Street at S. 3rd Avenue
Westbound  On Player Street at S. 6th Street
Northbound On Plaza Drive at E. Southridge Road
Northbound On Pleasantview Road at S. 4th Street
Southbound On Pleasantview Road at S. 4th Street
Westbound  On Pleasantview Road at S. 4th Street
Eastbound  On Pleasantview Road at S. 4th Street
Westbound  On Pleasantview Road at S. 6th Street
Westbound  On Prairie Lane at S. 12th Street
Westbound  On Rainbow Drive at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Rainbow Drive at S. 3rd Avenue
Eastbound  On Ratcliff Drive at S. 7th Avenue
Westbound  On Ratcliff Drive at S. 7th Avenue
Eastbound  On Rex Ryden Road at Governor Road
Eastbound  On Rex Ryden Road at S. 18th Avenue RR track crossing
Westbound  On Rex Ryden Road at S. 18th Avenue RR track crossing
Westbound  On Richard Lane at S. 6th Street
Eastbound  On Riverside Street at N. 4th Avenue
Westbound  On Riverside Street at N. 4th Avenue
Eastbound  On Riverside Street at N. 5th Avenue
Westbound  On Riverside Street at N. Center Avenue
Eastbound  On Roberts Terrace at S. 6th Street
Westbound  On Roberts Terrace at S. 6th Street
Northbound On Robertson Drive at W. Olive Street
Eastbound  On Rolling Meadows Road at S. 12th Street
Northbound On Rolling Meadows Road at S. 14th Street
Northbound On Santa Barbara Drive at Wardview Road
Northbound On South 1st Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 1st Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 1st Street at W. Ferner Street
Westbound  On South 1st Street at W. Ferner Street
Northbound On South 1st Street at W. Ingledue Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Ingledue Street
Northbound On South 1st Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Madison Street
Northbound On South 1st Street at W. Nevada Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Nevada Street
Southbound On South 1st Street at W. Olive Street
Westbound  On South 2nd Street at W. Berle Road
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 2nd Street at W. High Street
Westbound  On South 2nd Street at W. High Street
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Ingledue Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Ingledue Street
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Madison Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 2nd Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 2nd Street at W. Nevada Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. Olive Street
Southbound On South 2nd Street at W. South Street
Northbound On South 2nd Street at W. Southridge Road
Southbound On South 2nd Street at Washington Street
Eastbound  On South 2nd Street at Washington Street
Westbound  On South 2nd Street at Washington Street
Southbound On South 3rd Avenue at Plaza Heights Road
Eastbound  On South 3rd Avenue at Young Street
Northbound On South 3rd Avenue Place at Thomas Drive
Southbound On South 3rd Avenue Place at Thunderbird Drive
Eastbound  On South 3rd Avenue at Thomas Drive
Westbound  On South 3rd Avenue at Thomas Drive
Eastbound  On South 3rd Avenue at Thunderbird Drive
Westbound  On South 3rd Avenue at Thunderbird Drive
Southbound On South 3rd Street at S. 6th Street
Northbound On South 3rd Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 3rd Street at W. Boone Street
Eastbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Boone Street
Westbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 3rd Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 3rd Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Church Street
Westbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 3rd Street at W. Madison Street
Southbound On South 3rd Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Madison Street
Westbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 3rd Street at W. Nevada Street
Northbound On South 3rd Street at W. Olive Street
Northbound On South 4th Avenue at Thomas Drive
Southbound On South 4th Avenue at Thunderbird Drive
Southbound On South 4th Street at Sunset Lane
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Eastbound  On South 4th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Westbound  On South 4th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Madison Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 4th Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 4th Street at W. Nevada Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Olive Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Olive Street
Northbound On South 4th Street at W. Washington Street
Southbound On South 4th Street at W. Washington Street
Northbound On South 5th Avenue at Thunderbird Drive
Southbound On South 5th Avenue at Thunderbird Drive
Northbound On South 5th Avenue at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 5th Avenue at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 5th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 5th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 5th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 5th Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 5th Street at W. Madison Street
Southbound On South 5th Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 5th Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 5th Street at W. Nevada Street
Northbound On South 5th Street at W. Olive Street
Southbound On South 5th Street at W. Olive Street
Northbound On South 5th Street at Westwood Drive
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at softball complex
Westbound  On South 6th Street at Terry Terrace
Southbound On South 6th Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 6th Street at W. Church Street
Westbound  On South 6th Street at W. High Street
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Westbound  On South 6th Street at W. Ingledue Street
Southbound On South 6th Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 6th Street at W. Madison Street
Southbound On South 6th Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 6th Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 6th Street at W. South Street
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at W. Southridge Road
Westbound  On South 6th Street at W. Southridge Road
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at Washington Street
Westbound  On South 6th Street at Washington Street
Northbound On South 6th Street at Westwood Drive
Southbound On South 6th Street at Westwood Drive
Eastbound  On South 6th Street at Westwood Drive
Westbound  On South 6th Street at Westwood Drive
Westbound  On South 7th Avenue at Joan Terrace
Northbound On South 7th Avenue at Southridge Road
Westbound  On South 7th Avenue at Travis Drive
Southbound On South 7th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 7th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 7th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 7th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 7th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 7th Street at W. Madison Street
Northbound On South 8th Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 8th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 8th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 8th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 8th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 8th Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 8th Street at W. Southridge Road
Southbound On South 8th Street at W. Southridge Road
Eastbound  On South 9th Street at Sunshine Drive
Southbound On South 9th Street at Washington Street
Eastbound  On South 9th Street at W. Boone Street
Westbound  On South 9th Street at W. Boone Street
Eastbound  On South 9th Street at W. Church Street
Westbound  On South 9th Street at W. Church Street
Westbound  On South 9th Street at W. Madison Street
Eastbound  On South 9th Street at W. Nevada Street
Westbound  On South 9th Street at W. Nevada Street
Northbound On South 10th Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 10th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 10th Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 11th Street at Miller Middle School
Northbound On South 11th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 12th Street
Southbound On South 12th Street
Eastbound  On South 12th Street
Westbound  On South 12th Street
Southbound On South 12th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 12th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 12th Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 12th Street at W. Linn Street
Westbound  On South 12th Street at W. Linn Street
Northbound On South 12th Street at W. Main Street
Southbound On South 12th Street at W. Olive Street
Northbound On South 12th Street at Westwood Drive
Southbound On South 13th Street at W. Boone Street
Northbound On South 13th Street at W. Church Street
Southbound On South 13th Street at W. Church Street
Eastbound  On South 13th Street at W. Church Street
Westbound  On South 13th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 13th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 13th Street at W. Linn Street
Eastbound  On South 13th Street at W. Linn Street
Westbound  On South 13th Street at W. Linn Street
Southbound On South 14th Street at W. Church Street
Northbound On South 14th Street at W. Main Street
Northbound On South 16th Street at W. Main Street
Southbound On South 16th Street at W. Main Street
Westbound  On South Center Street at E. Lafrentz Lane
Eastbound  On South Center Street at Santa Barbara Drive
Northbound On South Center Street viaduct ramp (to/from Washington Street)
Southbound On South Center Street viaduct ramp (to/from Washington Street)
Eastbound  On South Center Street viaduct ramp (to/from Washington Street)
Westbound  On South Center Street viaduct ramp (to/from Washington Street)
Eastbound  On South Center Street at W. Ferner Street
Westbound  On South Center Street by Walmart
Southbound On Southridge Circle at W. Southridge Road
Northbound On Stratford Lane at Westwood Drive
Southbound On Stratford Lane at Westwood Drive
Northbound On Summit Road at Summit Street and Valley View Road
Eastbound  On Swayze Street at N. 6th Avenue
Westbound  On Swayze Street at N. 6th Avenue
Southbound On Timberline Road at Westwood Drive
Eastbound  On Union Street at N. 6th Avenue
Westbound  On Union Street at N. 6th Avenue
Northbound On Wakefield Drive at Wauconda Road
Southbound On Wakefield Drive at Wauconda Road
Northbound On Wakefield Drive at Westwood Drive
Southbound On Wakefield Drive at Westwood Drive
Northbound On Washington Street at S. 1st Street
Westbound  On Washington Street at S. 12th Street
Northbound On Washington Street at Aquatic Center
Northbound On West Madison Street at Wilson Circle
Southbound On West Main Street at North 25th Street
Northbound On West Main Street at North 29th Street
Southbound On West Southridge Road at Wakefield Drive
Northbound On West Southridge Road at Wauconda Road
Southbound On West Southridge Road at Wauconda Road
Southbound On Woodland Street in Riverview Park
Eastbound  On Woodside Drive at Knollway Drive
Eastbound  Intersection of alley at S. 2nd Street between Main and Church
Southbound Intersection of alley from East Linn Street between 3rd Avenue to
           4th Avenue
 
(2013 Code, § 20-38)
   (B)   Stop sign placement. Stop signs at the intersections referred to
herein requiring stops to be made by moving traffic shall be placed and
maintained by the Street Division at the right-hand curb or curb line facing
traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-39) (Ord. 15000, passed 7-27-2020; Ord. 15006, passed 12-28-
2020; Ord. 15015, passed 3-8-2021; Ord. 15045, passed 7-11-2022; Ord. 15049,
passed 10-10-2022; Ord. 15074, passed 10-23-2023)
SCHEDULE V. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Yield sign locations. Moving vehicular traffic or automotive traffic
on the following designated streets, avenues, roads or drives shall yield
before entrance into an intersection from the directions herein designated at
the following named intersections:
Direction Street/Location
Direction  Street/Location
Eastbound  On Beer Garden Road at E. Nevada Street RR Crossing
Westbound  On Beer Garden Road at E. Nevada Street RR Crossing
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Westbound  On East Boone Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 6th Avenue
Southbound On East Boone Street at S. 6th Avenue
Eastbound  On East Boone Street at S. 8th Avenue
Westbound  On East Boone Street at S. 8th Avenue
Northbound On East Boone Street at S. 12th Avenue Pl.
Eastbound  On East Bromley Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Westbound  On East Bromley Street at RR tracks east of 8th Avenue S.
Eastbound  On East Marion Street at N. 1st Avenue
Westbound  On East Marion Street at N. Center Street
Eastbound  On East Olive Street at S. 18th Avenue
Westbound  On East Olive Street at S. 18th Avenue
Northbound On Harrison Drive at W. Boone Street
Northbound On Innes Boulevard at N. 4th Street
Westbound  On Jackson Street at S. 7th Avenue
Northbound On Jerome Street at N. 5th Street
Southbound On Jerome Street at N. 5th Street
Northbound On Melissa Lane
Northbound On North 21st Street at Summit Street
Northbound On North 22nd Street at Summit Street
Eastbound  On Rex Ryden Road at S. 18th Avenue RR track crossing
Westbound  On Rex Ryden Road at S. 18th Avenue RR track crossing
Southbound On South 12th Street at W. Boone Street
Southbound On South 13th Street at W. Boone Street
 
(2013 Code, § 20-40)
   (B)   Yield sign placement. Yield signs at the intersections referred to
herein requiring moving traffic to yield shall be placed and maintained by the
Street Division at the right-hand curb or curb line facing traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-41) (Ord. 15000, passed 7-27-2020)
SCHEDULE VI. TRAFFIC SIGNAL LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Traffic signal locations. Moving vehicular traffic or automotive
traffic at the following designated intersections of streets, avenues, roads or
drives shall obey the visual signal indication before entrance into the
intersections herein designated at the following named intersections:
Street/Location
Street/Location
3rd Avenue at Main Street
3rd Avenue at Church Street
3rd Avenue at Linn Street
3rd Avenue at Anson Street
3rd Avenue at Riverside Street
3rd Avenue at State Street
6th Street at Olive Street
13th Street at Main Street
Anson Street at 1st Avenue
Center Street at Anson Street
Center Street at South Street
Center Street at Westwood Drive
Center Street at Southridge Road
Center Street at Nicholas Drive
Center Street at Hibbs Boulevard
Center Street at Berle Road
Center Street at Iowa Avenue
Center Street at Olive Street
Center Street at Boone Street
Center Street at Linn Street
Center Street at Church Street
Center Street at Meadow Lane
Governor Rd at Olive Street
 
(2013 Code, § 20-42)
   (B)   Traffic signal installation. Traffic control signals at the
intersections referred to herein requiring moving traffic to stop shall be
placed and maintained by the Public Works Department according to the
requirements of the Federal Highway Administration Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(2013 Code, § 20-43)
   (C)   Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
      (1)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official parking sign, curb or other marking,
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal, if such sign, signal, marking or device has not been authorized by the
state’s Department of Transportation or the Council with reference to streets
and highways under its jurisdiction. No person shall place or maintain, nor
shall any public authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to
prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs
giving useful directional information of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs. All, except that all erected signs, shall conform to §§ 156.550
through 156.552 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
empowered to remove the sign, signal or marking or cause it to be removed
without notice.
(2013 Code, § 20-44)
   (D)   Interference with devices; unlawful possession.
      (1)   Any person who willfully and intentionally, without lawful
authority, attempts to or in fact alters, defaces, injures, knocks down or
removes an official traffic control device; an authorized warning sign or
signal or barricade, whether temporary or permanent; a railroad sign or signal;
an inscription, shield or insignia on any of such devices, signs, signals or
barricades or any other part thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession any official traffic control device, except because of his or her
employment.
(2013 Code, § 20-45)
   (E)   Penalty. Anyone violating the provisions of this schedule shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 20-46)
(Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14937, passed 1-26-2015; Ord. 14970, passed
11-27-2017; Ord. 15000, passed 7-27-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 321.259, 321.260
SCHEDULE VII. SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Zones established. The following school zones are established to
include the parts of streets herein set forth:
School Location
School                                                   Location
                                                         On South 3rd Avenue
                                                         from Ferner Street to
                                                         May Street; on East
                                                         South Street from
Anson Elementary                                         South 5th Avenue to
                                                         South 2nd Avenue; on
                                                         East Anson Street from
                                                         South 5th Avenue to
                                                         South 2nd Avenue
                                                         On South 6th Street
                                                         from Sunset Lane to
                                                         Edgeland Drive; on
                                                         Pleasantview Drive
                                                         from South 6th Street
Fisher Elementary School                                 to Bryngelson Drive;
                                                         on South 4th Street
                                                         from Sunset Lane to
                                                         Edgeland Drive; on
                                                         Meadow Lane from South
                                                         6th Street to South
                                                         3rd Street
                                                         On West Main Street
                                                         from 400 feet west of
                                                         South 14th Street to
                                                         South 12th Street; on
Franklin Elementary School                               14th Street from
                                                         Church Street to State
                                                         Street; on 13th Street
                                                         from Church Street to
                                                         State Street
                                                         On East Southridge
                                                         Road from Sugar Creek
Hoglan Elementary School                                 Lane to 5th Avenue; on
                                                         South 3rd Avenue from
                                                         Newcastle Road to
                                                         Melody Lane
                                                         On South 4th Street
                                                         from Edgeland Drive to
                                                         400 feet north of
                                                         Ingledue Street; on
                                                         West Ingledue Street
                                                         from 5th Street to 1st
                                                         Street; on South 2nd
Lenihan Intermediate School and St. Henry’s Elementary Street from Ferner
School                                                   Street to Olive
                                                         Street; on Crestview
                                                         Drive from Columbus
                                                         Drive to Olive Street;
                                                         on Columbus Drive from
                                                         4th Street to 2nd
                                                         Street; on West Olive
                                                         Street from 2nd Street
                                                         to 5th Street
                                                         On South 2nd Avenue
                                                         from Ingeldue Street
                                                         to Koeper Drive; on
                                                         East Olive Street from
Marshalltown High School                                 Center Street to
                                                         Edgebrook Drive; on
                                                         South 3rd Avenue from
                                                         Ingeldue Street to
                                                         Koeper Drive
                                                         On South 9th Street
                                                         from Boone Street to
                                                         Church Street; on
                                                         South 11th Street from
                                                         Boone Street to Church
                                                         Street; on West Church
Miller Middle School                                     Street from 9th Street
                                                         to 12th Street; on
                                                         West Linn Street from
                                                         11th Street to 12th
                                                         Street; on West Boone
                                                         Street from 9th Street
                                                         to 12th Street
                                                         On Summit Street from
                                                         6th Street to 3rd
                                                         Street; on 4th Street
                                                         from Jerome Street to
Rogers Elementary School                                 State Street; on
                                                         Fremont Street from
                                                         3rd Street to 6th
                                                         Street; on 5th Street
                                                         from Jerome Street to
                                                         State Street
                                                         On West Linn Street
                                                         from Center Street to
                                                         2nd Street; on South
                                                         1st Street from Nevada
                                                         Street to Church
St. Mary’s Elementary School                           Street; on West Boone
                                                         Street from Center
                                                         Street to 2nd Street;
                                                         on South Center Street
                                                         from Boone Street to
                                                         Church Street
                                                         On East State Street
                                                         from 5th Avenue to 8th
                                                         Avenue; on 7th Avenue
Woodbury Elementary School                               from Church Street to
                                                         Bromley Street; on
                                                         East Main Street from
                                                         5th Avenue to 8th
                                                         Avenue
 
(2013 Code, § 20-46.1)
   (B)   Sign material and placement standards. Movable stop signs shall meet
minimum material design standards as outlined in the most current Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA) Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)
and FHWA Guidelines and Recommendations to Accommodate Older Drivers and
Pedestrians. Movable stop signs may be placed within the designated school zone
at such locations as approved by written agreement between the respective
school system and the city. Movable stop signs shall be placed in the street in
accordance with the traffic safety regulations of the state’s Department of
Transportation, if any, and, if none, they shall be placed in the center of the
intersection, crosswalk or as otherwise specifically approved by the City
Engineer.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.2)
   (C)   Time of placement.
      (1)   Movable stop signs can be placed in the street near the respective
schools at the approved locations no sooner than one hour before and must be
removed within one hour after applicable regularly scheduled school session
start times. Movable stop signs can also be placed in the street near the
respective schools at the approved locations no sooner than one hour before and
must be removed within one hour after applicable regularly scheduled school
session dismissal times.
      (2)   The city must specifically approve any variations to the movable
stop sign time of placement standards.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.3)
   (D)   Vehicles to stop. All motor vehicles approaching said movable stop
sign locations shall stop before entering said locations when such movable stop
signs have been placed in the street at approved locations within the school
zones.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.4)
   (E)   School zone speed limit. The maximum speed limit within the school
zones is established at 25 mph unless otherwise approved and posted.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.5)
   (F)   Obedience. All motor vehicles moving through the above described
school zones shall be governed by, and all drivers thereof shall observe, all
traffic control devices or signs as shall be installed for the control or
movement of motor vehicle traffic.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.6)
   (G)   Speed signs. Appropriate signs indicating the maximum rate of speed of
moving vehicles entering the school zone as herein established shall be erected
and maintained by the city to advise the operators of motor vehicles using said
streets or highways of the maximum rate of speed, as is herein defined or
established, in the school zones in which entrance is being made.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.7)
   (H)   Exemptions. All emergency vehicles including police, fire and
ambulance services, when responding to emergency service calls, are exempt from
the provisions of this schedule, on the condition that notice of the approach
of such vehicles into the school zones is given by the sounding of a loud
siren, bell or other loud signaling device.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.8)
   (I)   Penalties. Any driver in violation of observing the traffic control
sign provisions of this schedule shall be subject to fines and/or other
penalties as outlined in this traffic code and the state’s Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Code.
(2013 Code, § 20-46.9)
SCHEDULE VIII. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Speed restrictions.
      (1)   Any person driving a motor vehicle on a highway shall drive the
vehicle at a careful and prudent speed not greater than or less than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of
the highway and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall
drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit him or her
to bring the vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such
driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using the highway
will observe the law.
      (2)   The following shall be the lawful speed, and except as modified,
any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful:
         (a)   In any business district: 20 mph;
         (b)   In any residence or school district: 25 mph;
         (c)   For any motor vehicle drawing another vehicle, except as
otherwise specified: 40 mph; and
         (d)   In any suburban district: 45 mph.
      (3)   The maximum speed limits on the following designated streets,
avenues, roads or drives is hereby established at the rates designated as
follows:
On Street From Street To Street mph
On Street               From Street               To Street                 mph
12th Avenue/Governor    Anson Street              Merle Hibbs Boulevard     35
Road
12th Avenue/Governor    East Merle Hibbs          Southerly city limits     45
Road                    Boulevard
12th Avenue             Main Street               Anson Street              30
12th Street             Lincoln Way               Olive Street              35
12th Street             Westwood Drive            Prairie Lane              35
18th Avenue             500 feet south of E.      Hwy 30                    55
                        Anson Street
18th Avenue             Hwy 30                    Burns Road                35
18th Avenue             Marion Street             500 feet south of E.      35
                                                  Anson Street
18th Avenue             Marion Street             Jackson Street            35
1st Avenue              State Street              Church Street             20
1st Street              State Street              Church Street             20
2nd Avenue              State Street              Church Street             20
2nd Street              State Street              Church Street             20
233rd Street            Westerly city limits      Campbell Drive            35
3rd Avenue              200 feet north of Boone   Anson Street              35
                        Street
3rd Avenue              North city limits         200 feet north of         45
                                                  Woodland Street
3rd Avenue              200 feet north of         100 feet north of Bromley 35
                        Woodland                  Street
3rd Street              Madison Street            6th Street                35
6th Street              3rd Street                Iowa Avenue West          35
6th Street, when school Meadow Lane               Westwood Drive            25
flash is on
8th Avenue              Marion Street             Edgewood Street           35
Anson Street            12th Avenue               Beer Garden Road          35
Anson Street            3rd Avenue                12th Avenue               30
Anson Street            Center Street             3rd Avenue                35
Campbell Drive          233rd Street              Olive Street              35
Center Street           Nevada Street             Nicholas Drive            35
Center Street           Iowa Avenue               3,000 feet south of Iowa  50
                                                  Avenue
Center Street           Nicholas Drive            Iowa Avenue               45
Center Street           State Street              Church Street             20
Church Street           3rd Street                4th Avenue                20
Church Street           4th Avenue                7th Avenue                30
Church Street           9th Street                3rd Street                30
Edgewood Street         3rd Avenue                5th Avenue (east side)    25
Edgewood Street         5th Avenue                8th Avenue                35
Governor Road           Merle Hibbs Boulevard     South city limits         35
Highland Acres Road     Main Street               South city limits         35
Hwy 30                  West city limits          East city limits          65
Iowa Avenue E.          12th Street               Rose Hill Cemetery        50
Iowa Avenue W.          Parker Avenue             12th Street               55
Iowa Avenue W.          Rose Hill Cemetery        East city limits          55
Lincoln Way             Approximately 200 feet    9th Street                30
                        west of Ann Rutledge Road
Lincoln Way             Highland Acres Road       Approximately 200 feet    40
                                                  west of Ann Rutledge Road
Lincoln Way             West city limits          Highland Acres Road       45
Linn Street             4th Avenue                8th Avenue                30
Lincoln Way/Madison     9th Street                6th Street                30
Madison Street          6th Street                4th Avenue                30
Main Street             12th Avenue               400 feet east of 18th     35
                                                  Avenue
Main Street             13th Street               3rd Street                30
Main Street             20th Street               14th Street               30
Main Street             3rd Avenue                8th Avenue                25
Main Street             3rd Street                3rd Avenue                20
Main Street             400 feet east of 18th     East city limits          55
                        Avenue
Main Street             5th Avenue                12th Avenue               30
Main Street             Highland Acres            20th Street               45
Marion Street           N. Center Street          N 1st Avenue              10
Marion Street           8th Avenue                18th Avenue               30
Nevada Street           18th Avenue               Quarry Road               35
Nevada Street           4th Avenue                12th Avenue               35
Nicholas Drive          3rd Street                Center Street             35
Olive Street            18th Avenue               East city limits          45
Olive Street            6th Street                Campbell Drive            35
Olive Street            Rainbow Drive             18th Avenue               35
Quarry Road             Nevada Street             East to city limits       35
Riverview Park Road                                                       15
Southridge Road         Edgebrook Drive           Governor Road             35
State Street            3rd Street                3rd Avenue                20
Summit Street           22nd Street               9th Street                30
Summit Street           Valley View Road          22nd Street               45
West Merle Hibbs        South Center Street       South 6th Street          35
Boulevard
Westwood Drive          6th Street                Campbell Drive            35
Westwood Drive          6th Street                Freiburg Court            25
Woodland Street         3rd Avenue                East to end               15
 
(2013 Code, § 20-78)
   (B)   Speed limit signs. Appropriate signs indicating the maximum rate of
speed of moving vehicles within the speed zones above created shall be erected
and maintained by the Public Works Department to advise the operators of motor
vehicles using said streets or highways of the maximum rate of speed as is
herein defined or established in the districts in which entrance is being made.
(2013 Code, § 20-79)
(Ord. 68, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14881, passed 2-14-2011; Ord. 14892, passed
11-28-2011; Ord. 14915, passed 2-25-2013; Ord. 14994, passed 1-27-2020; Ord.
15060, passed 3-27-2023; Ord. 15074, passed 10-23-2023; Ord. 15076, passed 11-
13-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Special exclusion parking
      
II.   No parking any time
      
III.   Parking around schools
      
IV.   Community School District staff and employee parking
      
V.   Residential/owner parking permits
      
VI.   Restricted parking
      
VII.   Snow removal; parking prohibited
      
VIII.   Snow routes
      
IX.   Disabled parking
      
X.   Public access parking
SCHEDULE I. SPECIAL EXCLUSION PARKING.
   This schedule shall have no application and is expressly declared to be
inapplicable to the existing parking ordinances for regulations in regard to
parking on the following portions of streets and avenues:
Side On Street From To
Side On Street            From                       To
Both N. 13th Street       Summit Street              Main Street
Both S. 2nd Avenue        South line of Glenda Drive South 70 feet
West S. 2nd Street        Southridge Drive           Nicholas Drive
Both S. 3rd Avenue        Linn Street                Anson Street
Both N. 4th Avenue        East Main Street           East State Street
Both Bittersweet Road
Both Fieldcrest Court
Both Freiberg Court
Both Greenfield Drive
Both Larkfield Court
Both E. Linn Street       3rd Avenue                 4th Avenue
Both Rolling Meadows Road
Other streets designated with painted parking spaces.
Other streets otherwise designated or not posted with alternate parking
signs.
 
(2013 Code, § 20-160.6)
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING ANY TIME.
   (A)   No parking any time. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited at
all times on certain streets and locations hereafter set forth as follows:
Side On Street From To
Side               On Street           From                To
Both               18th Avenue         Marion Street       South city limits
                                       480 feet west of
Both               Anson Street        the centerline of   S. 4th Avenue
                                       S. Center Street
Both               Bohen Street        S. Center Street    S. 1st Avenue
Both               E. and W. 3rd       S. 3rd Avenue       Nevada-Madison
                   Avenue ramps                            Street connection
Both               E. Anson Street     S. 12th Avenue      Stegman Boulevard
Both               E. Anson Street     S. Center Street    S. 4th Avenue
North              E. Boone Street     East line of S.     110 feet east
                                       Center Street
South              E. Boone Street     S. 1st Avenue       S. 2nd Avenue
North              Byron Street        N. 1st Avenue       N. 2nd Avenue
Both               E. Church Street    S. 3rd Avenue       S. 4th Avenue
                                       A point 20 feet
                                       west of the west
North              E. Linn Street      line of the north-  West line of said
                                       south alley between alley
                                       4th Avenue and 5th
                                       Avenue
                                       East line of S. 3rd West line of first
Both               E. Linn Street      Avenue east one-    north and south
                                       half block          alley intersecting
                                                           E. Linn Street
Both               E. Linn Street      S. 14th Avenue      S. 18th Avenue
North              E. Linn Street      S. Center Street    S. 1st Avenue
                                       Alley between S.
North              E. Linn Street      2nd Avenue and S.   S. 3rd Avenue
                                       3rd Avenue
Both               E. Main Street      12th Avenue         East city limits
                                       40 feet west of the
South              E. Main Street      west line of N. 4th 85 feet east
                                       Avenue
                                       A point 68 feet
North              E. Main Street      east of the east    A point 100 feet
                                       right-of-way line   east
                                       of S. 3rd Avenue
North              E. Main Street      East line of 3rd    28 feet east
                                       Avenue
Both               E. Meadow Lane      S. Center Street    S. 2nd Avenue
Both               E. Merle Hibbs      S. Center Street    East to dead end
                   Boulevard
                   E. Merle Hibbs
                   Boulevard (This
South (Effective   schedule entry      Driveway located
10/05/23 to 12/31/ shall supersede any east of Melissa     East to dead end
24)                conflicting         Lane
                   schedule entries
                   during this
                   timeframe)
Both               E. Nevada Street    East line of S. 1st To a point 196.5
                                       Avenue              feet east
Both               E. Nevada Street    S. 4th Avenue       S. 18th Avenue
South              E. Nevada Street    S. Center Street    S. 1st Avenue
Both               E. North Street     N. Center Street    N. 2nd Avenue
Both               E. Olive Street     S. Center Street    East city limits
                                       East line of S. 3rd The entrance to the
North              E. South Street     Avenue              Anson School parking
                                                           lot
Both               E. South Street     S. Center Street    S. 3rd Avenue
North              E. Southridge Road  East line of S.     750 feet east
                                       Center Street
Both               E. State Street     East line of N. 5th West line of N. 9th
                                       Avenue              Avenue
North              E. State Street     N. 3rd Avenue       N. 4th Avenue
North              E. and W. State     N. 3rd Street       N. 3rd Avenue
                   Street
Both               E. State Street     West property line  A point 65 feet west
                                       of N. 7th Avenue
Both               Edgebrook Drive     South line of E.    A point 85 feet
                                       Olive Street        south
Both               Edgewood Street     N. 3rd Avenue       N. 8th Avenue
Both               Fremont Street      East line of N.     A point 50 feet east
                                       27th Street
Both               Iowa Avenue         East city limits    West city limits
Both               Jackson Street      S. 12th Avenue      S. 15th Avenue
Both               Madison Street      S. 4th Avenue       S. 9th Street
North              Marion Street       N. 2nd Avenue       N. 3rd Avenue
Both               Marion Street       N. 3rd Avenue       N. 18th Avenue
East               N. 10th Avenue      Lee Street          Woodbury Street
West               N. 10th Avenue      Marion Street       Bromley Street
East               N. 10th Avenue      Marion Street       Lee Street
Both               N. 12th Avenue      North line of E.    80 feet north
                                       Main Street
East               N. 14th Street      W. Main Street      W. State Street
East               N. 16th Street      Kalsem Boulevard    River Boulevard
West               N. 16th Street      W. Main Street      W. State Street
Both               N. 17th Street      Main Street         220 feet north (to
                                                           the creek)
                                       South line of east-
East               N. 1st Avenue       west alley between  Thence 35 feet south
                                       Main Street and
                                       State Street
Both               N. 3rd Avenue       Anson Street        North city limits
                                       20 feet north of    100 feet south of
East               N. 3rd Street       the north line of   the south line of
                                       Summit Street       Summit Street
West               N. 3rd Street       Main Street         50 feet north
West               N. 3rd Street       North line of       North 100 feet
                                       Summit Street
West               N. 3rd Street       South line of W.    60 feet south
                                       State Street
                                       North right-of-way
East               N. 4th Avenue       line of Woodbury    55 feet north
                                       Street
                                       20 feet south of    20 feet north of the
Both               N. 4th Street       the south line of   north line of the
                                       the alley south of  alley south of
                                       Summit Street       Summit Street
                                       South line of the
West               N. 5th Street       alley south of      60 feet south
                                       Summit Street
Both               N. 7th Avenue       E. Main Street      E. State Street
East               N. 7th Avenue       E. State Street     Bromley Street
East               N. 8th Avenue       E. Main Street      E. State Street
Both               N. 8th Avenue       E. Marion Street    Edgewood Street
West               N. 9th Avenue       Bromley Street      State Street
East               N. 9th Avenue       E. Main Street      North to first alley
                                                           intersection
East               N. 9th Avenue       Woodbury Street     State Street
                                       Beginning at a
                                       point 100 feet
West               N. 9th Street       south of the south  Thence 25 feet south
                                       line of Summit
                                       Street
Both               N. 9th Street       South line of       South 100 feet
                                       Summit Street
                                       South line of alley
                                       adjacent to Lot 6,
East               N. Center Street    Block 10 of         35 feet south
                                       original plat of
                                       Marshalltown (19 N.
                                       Center Street)
Both               N. Linwood Street   N. 4th Avenue       N. 3rd Avenue
South              Nicholas Drive      East line of S. 2nd East 105 feet
                                       Street
Both               Riverside Street    Center Street       N. 3rd Avenue
East               S. 11th Street      W. Church Street    W. Boone Street
Both               S. 12th Avenue      Main Street         South city limits
East               S. 13th Street      W. Church Street    W. Linn Street
East               S. 14th Avenue      South line of E.    A point 60 feet
                                       Linn Street         south
Both               S. 15th Avenue      Jackson Street      Anson Street
Both               S. 15th Avenue      South line of E.    60 feet south
                                       Nevada Street
Both               S. 16th Avenue      North line of E.    40 feet north
                                       Nevada Street
                                       120 feet north of
East               S. 1st Avenue       the north line of   60 feet north
                                       E. Nevada Street
                                       A point 78 feet
West               S. 1st Avenue       north of the north  126 feet north
                                       line of Madison
                                       Street
East               S. 1st Avenue       E. Nevada Street    E. Madison Street
West               S. 1st Avenue       North line of E.    180 feet north
                                       Nevada Street
                                       South line of east-
West               S. 1st Avenue       west alley between  To a point 20 feet
                                       Main Street and     south
                                       State Street
East               S. 1st Avenue       South property line A point 186 feet
                                       of Boone Street     south
West               S. 1st Street       Boone Street        A point 40 feet
                                                           north
West               S. 1st Street       Washington Street   Main entrance of YM-
                                       South               YW Building
                                       75 feet south of
West               S. 2nd Avenue       south line of E.    South 20 feet
                                       Church Street
                                       North alley line of
East               S. 2nd Avenue       the alley south of  North 25 feet
                                       Linn Street
East               S. 2nd Avenue       W. Madison Street   Nevada Street
                                       Beginning at a
                                       point 53 feet south
Both               S. 2nd Street       of the south line   Thence 80 feet south
                                       of W. Southridge
                                       Road
East               S. 2nd Street       Southridge Road     Nicholas Drive
                                                           200 feet south of
East               S. 3rd Avenue       E. Anson Street     the south line of E.
                                                           Anson Street
East               S. 3rd Avenue       North line of       A point 750 feet
                                       Southridge Road     north
Both               S. 3rd Avenue       South line of       420 feet south
                                       Newcastle Road
Both               S. 3rd Street       S. 6th Street       W. Madison Street
                                                           South line of east
West               S. 3rd Street       W. Madison Street   and west alley
                                                           between 3rd Street
                                                           and 4th Street
East               S. 3rd Street       W. Nevada Street    W. Madison Street
Both               S. 4th Avenue       Linn Street         Church Street
West               S. 4th Avenue       Nevada Street       Linn Street
                                       South alley line of
East               S. 4th Avenue       the alley south of  South 25 feet
                                       Linn Street
East               S. 4th Street       W. Ingledue Street  W. Olive Street
East               S. 6th Avenue       E. Anson Street     E. May Street
                                                           The intersection of
Both               S. 6th Street       Iowa Avenue         S. 6th Street and S.
                                                           3rd Street (S. 6th
                                                           Street connection)
                                       S. 3rd Street - S.  Chicago NW Railroad
Both               S. 6th Street       6th Street          Tracks
                                       connection
East               S. 6th Street       W. Main Street      W. Madison Street
                                                           A point 100 feet
Both               S. 9th Street       North line of       north of the north
                                       Lincoln Way         line of W. State
                                                           Street
Both               S. Center Street    Church Street       South city limits
Both               S. Center Street    Berle Road          Westwood Drive
                   Frontage Road
Both               S. Center Street    Washington Street   South end of Center
                   ramps                                   Street viaduct
Both               Summit Street       East line of N.     270 feet east
                                       21st Street
North              Summit Street       West line of N. 4th 60 feet west
                                       Street
Both               Swayze Street       10th Avenue         12th Avenue
South              Swayze Street       N. 3rd Avenue       N. 4th Avenue
North              Turner Street       S. 9th Avenue       S. 12th Avenue
                                       North edge of the
Both               Village Circle      pavement of Highway 50 feet north
                                       30
                                       300 feet from
Both               W. Anson Street     intersection with   S. Center Street
                                       S. Center Street
North              W. Boone Street     S. 6th Street       1/2 block east
South              W. Boone Street     S. 6th Street       160 feet west
Both               W. Boone Street     S. 9th Street       S. 12th Street
North              W. Church Street    East line of S. 3rd 60 feet east
                                       Street
Both               W. Church Street    East property line  A point 50 feet east
                                       of S. 9th Street
South              W. Church Street    S. 2nd Street       S. 3rd Street
Both               W. Church Street    West line of S. 9th 100 feet west
                                       Street
Both               W. Church Street    West property line  A point 50 feet west
                                       of S. 9th Street
North              W. Fremont Street   N. 16th Street      N. 18th Street
Both               W. Hibbs Boulevard  S. Center Street    S. 2nd Street
South              W. High Street      6th Street          West line of 2nd
                                                           Street
North              W. High Street      West line of S. 2nd West 500 feet
                                       Street
Both               W. Lincoln Way      9th Street          West city limits
                                       20 feet east of the East 180 feet to the
North              W. Linn Street      east line of S. 3rd west line of the
                                       Street east 160     alley
                                       feet
North              W. Linn Street      East line of S.     Extending east 180
                                       13th Street         feet
Both               W. Main Street      19th Street         West city limits
Both               W. Main Street      8th Avenue          9th Avenue
                                       West line of north- A point 25.5 feet
North              W. Main Street      south alley between west
                                       2nd and 3rd Streets
Both               W. Olive Street     S. 6th Street       S. 12th Street
North              W. South Street     West line of Center A point 360 feet
                                       Street              west
South              W. South Street     West line of S.     West 156 feet
                                       Center Street
Both               W. Southridge Road  West line of Center A point 350 feet
                                       Street              west
Both               W. State Street     East line of N. 7th East 100 feet
                                       Street
Both               W. State Street     East property line  A point 50 feet east
                                       of N. 9th Street
Both               W. State Street     West property line  A point 50 feet west
                                       of N. 9th Street
Both               Washington/Player   S. 2nd Street       S. 6th Street
                   Streets
South              Westwood Drive      West line of S. 6th 250 feet west
                                       Street
Both               Westwood Drive      West property line  A point 570 feet
                                       of Center           west
Both               Wilson Circle       South line of       100 feet south
                                       Madison Street
South              Woodbury Street     N. 9th Avenue       N. 10th Avenue
                                       West line of N. 9th 170 feet
Both               Woodbury Street     Avenue              Between curb and
                                       Any terrace         sidewalk
 
(2013 Code, § 20-161)
   (B)   Appropriate signs for prohibited parking. Appropriate signs stating
thereon “NO PARKING AT ANY TIME” shall be placed and maintained by the Street
Division adjacent to the curb along the portions of the streets and avenues
included in the provisions of this schedule where parking at all times is
prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 20-161.1)
   (C)   Removal of vehicles on controlled streets and avenues.
      (1)   Any vehicle left standing or parked in the controlled area as
herein prescribed, contrary to the provisions hereof, may be towed away or
removed by direction of the Chief of Police and the cost of any towing or
storage of such motor vehicle shall be paid by the owner or other persons
responsible therefor as a condition in again obtaining possession thereof, and
such charges shall not be considered as a fine or penalty.
      (2)   A fine or penalty may be further assessed upon charges filed and
conviction thereof.
(2013 Code, § 20-161.2)
(Ord. 14879, passed 3-28-2011; Ord. 14944, passed 1-11-2016; Ord. 14982, passed
5-28-2019; Ord. 14987, passed 9-23-2019; Ord. 15002, passed 8-12-2020; Ord.
15005, passed 12-28-2020; Ord. 15044, passed 6-13-2022; Ord. 15059, passed 2-
27-2023; Ord. 15075, passed 10-23-2023; Ord. 15077, passed 11-27-2023; Ord.
15096, passed 11-25-2024) Penalty, see §
70.999
SCHEDULE III. PARKING AROUND SCHOOLS.
   (A)   Parking around schools. The stopping, parking or leave standing of
motor vehicles on the following streets and avenues in the city is hereby
prohibited at all times, except as provided in division (B) below:
Side On Street From To
Side           On Street          From                  To
ANSON SCHOOL
   East     S. 3rd Avenue      E. South Street       E. Anson Street
   West     S. 3rd Avenue      E. South Street       Young Street
   North    E. South Street    S. 3rd Avenue         S. 5th Avenue
FISHER SCHOOL
   Both sideS. 4th Street      Sunset Lane           Pleasantview Road
   North    Pleasantview Road  S. 6th Street         S. 4th Street
   West     S. 4th Street      Pleasantview Road     W. Meadow Lane
FRANKLIN SCHOOL
   East     N. 14th Street     W. Main Street        435 feet north
   West     N. 14th Street     W. Main Street        100 feet north
   North    W. Main Street     N. 14th Street (south N. 13th Street
                                  leg)
   *South   W. Main Street     N. 13th Street        N. 14th Street (south
                                                        leg)
   *School days only 7:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
HOGLAN SCHOOL
   East     S. 3rd Avenue      E. Southridge Road    Newcastle Road
   North    E. Southridge Road S. 3rd Avenue         525 feet east
LENIHAN SCHOOL
   North    Columbus Drive     S. 4th Street         120 feet east
   **North  Ingledue Street    2nd Street            4th Street
   **School days only 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., 2:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.
   South    W. Ingeldue Street S. 4th Street         S. 2nd Street
   **West   S. 4th Street      Ingledue Street       Columbus Drive
   **School days only 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., 2:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.
   **South  W. Ingledue        Along terrace between horseshoe entrance/exit
   **No parking anytime
MARSHALLTOWN CHRISTIAN SCHOOL
   *Both sidS. 7th Avenue      Henry Drive           712 feet south
   *School days only, 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 a.m., 2:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.
MILLER MIDDLE SCHOOL
   North    W. Boone Street    S. 12th Street        S. 11th Street
ROGERS SCHOOL
   West     N. 4th Street      Summit Street         Fremont Street
   East     N. 5th Street      Summit Street         Fremont Street
   South    Summit Street      N. 5th Street         N. 4th Street
SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
   East     S. 2nd Avenue      E. Olive Street       E. Ingledue Street
   North    E. Olive Street    S. 2nd Avenue         West line of Bobcat
                                                        Estates
ST. FRANCIS SCHOOL
   East     S. 4th Street      W. Olive Street       W. Ingledue Street
   South    Columbus Drive     S. 4th Street         Crestview Drive
   West     Crestview Drive    Columbus Drive        W. Olive Street
   North    W. Olive Street    Crestview Drive       S. 4th Street
WOODBURY SCHOOL
   South    E. State Street    N. 7th Avenue         N. 5th Avenue
   West     S. 7th Avenue      E. State Street       E. Main Street
   North    E. Main Street     N. 7th Avenue         N. 4th Avenue
 
(2013 Code, § 20-162)
   (B)   Temporary stops. Temporary stops for the sole purposes of immediate
discharge or immediate loading of students shall be permitted, but only in the
event that off-street areas for such discharge or loading do not exist within
300 feet of any exit door of said school. Any such temporary stop shall be for
a duration of the shortest possible time necessary to discharge or load
students, shall be done in a manner that will not impede or hamper general
traffic and the driver shall remain in the vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 20-162.1)
   (C)   Parking on opposite side. In any of the aforesaid school areas where
parking is presently allowed on the opposite side of the portions of the
streets designated as prohibited parking by this schedule, parking shall be
allowed at all times, notwithstanding the provisions within this traffic code.
(2013 Code, § 20-162.2)
   (D)   Sign placement. There shall be erected suitable lawful signs in
appropriate and conspicuous places on said various streets and avenues stating
that parking is prohibited or allowed in clear and concise language. Signs
shall include the wording “Passenger loading and unloading only. Driver must
remain in vehicle”.
(2013 Code, § 20-162.3)
(Ord. 14198, passed 9-24-1984; Ord. 14225, passed 11-12-1985; Ord. 14789,
passed 10-23-2006; Ord. 14818, passed 9-10-2007; Ord. 14828, passed 3-18-2008;
Ord. 14974, passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 15044, passed 6-13-2022; Ord. 15075, passed
10-23-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
SCHEDULE IV. COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT STAFF AND EMPLOYEE PARKING.
   (A)   Providing for residential/owner and Marshalltown Community School
District staff and employee parking.
      (1)   From 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday of each week,
except legal holidays, no motor vehicle shall be parked in the designated
municipal areas set forth below unless said motor vehicle has visibly affixed
to the left corner of the rear windshield a non-expired resident/owner permit
or a city school district staff and employee parking permit issued by the city.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in any such designated municipal areas without
such a resident/owner permit or a city school district staff and employee
parking permit. Any motor vehicle parked without such permit shall be
considered in violation of this schedule.
Side On Street From To
Side On Street          From               To
West S. 2nd Avenue      E. Ingledue Street Koeper Drive
Both S. 3rd Avenue      E. Olive Street    Rainbow Drive
Both S. 3rd Avenue      Bobcat Boulevard   Pine Street
Both Koeper Drive       S. 3rd Avenue      S. 2nd Avenue
Both Olson Way          E. Olive Street    S. 2nd Avenue
Both Cherry Street      S. 2nd Avenue      S. Center Street
Both E. Ingledue Street S. 1st Avenue      S. 3rd Avenue
 
      (2)   After 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., parking in the designated areas is
permitted and a permit is not required.
(2013 Code, § 20-163)
   (B)   Installation of signs. The City Engineer shall post suitable signs to
designated these areas as resident/owner and city school district staff and
employee parking only, in accordance with this schedule. These signs shall
comply with state regulations as adopted by the state’s Department of
Transportation.
(2013 Code, § 20-163.1)
   (C)   Issuance of permits. The City Clerk shall issue resident/owner and
city Community School District staff and employee parking permits to those
residents or owners of the residential real estate described with the
boundaries above and those individuals showing proof as to employment status
with the Community School District. Each owner/resident or Community School
District staff or employee shall receive one such permit for each motor vehicle
registered in the owner’s name. No more than 40 permits shall be granted to the
Community School District staff and employees under this schedule.
(2013 Code, § 20-163.2)
(Ord. 14917, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 15044, passed 6-13-2022; Ord. 15096, passed
11-25-2024)
SCHEDULE V. RESIDENTIAL/OWNER PARKING PERMITS.
   (A)   Providing for resident/owner parking permits.
      (1)   There is created a system of permit parking in the following
designated municipal areas:
 
Side On Street       From                         To
Both S. 14th Avenue  E. Linn Street               E. Nevada Street
                                                  South line of south line of
Both S. 15th Avenue  South line of E. Linn Street Lot 37 of Norris Addition
                                                  (308 S. 15th Avenue)
Both S. 16th Avenue  E Linn Street                Norris Place
Both Anson Circle                                 
Both E. Boone Street S. 12th Avenue Place         S. 17th Avenue
 
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be parked in the designated municipal areas
set out above unless said motor vehicle has visibly affixed to the left corner
of the rear windshield a non-expired resident/owner street permit issued by the
city. Visitors and those conducting business in the permit area shall visibly
display such permits in the left corner of the front windshield. No motor
vehicle shall be parked in such designated municipal areas without a resident/
owner street permit. Any vehicle parked without such a permit shall be
considered in violation of this schedule.
(2013 Code, § 20-164)
   (B)   Posting of signs.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall post suitable signs to designate these
areas as resident/owner street permit parking only, in accordance with this
schedule.
      (2)   These signs shall comply with state regulations as adopted by the
state’s Department of Transportation.
(2013 Code, § 20-164.1)
   (C)   Revocation of permits. No holder of a street parking permit shall
transfer, sell or assign such permit or otherwise allow use of any such permit
contrary to the provisions of this schedule. In the event such inappropriate
use occurs, the City Administrator is vested with the authority to revoke and
cancel all such permits.
(2013 Code, § 20-164.2)
   (D)   Issuance of permits. The City Clerk is hereby vested with authority to
prepare for issuance of the required permits and may, if desired, issue them
color coded, numbered and having on their face such information as is required
to identify the permit holder, date of expiration, residence and other relevant
information.
(2013 Code, § 20-164.3)
   (E)   Existing parking regulations. All permit holders shall abide by all
existing parking regulations and are not exempt therefrom.
(2013 Code, § 20-164.4)
   (F)   Fine for violation. Any person violating the provisions of this
schedule, in addition to revocation or cancellation of any issued permit, is
subject to a fine of $10.
(2013 Code, § 20-164.5)
(Ord. 14525, passed 2-12-1996; Ord. 14595, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 14614, passed
1-11-1999; Ord. 14616, passed 2-28-1999; Ord. 14494, passed 2-13-1995; Ord.
14917, passed 3-25-2013)
SCHEDULE VI. RESTRICTED PARKING.
   (A)   Restricted parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
      (1)   The stopping, parking or leaving standing of motor vehicles on the
following designated streets, avenues, roads or drives is hereby prohibited
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
holidays:
 
Side  On Street          From To
Both  Anson Circle
Both  Highview Drive
North W. Ingledue Street      S. 3rd Street
 
      (2)   The stopping, parking or leaving standing of motor vehicles on the
following designated streets, avenues, roads or drives is hereby prohibited
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, when school
is in session:
 
Side  On Street         From          To
South Pleasantview Road S. 4th Street S. 6th Street
 
(2013 Code, § 20-165)
   (B)   Restricted parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The
stopping, parking or leaving standing of motor vehicles on the following
designated streets, avenues, roads or drives is hereby prohibited between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
Side  On Street     From                                        To
North Summit Street 356 feet of the east line of N. 15th Street 230 feet east
 
(2013 Code, § 20-165.5)
   (C)   Restricted parking, except on Sundays. The stopping, parking or
leaving standing of motor vehicles on the following designated streets,
avenues, roads or drives is hereby prohibited at all times, except parking
shall be permitted on Sundays only:
 
Side  On Street        From                       To
North W. Church Street West line of Center Street West to the east line of the
                                                  alley intersection
 
(2013 Code, § 20-166)
   (D)   Restricted parking between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. It
shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any automobile, motor driven or
operated truck, tractor, tractor trailer, house trailer or other motor vehicle
equipment not governmentally owned or operated or controlled at any time on any
day between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. on any street, avenue or other
place described as follows:
Side On Street From To
Side On Street      From           To
Both 1st Avenue     Church Street  State Street
Both 1st Street     Church Street  State Street
Both 2nd Avenue     Church Street  State Street
Both 2nd Street     Church Street  State Street
Both Center Street  Church Street  State Street
Both Church Street  2nd Street     3rd Avenue
Both Main Street    2nd Street     3rd Avenue
Both N. 13th Street Fremont Street Summit Street
Both State Street   2nd Street     3rd Avenue
   All alleys bounded by Church Street, State Street, 2nd Street, 3rd
Aveneue
   Parking Lot C (Coliseum)
   Parking Lot L (Library)
   Parking Lot T (City Hall/ Carnegie)
   Parking Lot Z (Farmer’s Market)
 
(2013 Code, § 20-167)
   (E)   Exemption.
      (1)   An exemption parking permit may be requested for any individual
residing in the restricted parking from 2:30 a.m. to 5:30 a.m. area without
private parking or public parking access immediately adjoining or directly
across an alley or street.
      (2)   The exemption will allow for parking from 2:30 a.m. to 5:30 a.m. on
1st Street, 2nd Street, 1st Avenue, and 2nd Avenue.
      (3)   Proof of residence is required to be issued a permit by the City
Clerk.
      (4)   The permit must be properly displayed on the bottom corner of the
rear driver side windshield.
      (5)   The exemption is not valid when the snow ordinance is in effect or
the road is closed.
   (F)   Installation of signs. Appropriate signs designating the prohibited
hours for the parking or the leave standing of the kind and type of vehicles
referred to herein shall be erected and maintained by the Street Division in
conspicuous places in the areas described and designated in this schedule,
which shall be at least two on each block of street curbing, two in each
parking lot within the area and one at each alley entrance.
(2013 Code, § 20-167.2)
(Ord. 14182, passed 4-23-1984; Ord. 14490, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. 14513, passed
11-13-1995; Ord. 14608, passed 1-25-1999; Ord. 14686, passed 12-10-2001; Ord.
14874, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 14917, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. 15044, passed 6-13-
2022; Ord. 15081, passed 12-22-2023; Ord. 15096, passed 11-25-2024)
SCHEDULE VII. SNOW REMOVAL; PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibiting parking when snow removal operations are in progress.
      (1)   Wherever the word CUL-DE-SAC is used in this schedule, it shall be
that portion of a street or public way that is circular in its design and is
located at the end or terminal point of a street or public way and shall start
where the roadway commences its circular character and shall end when the
roadway ceases its circular character.
      (2)   The stopping, parking or leaving standing of motor vehicles when
snow removal operations are in progress by the city on the following designated
streets, parts of streets or public ways is hereby prohibited on either side of
the street:
Side On Street From To
Side  On Street                    From             To
     All cul-de-sac circles                        
Both  Denmead Boulevard            W. Main Street   W. State Street
Both  E. Boone Street              3rd Avenue       4th Avenue
Both  E. North Street              N. Center Street N. 2nd Avenue
South E. and W. State Street       N. 3rd Street    N. 3rd Avenue
Both  Highland Drive               5th Street       6th Street
Both  Laurel Drive                 S. 15th Avenue   East to dead end
Both  Melody Lane                                   
Both  N. 12th Street               Fremont Street   Summit Street
Both  N. and S. 1st Avenue         E. Church Street W. State Street
Both  N. and S. 1st Street         W. Church Street W. State Street
Both  N. and S. 2nd Avenue         E. Church Street W. State Street
Both  N. and S. 2nd Street         W. Church Street W. State Street
Both  N. 5th Avenue                Woodbury Street  Lee Street
Both  N. 6th Street                Highland Drive   Jerome Street
Both  N. 8th Street                Summit Street    State Street
Both  Noble Street                 S. 7th Avenue    S. 8th Avenue
Both  Plaza Heights Road           S. 3rd Avenue    Iowa River Hospice
Both  S. 16th Street               W. Church Street W. Linn Street
East  S. 4th Avenue                E. Church Street Nevada Street
Both  S. 6th Street                Main Street      Madison Street
All   S. 11th Street - Parking lot W. Church Street Boone Street
Both  Walter's Circle              Edgebrook Drive  Cul-de-sac
Both  W. Linn Street               16th Street      A point 861 feet east
Both  Wood Street                  S. 7th Avenue    S. 8th Avenue
Both  Young Street                                  
 
(2013 Code, § 20-169)
   (B)   Towing of vehicles in violation. Any vehicle found to be parked in
violation of the provisions of this schedule may, in addition to the penalty
provided, be towed from said location by order of the police at the owner’s
expense.
(2013 Code, § 20-169.1)
   (C)   Installation of signs. There shall be erected at all the locations set
forth above suitable signs setting forth the no parking provision of this
schedule.
(2013 Code, § 20-169.2)
   (D)   Conflict with overtime alternate parking regulations. The provisions
of any overtime alternate parking sections of this schedule or any ordinance
are suspended during the period that snow removal operations are in effect, but
shall be of full force after snow removal operations are complete.
(2013 Code, § 20-169.3)
   (E)   Penalty for violation. Anyone violating the provisions of this
schedule shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. In addition thereto, a violation of this
schedule shall be a municipal infraction.
(2013 Code, § 20-169.4)
(Ord. 13677, passed 2-25-1980; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 14974,
passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 15011, passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 15075, passed 10-23-2023;
Ord. 15077, passed 11-27-2023; Ord. 15096, passed 11-25-2024)
SCHEDULE VIII. SNOW ROUTES.
   (A)   Snow removal operations.
      (1)   The Street Department shall post any street, avenue or area with
appropriate signs where snow removal operations are to be carried out and,
within three hours thereafter, all motor vehicles parked or left standing
therein or thereon shall be removed therefrom. After such posting of any
street, avenue or area for such purpose, no motor vehicle shall be parked or
left standing therein.
      (2)   Parked automobiles that interfere with city snow removal operations
may be towed away or otherwise removed to some other place of parking out of
the way of snow removal operations.
(2013 Code, § 20-184)
   (B)   Snow routes. Streets or portions of streets shall be designated as
snow routes, and there shall be erected suitable signs at the entrance to and
along the routes.
(2013 Code, § 20-184.1)
   (C)   Snow route restrictions.
      (1)   (a)   When conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface
of a designated snow route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to
impede or block traffic if the driving wheels of the vehicle are not equipped
with snow tires, tire chains or non-slip differential.
         (b)   The term SNOW TIRES, as used in this schedule, means tires
designed for use when there are conditions of snow or ice on the highways, and
meeting the requirements that shall be promulgated by rule of the Commissioner
of Public Safety.
      (2)   Standing or parking of vehicles upon a street designated as an
emergency snow route shall be prohibited at any time when snow removal
operations are in progress and before such operations have resulted in the
removal or clearance of snow from such streets.
(2013 Code, § 20-184.2)
   (D)   Stalled vehicles on snow emergency routes and non-snow emergency
routes.
      (1)   Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled or is unable to move under its
own power on any part of a snow emergency route while there is a parking
prohibition in effect, the person operating that vehicle shall take immediate
action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway of the snow
emergency route, either onto the first cross street which is not a snow
emergency route or onto the public space portion of a nearby driveway. No
person shall abandon or leave his or her vehicle in the roadway of such snow
emergency route, except for a reasonable time necessary to receive assistance.
      (2)   Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled or is unable to move under its
own power, for any reason, on a non-snow emergency route, the person operating
the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed away or
pushed to the side of the street upon which parking is permitted and within 24
hours shall have the vehicle removed from the street or highway.
(2013 Code, § 20-184.3)
   (E)   Snow routes designated; signs. The following streets or portions of
streets shall be designated as snow routes and there shall be erected suitable
signs at the entrance to and along the routes as are designated:
Street Location
Street                               Location
18th Avenue                          From Marion Street to Highway 30
E/W Anson Street                     From S. 2nd Street to S. 3rd Avenue
E/W Church Street                    From S. 9th Street to S. 7th Avenue
E/W Linn Street                      From S. 3rd Street to S. 3rd Avenue
E/W Main Street                      From Highland Acres Road to N. 18th Avenue
E/W Ramps                            From S. 3rd Avenue to E. Madison Street
E/W Southridge Road                  From S. 6th Street to Governor Road
Edgebrook Drive                      From E. Southridge Road to E. Olive Street
Edgewood Street                      From N. 3rd Avenue to N. 8th Avenue
Governor Road and 12th Avenue        From Iowa Avenue East to Main Street
Iowa Avenue E/W                      From the west corporate limits to S. 18th
                                     Avenue
Marion Street                        From N. 8th Avenue to N. 18th Avenue
N. 13th Street                       From W. Main Street to Summit Street
N. 8th Avenue                        From Marion Street to Edgewood Street
N/S 3rd Avenue                       From E. Anson Street to the north
                                     corporate limits
N/S Center Street                    From the south corporate limits to State
                                     Street
S. 12th Street                       From W. Lincoln Way to W. Olive Street
S. 2nd Street                        From W. High Street to W. Anson Street
S. 3rd/6th Street                    From W. State Street to Iowa Avenue West
S. 7th Avenue                        From E. Main Street to E. Church Street
S. 9th Street                        From W. Lincoln Way to W. Main Street
Summit Street                        From Valley View Road to N. 13th Street
W. Boone Street                      From S. 9th Street to S. Center Street
W. High Street                       From S. 6th Street to S. 2nd Street
W. Lincoln Way/Madison Street/Nevada From Highland Acres Road to N. 18th Avenue
Street
W. Olive Street                      From S. 12th Street to 18th Avenue
 
(2013 Code, § 20-184.3.5)
   (F)   Parking restricted in public lots during snow removal and maintenance
operations. The following parking lots shall be designated as restricted from
parking as indicated in the city's snow/maintenance alert issuance. Any vehicle
found to be parked in violation of these provisions of this schedule, in
addition to the penalty identified in
Ch. 77, Schedule VII, shall be towed from said location by order of the police
at the owner's expense.
      (1)   Restriction between 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., during "Group 1" as
issued through City of Marshalltown News Flash.
 
City Parking Lots D, H, J, O, and N
 
      (2)   Restriction between 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., during "Group 2" as
issued through City of Marshalltown News Flash.
 
City Parking Lots F, K, P, and Y
 
(2013 Code, § 20-184.3.6)
   (G)   Violation; penalty.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle that may be parked contrary to the provisions of
this schedule may, in addition to the remedies set forth in division (G)(2)
below, be towed away at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   Any person violating the terms of the sections mentioned in
division (G)(1) above shall, upon conviction, be fined $25 if paid within 30
days of the date of the violation. If not paid within 30 days, the fine shall
be $35. Violations shall be charged and collected in the same manner as other
parking violations, by notice of a fine payable to the City Clerk.
(2013 Code, § 20-184.4)
(Ord. 9161, passed 1-28-1957; Ord. 13641, passed 11-13-1979; Ord. 14488, passed
5-8-1995; Ord. 14556, passed 1-13-1997; Ord. 14832, passed 5-27-2008; Ord.
14869, passed 3-8-2010; Ord. 14910, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 14926, passed 10-28-
2013; Ord. 15012, passed 2-8-2021; Ord. 15081, passed 12-22-2023; Ord. 15096,
passed 11-25-2024)
SCHEDULE IX. DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   Disabled parking areas established. The City Council may establish
parking areas in the city that shall be reserved for parking by disabled
persons. The following locations are designated as disabled parking:
Block On Street Side Location
Block On Street      Side  Location
10W   State Street   South 1st space west of N. Center Street
300 W Main Street    North 1st and 2nd spaces east of 4th Street
200 W Main Street    North 1st 2 spaces east of alley
200 W Main Street    South 1st space east of alley
200 W Main Street    South 2nd and 3rd spaces east of alley (Sunday only)
100 W Main Street    North 1st space west of alley
10 W  Main Street    South 1st space east of 1st Street
10 W  Main Street    South 1st space east of alley
10 E  Main Street    North 1st space west of 1st Avenue
100 E Main Street    North 1st space east of alley
100 E Main Street    South 1st space west of alley
200 E Main Street    North 1st space west of alley
300 E Main Street    South 2nd and 3rd spaces east of 3rd Avenue
10 W  Church Street  South 3rd and 4th spaces east of Center Street (Sunday
                           only)
10 W  Church Street  South 5th space east of Center Street
100 W Church Street  North 2nd space west of 1st Street
100 E Church Street  North 1st space west of alley
100 E Church Street  South 1st space west of South 1st Avenue
200 E Church Street  North 1st space east of alley
200 E Church Street  South 1st space east of 2nd Avenue
10 S  1st Street     West  1st space north of Church Street
10 S  4th Street     East  2 spaces, 135 feet and 170 feet south of the south
                           line of W. Main Street
10 N  Center Street  West  1st space south of W. State Street
100 N Center Street  West  3rd space south of alley
100 N Center Street  East  6th space north of alley
10 S  Center Street  West  1st space south of alley
10 N  1st Avenue     West  1st space north of Main Street
10 S  1st Avenue     East  1st space south of alley
10 S  1st Avenue     East  1st space north of E. Church Street
10 S  1st Avenue     East  1st space north of Church Street
10 S  2nd Avenue     West  1st and 2nd space south of alley (at 21 S. 2nd
                           Street)
100 S 2nd Avenue     East  2nd space south of Church Street (at Presbyterian
                           Church)
500 S 3rd Avenue     West  1st 1 space north of Madison Street
500 S 3rd Avenue     East  1st 1 space north of Madison Street
10 N  5th Avenue     East  1 space as signed (Sunday only)
10S   5th Avenue     East  1st space south of the east/west alley
300S  6th Street     West  1 space as signed
300   Columbus Drive North From 145 feet west of Huisman Circle to 70 feet west
      Parking Lot A        2 spaces as signed
      Parking Lot D        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot E        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot F        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot H        3 spaces as signed
      Parking Lot J        3 spaces as signed
      Parking Lot K        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot L        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot N        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot O        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot P        2 spaces as signed
      Parking Lot T        3 spaces as signed
      Parking Lot W        1 space as signed
      Parking Lot Z        1 space as signed
 
(2013 Code, § 20-185)
   (B)   Installation of signs. The Public Works Director shall post suitable
signs to designate these areas as disabled parking areas in accordance with
city policy, the Code of Iowa and the Manual of Traffic Control Devices For
Streets and Highways, as adopted by the state’s Department of Transportation
and the city.
(2013 Code, § 20-185.1)
   (C)   Improper use of disabled parking spaces. The use of a disabled parking
space, located on either public or private property, as provided in I.C.A. §§
321L.5 and 321L.6 or subsequent amendments thereto, by a motor vehicle
displaying a disabled parking permit as aforesaid, but not being used by a
person in possession of a motor vehicle license with a disabled designation or
a non-operator’s identification card with a disabled designation, other than a
person issued a permit or being transported in accordance with I.C.A. § 321.2,
subsec. 1, para. “b”, or subsequent amendments thereto, or by a motor vehicle
in violation of the rules adopted by the state’s Department of Transportation
under I.C.A. § 321L.8 or subsequent amendments thereto, constitutes improper
use of a disabled parking permit, which is an offense for which a fine shall be
imposed upon the owner, operator or lessee of the motor vehicle or the person
to whom the disabled parking permit is issued. The fine for each violation
shall be the same as provided by the Code of Iowa.
(2013 Code, § 20-185.2)
(Ord. 12491, passed 6-18-1974; Ord. 14557, passed 2-10-1997; Ord. 14784, passed
6-12-2006; Ord. 14878, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 14924, passed 7-22-2013; Ord.
14935, passed 8-25-2014; Ord. 14977, passed 8-27-2018; Ord. 14988, passed 9-23-
2019; Ord. 14991, passed11-25-2019; Ord. 15096, passed 11-25-2024)
SCHEDULE X. PUBLIC ACCESS PARKING.
   (A)   Areas and spaces designated; manner of parking.
      (1)   The Director of Public Works/City Engineer or such city officer or
employee as he or she shall select shall place lines or marks on the curb or on
the street to designate the area in which a vehicle may be parked, and it shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle which extends over, across or which straddles
such parking space lines.
      (2)   Not more than one vehicle shall be parked in a marked parking
space.
(2013 Code, § 20-221)
   (B)   Installation of signs; maintenance. The Street Division, under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer, shall install and
maintain suitable signs as required under this schedule.
(2013 Code, § 20-222)
   (C)   Fined parking; areas specified. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name to be
parked, placed or remain in a parking space beyond the time limits provided;
each hour that any vehicle remains so parked or placed beyond the following
time limits shall constitute a separate violation:
      (1)   Thirty-minute parking.
Street Location
Street          Location
                West side, between Main Street and State Street, commencing 70
Center Street   feet north of the north line of the east/west alley, to a point
                43 feet north thereof
                North side, between 1st Avenue and 2nd Avenue, commencing 70
Main Street     feet east of the east line of 1st Avenue to a point 24 feet
                east thereof
                North side, two spaces located 25 feet to 70 feet easterly of
Main Street     3rd Avenue and three spaces located 115 feet to 185 feet
                easterly of 3rd Avenue
Main Street     South side, between 3rd Avenue and 5th Avenue the 1st, 4th, 5th
                and 6th parking spaces as assigned
                South side, between Center Street and S. 1st Avenue, from the
Church Street   point 31 feet west of S. 1st Avenue to a point 25 feet west
                thereof
                West side, between Church Street and Linn Street, commencing 70
S. 1st Avenue   feet north of the east/west alley, to a point 27 feet north
                thereof
E. State Street South side, the 1st three parking spaces west of the alley
                between 2nd Avenue and 3rd Avenue
W. State Street South side, the 2nd and 3rd parking spaces west of N. Center
                Street
 
   (2)   Ninety-minute parking.
 
Street/Lot    Location
Parking Lot J West side, row of parallel parking stalls
 
      (3)   Three-hour parking. Except as shown in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)
above and disabled parking as provided in
Ch. 77, Schd. IX, division (A), of this traffic code:
Street Location
Street        Location
1st Avenue    From State Street to 280 feet south of Church Street
1st Street    From 180 feet south of Grant Street to Church Street
1st Street    From Church Street to a point 180 feet south
2nd Avenue    From the alley south of State Street to the alley south of Church
              Street
2nd Street    From Church Street to State Street
13th Street   Both sides, from Fremont Street to Summit Street
Center Street From 120 feet south of Grant Street to Linn Street
Church Street From 3rd Avenue to 2nd Street
Linn Street   South side, from S. Center Street to S. 3rd Avenue
Main Street   From 3rd Avenue to 3rd Street, and the south side of Main Street
              between 3rd Avenue and 5th Avenue
Main Street   South side between 3rd Avenue and 5th Avenue
State Street  From 3rd Avenue to 3rd Street
 
(2013 Code, § 20-223)
   (D)   When applicable. The provisions of this schedule relating to parking
time limits shall not apply between the hours of 6:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m. of
any day or on Sundays or legal holidays. LEGAL HOLIDAYS for the purposes of
this schedule are those holidays observed in the city on which City Hall is
closed to the public.
(2013 Code, § 20-224)
(Ord. 14216, passed 6-10-1985; Ord. 14407, passed 12-28-1992; Ord. 14505,
passed 7-11-1995; Ord. 14601, passed 9-14-1998; Ord. 14623, passed 4-12-1999;
Ord. 14739, passed 7-12-2004; Ord. 14742, passed 8-16-2004; Ord. 14750, passed
11-8-2004; Ord. 14784, passed 6-12-2006; Ord. 14878, passed 8-23-2010; Ord.
14879, passed 3-28-2011; Ord. 14910, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 15050, passed 9-26-
2022; Ord. 15096, passed 11-25-2024)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
92.   HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS AND SUBSTANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LEISURE
      
94.   (RESERVED)
      
95.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Keeping livestock
   
90.002   Poultry or domestic fowl
   
90.003   Running at large or staking out
   
90.004   Feeding deer
   
90.005   Police dogs; applicability
   
90.006   Failure to comply with order
Dogs and Cats
   
90.020   Definitions
   
90.021   Rabies vaccination required
   
90.022   Dog waste; removal
   
90.023   Cats at large
   
90.024   Dogs at large
   
90.025   City authorized to contract for care, disposition of domesticated
animals in lieu of establishing pound
   
90.026   Apprehending and impounding
   
90.027   Police officer; duties
   
90.028   Notice to owner; redemption
   
90.029   Unclaimed or infected animals; disposition
   
90.030   Confinement of domesticated animals; releasing
   
90.031   Rabies control
   
90.032   Interference with enforcement officer
   
90.033   Owner’s liability for damage
   
90.034   Domesticated animal causing disturbance or annoyance
   
90.035   Kennels and breeding dogs
Vicious Animals
   
90.050   Definitions
   
90.051   Unprovoked dog biting
   
90.052   Protocol for dogs subject to vicious animal procedures
   
90.053   License and insurance required
   
90.054   Confinement of fierce, dangerous or vicious animals
   
90.055   Restraint
   
90.056   Seizure, impoundment and disposition; failure to comply
Dangerous Animals
   
90.070   Definition
   
90.071   Keeping dangerous animals prohibited
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 KEEPING LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   The keeping, stabling or housing and pasturing or roaming of
ruminants, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, asses or swine, except within a
lot containing over two acres and not closer than 200 feet from a dwelling is
prohibited.
   (B)   Horses within the city before the publication date of this chapter may
be grandfathered; however, the property owner has the burden of proof of
continuous land occupation of horses.
(2013 Code, § 6-1) (Ord. 9477, passed 2-24-1958; Ord. 11690, passed 6-23-1970;
Ord. 14169, passed 11-14-1983; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003)
§ 90.002 POULTRY OR DOMESTIC FOWL.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, the phrase POULTRY OR DOMESTIC FOWL
shall mean any live chicken or rooster, or any live domesticated, turkey, duck
or goose, regardless of the purpose for which any of these birds is owned or
possessed.
(2013 Code, § 6-1.1)
   (B)   (1)   The keeping or maintaining of poultry or domestic fowl in an
area of the city, which is zoned residential is prohibited.
      (2)   The keeping or maintaining of rabbit enclosures within ten feet
from any side lot line or rear lot line or within 50 feet from any street line
or residence is prohibited.
      (3)   In an area of the city, which is not zoned residential, the keeping
or maintaining of poultry or domestic fowl enclosures within ten feet of any
side lot line or rear lot line or within 50 feet from any street line is
prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 6-2)
(Ord. 14748, passed 12-27-2004) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.003 RUNNING AT LARGE OR STAKING OUT.
   No owner or person having charge of any domestic animal of any kind or
poultry or domestic fowl shall permit the domestic animal or poultry or
domestic fowl to be staked out on a street or alley or allow the domestic
animal or poultry or domestic fowl to run at large in the city. This section
does not apply to a dog or cat.
(2013 Code, § 6-3) (Ord. 14748, passed 12-27-2004) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.004 FEEDING DEER.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall engage in the artificial feeding of deer within
the city limits, except as set forth in division (B) below.
      (2)   ARTIFICIAL FEEDING shall be defined as the placement of shelled
corn and/or other types of grain, salt or minerals, fruit or vegetable matter
on the ground or in feeders, mangers or any other type of structure or
receptacle for the purpose of feeding or attracting deer, on any private or
public property.
(2013 Code, § 6-5)
   (B)   The prohibition set forth in division (A) above shall not apply to any
of the following:
      (1)   Deer management practices approved, authorized and sponsored by the
city;
      (2)   Use of bird feeders or their equivalent for the primary purpose of
feeding of birds; and/or
      (3)   Cultivation of naturally growing grains, fruits or vegetables, for
purposes other than the feeding of deer, but which inadvertently attract deer.
(2013 Code, § 6-6)
Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.005 POLICE DOGS; APPLICABILITY.
   Sections
90.020 through
90.035 and
90.050 through
90.056 of this chapter do not apply to police dogs on active status with the
city’s Police Department.
(2013 Code, § 6-7) (Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-2009; Ord. 15043, passed 6-13-2022)
§ 90.006 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   Failure to comply with an order of the Animal Warden issued pursuant to this
chapter and not timely appealed, or of the City Administrator or Hearing
Officer after appeal, constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-8) (Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-2009)
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person employed by the city or with whom the city has
contracted as its enforcement officer.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner or upon the public streets, alleys,
public grounds, school grounds or parks within the city. A dog shall not be
deemed AT LARGE under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If attached to a leash or chain of sufficient strength to restrain
the dog and not more than six feet in length when the leash or chain is held by
a person competent to restrain and control the dog off the owner’s premises;
      (2)   If properly restrained within a motor vehicle or housed in a
veterinary hospital;
      (3)   If accompanied by and at heel beside the owner or a competent
responsible person;
      (4)   If left unattended on the owner’s premises, so confined, tied or
restrained as to be unable to range beyond the owner’s premises;
      (5)   If the owner and the dog are participating in a regularly scheduled
competitive or exhibition event, sanctioned or sponsored by a nationally
recognized organization, local chapter thereof or other generally recognized
local organization, in a park designed by the city’s Park and Recreation
Department for such activities and under the terms and conditions established
by the Park and Recreation Department;
      (6)   If the dog and the owner are actively engaged in a generally
recognized and dog obedience training program or training for a generally
recognized kennel club event, in a park designed for such activities by the
city’s Park and Recreation Department and under the terms and conditions
established by the Park and Recreation Department; provided, all of the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The dog is in the actual physical presence of the owner or
trainer at all times;
         (b)   The owner or trainer is at no time more than 50 feet from the
dog;
         (c)   The dog is immediately obedient to the commands of the owner or
trainer;
         (d)   The owner or trainer has, at all times, on his or her person a
leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog; and
         (e)   However, in the Nicholson-Ford Nature Area, the exceptions above
shall only be applicable to dogs that are “retriever breeds” as determined and
defined by the city Park and Recreation Department. Such breeds in the
Nicholson-Ford Nature Area may be more than 50 feet from the trainer if wearing
an operable electronic collar.
      (7)   If a dog and owner are confined within an area specifically
designed and set apart as an off-leash dog park and the owner has registered
and followed the policies set for such an area, a dog shall be deemed to be AT
LARGE if it is not properly vaccinated for rabies as required by law, if it is
not housed, restrained or controlled in one of the methods set forth in this
section or if under division (6)(e) above, its presence or activities are not
in conformance with the terms and conditions established by the Parks and
Recreation Department of the city.
   CAT. Both male and female of the feline species.
   DOG. Both male and female animals of the canine species.
   KENNEL DOG. A dog kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale
and which is kept under constant restraint.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring an animal.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. A public establishment regularly maintained and
operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of disease
and injuries of animals.
(2013 Code, § 6-18) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14232, passed 5-27-1986; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 14872, passed
4-26-2010)
§ 90.021 RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have a dog or cat in his or
her possession, in the city, a cat or dog six months of age or over, which cat
or dog has not been vaccinated against rabies. Persons owning or possessing a
dog or cat over the age of six months of age shall be required to have a
certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat signed by a licensed
veterinarian indicating that the vaccination is current. Any dog or cat not
having a valid rabies vaccination tag and for which no rabies vaccination
certificate can be produced shall be apprehended pursuant to I.C.A. Ch. 351.
(2013 Code, § 6-19) (Ord. 12463, passed 5-1-1974; Ord. 13987, passed 5-11-1981;
Ord. 14232, passed 5-27-1998; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.022 DOG WASTE; REMOVAL.
   No owner, possessor or person in charge of a dog shall fail to clean up or
remove immediately any excrement or droppings deposited by such dog on any
public or private property not owned or in the control of that owner, possessor
or person in charge of such dog.
(2013 Code, § 6-20) (Ord. 14605, passed 12-30-1998; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-
2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.023 CATS AT LARGE.
   The city or its contracting agent, if the city has entered into a contract
as provided in this subchapter, shall pick up and shelter any cat confined in a
humane manner by any person when the cat was not on its owner’s property. Pick-
up shall be within 24 hours whenever possible.
(2013 Code, § 6-21) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14232, passed 5-27-1986; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.024 DOGS AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to permit such dog
to run at large, whether such dog shall be licensed or unlicensed.
   (A)   A dog found at large shall be sterilized, spayed or neutered, at the
owner's expense, if and upon the owner or keeper of the dog being found guilty
of a second or subsequent dog at large violation under this chapter.
   (B)   In determining what is a second, third or subsequent offense, multiple
counts or charges for more than one dog at large by the owner or keeper
resulting from the same event or release shall be considered one offense.
   (C)   There is no time limitation from the prior offense in determining
whether an offense under this section is a second, third or subsequent offense.
   (D)   A dog found at large shall be forfeited, if and upon the owner or
keeper being found guilty of a third or subsequent offense of a dog at large
violation under this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-22) (Ord. 14709, passed 3-25-2003; Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-
2009; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 14996, passed 5-11-2020) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.025 CITY AUTHORIZED TO CONTRACT FOR CARE, DISPOSITION OF DOMESTICATED
ANIMALS IN LIEU OF ESTABLISHING POUND.
   (A)   In lieu of the establishment and maintenance of a pound and the
employment of an Animal Warden employed by the city, the City Council may
contract with any incorporated society or association for the prevention of
cruelty to animals for the maintenance of a shelter or pound for untagged
domesticated animals and for lost, strayed or homeless domesticated animals;
for the destruction or disposition of seized domesticated animals not redeemed
as provided by this subchapter; and for the disposal of dead dogs or cats.
   (B)   Such contract shall set forth the manner in which the work shall be
done and in which payments are to be made to the society and may also direct
the disposition of all domesticated animals seized as provided in the agency’s
bylaws.
   (C)   Such contract may provide that proceeds of the animal-related fees
thereon may be retained by the society in payment for its services and such
other payments may be made to such society by the city as may be necessary to
defray the actual cost incurred by the society in connection with its work
under such contract by accounting to the city and credit on the amount
appropriated by the Council.
   (D)   The Animal Warden has the authority to write municipal infractions
under this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-23) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.026 APPREHENDING AND IMPOUNDING.
   No domesticated animal picked up pursuant to this subchapter shall be
released to the owner thereof until payment of a pick-up charge, plus boarding
charges. In addition, the owner shall show proof of a current rabies
vaccination. Additional conditions for release provided in this chapter shall
be applicable if the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal.
(2013 Code, § 6-24) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 11059, passed 5-9-1967;
Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972; Ord. 13987, passed 5-11-1981; Ord. 14232, passed
5-27-1986; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.027 POLICE OFFICER; DUTIES.
   Police officers or such other person as may be approved by the Council shall
report to the Animal Warden any domesticated animal found to be running at
large contrary to the provisions of this subchapter and shall give such
assistance as may be required in the impounding of any such domesticated
animal.
(2013 Code, § 6-25) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003)
§ 90.028 NOTICE TO OWNER; REDEMPTION.
   Not later than two days after the impounding of any domesticated animal, the
owners, if known, shall be notified either personally or by certified mail of
such impoundment. The registry of impounded animals shall be available for
inspection during reasonable hours by the owners. The owner of any animals
impounded may reclaim such animals by payment of all costs and charges incurred
by the city or the agency authorized by the City Council to impound animals,
including the maintenance of said animals.
(2013 Code, § 6-26) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003)
§ 90.029 UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the agency authorized by the City Council to
impound any animals, to keep all such animals, except cats, so impounded for a
period of seven days after the owner has been notified as provided in §
90.028 of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the agency authorized by the
City Council to impound cats, to keep all cats so impounded for a period of
three days after the owner has been notified as provided in §
90.028 of this chapter.
   (B)   If, after the seven days, or the three days for cats, following notice
to the owner of the impounding of the owner’s animal, or cat, respectively, or
if the owner is unknown, then after the seven days, or the three days
respectively, after the impoundment of such animal the owner thereof has failed
to claim and redeem any such impounded animal or cat, which, as provided in
this subchapter, the animal or cat shall become the property of the city or its
authorized agency and may be humanely destroyed or placed.
   (C)   Any animal or cat which appears to be suffering from rabies when
impounded shall be confined in the pound or a veterinary hospital for a period
of not less than ten days, and the animal or cat, or its carcass if it dies,
shall be subject to such reasonable medical or pathological tests as the Animal
Warden shall recommend.
   (D)   Rabies tests, if any, shall be conducted at the expense of the owner.
If an animal or cat is determined to be infected with rabies, it shall be
destroyed or disposed of as directed by the Animal Warden.
(2013 Code, § 6-27) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 11059, passed 5-9-1967;
Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 14757, passed
1-24-2005)
§ 90.030 CONFINEMENT OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS; RELEASING.
   (A)   (1)   Every female domesticated animal in heat shall be kept confined
to the owner’s property or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel so that
such domesticated animal cannot come in contact with other animals, except for
intentional breeding purposes.
      (2)   Domesticated animals kept outdoors for more than four hours at one
time must be provided with a moisture-proof and wind-proof shelter and shade of
a size which allows the animal to turn around freely and to easily sit, stand
and lie in a normal position and to keep the animal clean, dry and comfortable.
   (B)   (1)   No person, except the owner of a domesticated animal or such
owner’s authorized agent, shall willfully open any door or gate on any private
premises or unleash any domesticated animals for the purpose of enticing or
enabling any domesticated animal to leave such private premises and be at large
under this subchapter.
      (2)   No person shall provoke or mistreat any animal while confined on
its owner’s premises.
(2013 Code, § 6-29) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 12390, passed 1-15-1974; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.031 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers
of hydrophobia or rabies, the Mayor, if the Mayor deems it necessary, shall
issue a proclamation ordering every owner of an animal to confine the animal
securely on the owner’s premises at all times, for such period as deemed
necessary.
(2013 Code, § 6-30)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner in
the city to make written report to the Police Department of the name and
address of any person treated for a bite inflicted by an animal, together with
such other information as will assist in the prevention of rabies.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of every veterinarian in the city to report to
the Animal Warden any diagnosis of rabies in an animal made by him or her or
under his or her supervision.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or any person
having knowledge of such animal biting or causing a skin abrasion upon any
person in the city to promptly report such fact to the Animal Warden.
(2013 Code, § 6-31)
   (C)   (1)   The Animal Warden shall impound animals in the city suspected of
being infected with rabies or other disease communicable to humans or any
animal that has bitten or caused a skin abrasion upon any person in the city
and cause such animals to be placed in isolation and under quarantine for
observation for a minimum period of ten days. The isolation and quarantine
shall be either at the pound or humane shelter authorized by the city or in a
veterinary hospital. However, if such animal has an effective vaccination
against rabies given not less than 30 days and not having expired prior to the
date of bite or skin abrasion, and the animal was not at large at the time of
bite, it may be placed in the custody of the owner on the owner’s premises
during the isolation and quarantine period. When isolation and quarantine is
authorized on the owner’s premises, it will be at the discretion of and under
the supervision of the Animal Warden.
      (2)   The expense of isolation and quarantine will be borne by the owner.
If the animal is placed in isolation and under quarantine in the pound or
humane shelter authorized by the city, an additional charge shall be assessed.
(2013 Code, § 6-32)
   (D)   Every owner or person having possession, custody or control of any
animal which is known to be rabid or which has been bitten by an animal
infected with rabies shall immediately report such fact to the Police
Department or Animal Warden and shall have such animal placed in isolation and
quarantine as directed by the Animal Warden for such period as designated at
the owner’s expense.
(2013 Code, § 6-33)
   (E)   The owner of any animal shall forthwith surrender any animal which has
bitten a human or any animal which is suspected as having been exposed to
rabies for supervised quarantine at the owner’s expense as provided in division
(C) above, upon demand of the Animal Warden, police officer or City Attorney’s
office. No person shall kill any animal suspected of being rabid or remove the
animal from the city without permission of the Animal Warden.
(2013 Code, § 6-34)
(Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972; Ord. 14707, passed
3-10-2003)
§ 90.032 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   No person shall willfully interfere with, molest or injure an agent of the
city authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter or seek to release
any domesticated animal properly in the custody of such authorized agent.
(2013 Code, § 6-35) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003) Penalty, §
90.999
§ 90.033 OWNER’S LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall relieve the owner of any
domesticated animal from liability for any damage committed by such dog as
provided by state law.
(2013 Code, § 6-36) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003)
§ 90.034 DOMESTICATED ANIMAL CAUSING DISTURBANCE OR ANNOYANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or harboring a domesticated
animal to allow or permit such domesticated animal to cause serious or habitual
disturbance or annoyance to any person by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking or otherwise noise some conduct.
(2013 Code, § 6-37) (Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-
2003; Ord. 14709, passed 3-25-2003; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see
§
90.999
§ 90.035 KENNELS AND BREEDING DOGS.
   Dog kennels and the breeding or raising of dogs is prohibited; except that,
not more than three dogs over six months may be kept per residence.
(2013 Code, § 6-38) (Ord. 9477, passed 2-24-1958; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003)
Penalty, see §
90.999
VICIOUS ANIMALS
§ 90.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The Director of the Animal Rescue League or the Director’s
designee.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any animal, including, but not limited to, dogs, with a known
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, as evidenced by its
habitual or repeated chasing, snapping or biting at human beings or domestic
animals so as to potentially cause injury or otherwise endanger their safety.
The Chief of Police, a qualified veterinarian duly licensed in the state or the
Animal Warden are authorized to declare an animal VICIOUS for purposes of this
chapter. A police officer or the Animal Warden may determine an animal to be
VICIOUS for purposes of capture or confinement under §
90.056(A) of this chapter; and/or
      (2)   Any dog, which, without provocation, bites a human being or
domestic animal.
(2013 Code, § 6-51) (Ord. 14261, passed 8-10-1987; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-
2003; Ord. 14801, passed 3-12-2007)
§ 90.051 UNPROVOKED DOG BITING.
   (A)   The owner of a dog, whose dog without provocation bites a human being
or domestic animal, shall surrender that dog to the Animal Rescue League within
24 hours or one business day of such bite. Such dog shall be declared or deemed
a vicious animal for purposes of this chapter, and will be released upon
meeting the respective requirements of §
90.052 of this chapter, and upon paying the charges incurred and fees
established by the Animal Rescue League, unless the circumstances are such as
described in divisions (D) or (E) below.
   (B)   The owner of a dog, whose dog is classified as a vicious animal under
division (A) above or as a repeat biter under division (D) below, or as causing
serious injury or death to a human being or domestic animal under division (E)
below, or held by the Animal Rescue League under this section, may appeal the
vicious animal status, number of bite status or the seriousness of the injury
to the human being or domestic animal, to the City Administrator, within three
business days of the dog’s surrender to the Animal Rescue League. The appeal
will be heard by the City Administrator or by a Hearing Officer appointed by
the City Administrator.
   (C)   Such notice of appeal:
      (1)   Shall be in writing and served on the City Clerk or the City
Clerk’s designee. Failure to file such timely written notice of appeal shall
constitute a waiver of right to appeal; and
      (2)   Shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered
personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. Within seven days of receipt
by the City Clerk, a date of hearing for such appeal will be set. After such
hearing, the City Administrator or the Hearing Officer, if so appointed, may
affirm or reverse the decision as to the vicious animal status, the number of
bites status or the seriousness of the injury to the human being or domestic
animal. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall
be filed with the City Clerk within three days after the hearing or any
continued session thereof. The decision and order shall be served upon the
person who appealed.
   (D)   The owner of a dog, whose dog is previously declared or deemed a
vicious animal under this subchapter, and whose dog without provocation bites a
human being or domestic animal, shall surrender that dog to the Animal Rescue
League within 24 hours or one business day of such bite. Such dog shall be
euthanized, and the owner shall be responsible for the charges incurred and
fees established by the Animal Rescue League.
   (E)   The owner of a dog, whose dog bites a human being or domestic animal,
causing serious injury or death to that human being or domestic animal, shall
surrender that dog to the Animal Rescue League within 24 hours or one business
day of such bite. Such dog shall be euthanized, and the owner shall be
responsible for the charges incurred and fees established by the Animal Rescue
League.
   (F)   Fees under this section shall be paid to the Animal Rescue League for
services rendered, regardless of the success or failure of any such appeal
pursuant to this section.
(2013 Code, § 6-51.1) (Ord. 14801, passed 3-12-2007; Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-
2009)
§ 90.052 PROTOCOL FOR DOGS SUBJECT TO VICIOUS ANIMAL PROCEDURES.
   Procedures or protocol shall be adopted by the Animal Rescue League in the
holding, processing, release and euthanization, and by the City Administrator
for appeals, for dogs at large, dogs suspected or deemed to be vicious animals,
and for dogs suspected or deemed to have caused serious injury or death,
including, but not limited to, the following.
   (A)   A dog required to be licensed as a vicious animal under this
subchapter shall be microchipped and sterilized, spayed or neutered. All dogs,
which are microchipped or sterilized, spayed or neutered, or both, through the
Animal Rescue League, will be charged a fee to be determined by the Animal
Rescue League for such procedure.
   (B)   A dog found at large owned or kept by someone with two or more dog at
large violations shall be sterilized, spayed or neutered at the owner’s
expense. All such dogs sterilized, spayed or neutered through the Animal Rescue
League, will be charged a fee to be determined by the Animal Rescue League.
   (C)   Dogs captured or surrendered to the Animal Rescue League under the
provisions of this chapter, will not be released by the Animal Rescue League,
until all applicable requirements including, but not limited to, proof of
insurance, microchipping, sterilization, spaying or neutering, licensing and
payment of fees are met. Owners of dogs sent to the Animal Rescue League
pursuant to this subchapter, have five days from the date of surrender of the
dog or from notification that the Animal Rescue League holds the dog, to pick
up the dog and pay all applicable fees. This time may be extended by the Animal
Rescue League pending the time needed to hold an appeal hearing.
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner to refuse to
surrender a dog requested or required to be surrendered to the Animal Rescue
League pursuant to this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-51.2) (Ord. 14801, passed 3-12-2007; Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-
2009)
§ 90.053 LICENSE AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   All vicious animals must be licensed as follows.
   (A)   Application for a license must be made at the office of the City Clerk
upon a form to be provided by the Clerk.
   (B)   The application must be accompanied by an insurance policy or a
certificate of insurance issued by a company licensed to do business in the
state, providing personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner’s
policy, with a minimum liability amount of $100,000 for the injury or death of
any person, for damage to property of others and for acts of negligence by the
owner or his or her agents in the negligent keeping of such vicious animal.
   (C)   The insurance policy or certificate of insurance referred to in this
section shall provide that it cannot be cancelled or terminated until ten days’
notice by registered mail of such cancellation or termination shall have been
received by the City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee.
   (D)   The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy, issued
in compliance with this section, shall automatically revoke and terminate the
license issued under this section, unless another policy, complying with this
section, shall be provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or
termination. The City Clerk or the Clerk’s designee shall immediately issue
written notification of the revocation of such certificate and all licenses
issued under this section.
   (E)   The license provided for in this section shall be valid for one year
and must be renewed annually. The cost of issuance shall be as set by
resolution of the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 6-52) (Ord. 14261, passed 8-10-1987; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-
2003)
§ 90.054 CONFINEMENT OF FIERCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   No animal known to be vicious, as the term is defined in §
90.050 of this chapter, shall be permitted off the premises of the owner,
except when such animal is confined in a boarding kennel, a veterinary hospital
or while being transported to such boarding kennel or veterinary hospital.
      (2)   If any such animal is not confined as required by this section, it
shall be impounded and shall not be released without meeting the applicable
procedures or protocol established by the Animal Rescue League pursuant to §
90.052 of this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, any animal may be taken up and
impounded when the animal has attacked any person or domestic animal and
inflicted such serious and grievous injury to the person or domestic animal as
to cause the Animal Warden, in his or her sole discretion, to believe the
animal is vicious, and the animal shall not be released until the Animal Warden
shall authorize release upon any terms and conditions under procedures and
protocol established pursuant to §
90.052 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-53) (Ord. 9073, passed 6-25-1956; Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972;
Ord. 12390, passed 1-15-1974; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 14801, passed
3-12-2007; Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-2009) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.055 RESTRAINT.
   (A)   Persons owning, possessing or harboring or having the care of a
vicious animal shall not allow or permit such animal to go unconfined upon the
premises of such person. Persons shall not permit such animal to go beyond the
premises unless properly caged, tied or restrained so as to securely confine
and control such animal and, in the case of a vicious dog, securely leashed and
muzzled.
   (B)   If a vicious animal is housed in a kennel on a property, the kennel
must have a cement base, a secure covered top and a secure closed door.
(2013 Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 14261, passed 8-10-1987; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-
2003; Ord. 14801, passed 3-12-2007) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.056 SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   (1)   In the event that a vicious animal is found at large and
unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons
or property, such animal may, in the sole discretion of the Animal Warden, be
destroyed if it cannot be safely captured or confined. The city shall be under
no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a vicious animal found at
large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to its
destruction. Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a vicious animal on premises in the city, the Animal
Warden, accompanied by the police officer if necessary and available, or a
police officer, shall cause the matter to be investigated. If, after such
investigation as the Chief of Police or the Animal Warden deem necessary, on
their own initiative or as a result of a complaint hereunder, it is determined
that a person is keeping, sheltering or harboring a vicious animal in the city
which has not been licensed as a vicious animal under this chapter, or which
has been found to be at large after being deemed vicious, the Police Chief, or
his or her designee, or the Animal Warden, shall order the person keeping,
sheltering or harboring the vicious animal within three days of service of the
order to either safely and permanently place the animal with an organization or
group determined by the Animal Warden to be safe to keep vicious animals or
destroy the animal. The order herein shall be contained in a written notice
directed to the person or persons keeping, sheltering or harboring the vicious
animal and shall be served in the manner of personal service under the Iowa
Rules of Civil Procedure, or by both regular and certified mail and shall be
effective upon placement of the notice in a United States Post Office
receptacle. The notice shall also advise the persons to whom it is directed of
their right to appeal the order by delivering to the City Clerk within three
days of the personal service or five days of the mailing by regular and
certified mail, a written notice of appeal which provides the names and
addresses of the owners of the vicious animal, names the vicious animal and
states the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Within seven days of
receiving a notice of appeal hereunder, the City Clerk shall send by regular
mail to the appellant(s) at the address provided in the notice of appeal, a
written notice of the time, date and place for the hearing, the name of the
Hearing Officer appointed by the City Administrator to conduct the appeal and
the rights of the appellants to present evidence, to be represented by an
attorney at their own expense, to conduct cross-examination of the witnesses
presented by the city and to preserve a transcript of the proceedings on appeal
at their own expense. The decision on appeal shall be issued in writing within
seven days of the appeal hearing by regular mail to the address provided in the
notice of appeal.
      (2)   Any person who has received a notice under this section who removes
or transfers possession of the vicious animal, except in strict compliance with
the orders of the Police Chief, Animal Warden or Appeals Hearing Officer, shall
be subject to a civil penalty as a municipal infraction.
(2013 Code, § 6-55)
   (B)   Failure to comply with an order of the Animal Warden or police
officer, issued pursuant to this chapter and not appealed, or an order of the
City Administrator or Hearing Officer on appeal, pursuant to this chapter,
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-51)
(Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 14801, passed 3-12-2007; Ord. 14919, passed
5-13-2013)
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 90.070 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals and
having known tendencies as a species to do so; and
      (2)   Any animal declared to be DANGEROUS by the County Board of Health
or Council or its designee; and the following animals, which are deemed to be
dangerous animals per se:
         (a)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx and bobcats;
         (b)   Wolves, coyotes and foxes;
         (c)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks, minks and groundhogs;
         (d)   Raccoons, deer and snapping turtles;
         (e)   Bears;
         (f)   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
         (g)   Alligators and crocodiles;
         (h)   Snakes that are venomous or constrictors; and
         (i)   Gila monsters.
(2013 Code, § 6-61)
§ 90.071 KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep, shelter or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet
or act as temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such
animal for any other purpose or in any capacity within the city, except in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a
bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show;
      (2)   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed
veterinary hospital for treatment; or
      (3)   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the
possession of the state’s Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to I.C.A.
Ch. 481A and 481B.
   (B)   The Animal Warden will respond to complaints of dangerous animals and
remove them. In the event the Animal Warden is not reasonably available and an
imminent danger exists, the Police Department shall be authorized to destroy
the dangerous animal.
(2013 Code, § 6-62) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the penalties, remedies and relief as provided in
this municipal code of ordinances, a violation of §
90.024 of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction punishable and a third
or subsequent violation of §
90.024 of this chapter shall require forfeiture of the dog found at large.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
90.999(B) of this code of ordinances, concerning repeat offenses, there is no
time limitation from the prior offense in determining whether an offense under
§
90.024 of this chapter is a second, third or a subsequent offense after three.
(2013 Code, § 6-22)
(Ord. 12017, passed 4-11-1972; Ord. 14707, passed 3-10-2003; Ord. 14709, passed
3-25-2003; Ord. 14861, passed 9-14-2009; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fire Code
   
91.001   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
91.002   Amendments, definitions, substitutions or deletions
   
91.003   Enforcing officer
   
91.004   Appeals
   
91.005   Violations
Open Burning
   
91.020   Definitions
   
91.021   Burning garbage prohibited
   
91.022   Burning of rubbish prohibited
   
91.023   Burning diseased trees
   
91.024   Permissible opening burning
   
91.025   Recreational burning allowed; rear and side yard restrictions; pine
and spruce trees
   
91.026   Fire Department response fee
Gas Stations
   
91.040   Unlawful to keep or store gasoline or inflammable liquids without
permit
   
91.041   Investigation by Council; granting permit
   
91.042   Permit application; plans and specifications of premises
 
   
91.999   Penalty
FIRE CODE
§ 91.001 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   Unless specifically provided for in other codes or city ordinances, the
International Fire Code, 2021 Edition (hereinafter to be known as the IFC),
including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, and N as published
by the International Code Council, Inc. in cooperation with the International
Conference of Building Officials of Whittier, California, and except as
modified as to portions thereof as are deleted, substituted, redefined, or
inserted in this subchapter, is adopted by reference, is on file with the City
Clerk and is fully incorporated as the Fire Prevention Code of the city. The
provisions of said Fire Code shall be controlling for the safeguarding of life
and property from the hazards, substances, materials, and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the use of occupancy of buildings
or premises and in all matters covered by said Fire Code within the corporate
limits of the city and shall be known as the “Marshalltown Fire Code.”
(Ord. 15061, passed 6-12-2023)
§ 91.002 AMENDMENTS, DEFINITIONS, SUBSTITUTIONS OR DELETIONS.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Marshalltown,
hereinafter referred to as “this code”. Any reference to a Section number shall
mean to this code unless stated otherwise.
   (B)   Section 105.1.1 Permits required is amended to read as follows:
      A property owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to conduct an
operation or business, or install or modify systems and equipment that are
regulated by this code, or cause any such work to be performed, shall first
make application to the fire code official and obtain the required permits. The
minimum permit fee shall be established by Resolution of the City Council
without amending this ordinance.
   (C)   Section 111.1 Board of Appeals established is amended to read as
follows:
      The Fire Code Board of Appeals is hereby established within the City of
Marshalltown for the purpose of hearing applications for modification of the
requirements of the International Fire Code. The Board shall be authorized to
hear evidence from appellants and the Fire Chief pertaining to the application
and the intent of this code for the purpose of issuing orders pursuant to these
provisions. The membership of the Board shall consist of five voting members
having qualifications established by this section. Members shall be nominated
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the City Council.
Members shall serve without renumeration or compensation, and shall be removed
from office prior to the end of their appointed terms only for cause. The Fire
Chief shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Board. Membership of the Board
shall consist of the following positions:
         (a)   One member shall be a practicing design professional registered
in the practice of engineering or architecture in the state in which the board
is established.
         (b)   One member shall be a qualified engineer, technologist,
technician, or safety professional trained in fire protection engineering, fire
science or technology. Qualified representatives in this category shall include
fire protection contractors and certified technicians engaged in fire
protection system design.
         (c)   One member shall include a registered industrial or chemical
engineer, certified hygienist, certified safety professional, certified
hazardous materials manager or comparably qualified specialist.
         (d)   One member shall be a contractor regularly engaged in the
construction, alteration, maintenance, repair or remodeling of buildings or
building services and systems regulated by the code.
         (e)   One member shall be a representative of business or industry not
represented by a member from one of the other categories of board members
described above.
      Members shall be appointed for terms of 4 years. Members shall not be
reappointed to serve more than two consecutive full terms. Of the members first
appointed, two shall serve a term of 1 year, two for a term of 2 years, one for
a term of 3 years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the
manner in which the original appointments are required to be made. Members
appointed to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term shall be eligible for
reappointment to two full terms.
      Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the
application of any provisions of this code or in modifying an order of the Fire
Chief, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less than three,
shall be required.
      The Fire Chief shall act as secretary of the board and shall keep a
detailed record of all proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its
decisions, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of
a member to vote.
      The board shall meet at regular intervals, to be determined by the
Chairperson. In any event, the board shall meet within 10 days after notice of
appeal has been received. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure for
meeting and hearing operations.
      Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the
Fire Chief and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy shall be
sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant, and a copy shall be kept publicly
posted in the office of the Fire Chief for 2 weeks after filing.
   (D)   Section 112.4 Violation penalty is amended to read as follows:
      Any person violating any provision of this code or failing to comply with
any requirements hereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire
code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this
code, shall be subject to penalty as provided in § 91.999 of the Code of
Ordinances for the City of Marshalltown.
   (E)   Section 307.1 Open burning - General is amended to read as follows:
      A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or
maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in accordance with
Sections 307.1.1 through 307.5 and Section 91.020 of the Marshalltown Code of
Ordinances.
   (F)   Section 315.3.3 Equipment room is amended as follows:
      Combustible material shall hot be stored in boiler rooms, mechanical
rooms, and electrical rooms or in fire command centers as specified in Section
508.1.5.
         Exception:
            (1)   In sprinklered equipment rooms that have sufficient space to
allow a minimum of 10 feet between all combustible storage and the heating,
mechanical, or electrical equipment in the room.
   (G)   Table 405.2 Fire and Evacuation Drill Frequency and Participation is
amended as follows:
GROUP OR OCCUPANCY FREQUENCY PARTICIPATION
GROUP OR OCCUPANCY FREQUENCY                PARTICIPATION
Group A            Quarterly                Staff
Group B (c)        Annually                 Employees
Group E            See (a) below            All occupants
Group I-1 (d)      Semi-annually each shift All occupants
Group I-2          Quarterly each shift     Staff
Group I-3          Quarterly each shift     Staff
Group I-4          Monthly each shift       All occupants
Group R-1          Quarterly each shift     Employees
Group R-2 (c)      Four annually            All occupants
Group R-4 (d)      Semi-annually each shift All occupants
 
            (a)   Quarterly (four fire and four tornado) in accordance with
Iowa Code Chapter 100. In severe climates, the fire code official shall have
the authority to modify the emergency evacuation drill frequency.
            (b)   Group B buildings that have an occupant load of 500 or more
persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of discharge.
            (c)   Emergency evacuation drills in Group R-2 college and
university buildings shall be in accordance with Section 403.9.2.1. Other Group
R-2 occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 403.9.2.2.
            (d)   In Groups I-1 and R-4, see Sections 403.7.1.4 and 403.9.3.4
for additional drills for staff.
   (H)   Section 903.2.8.5 Residential Sprinkler is added as follows:
      An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one
and two-family dwellings.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   An automatic fire sprinkler system shall not be required where
additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are not already
provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
         (2)   One and two-family dwellings containing less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet of floor space, excluding attached garages and other
unenclosed areas.
   (I)   Section 903.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems is amended as follows:
      Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies shall be permitted to
be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R where the Group R occupancy
meets all of the following conditions:
         (1)   Four stories or fewer above grade plane.
         (2)   The floor level of the highest story is 35 feet (10663 mm) or
less above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
         (3)   The floor level of the lowest story is 35 feet (10663 mm) or
less below the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
      The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance
with Sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from grade plane.
   (J)   Section 907.2.2 Group B is amended as follows:
      A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group B occupancies
where one of the following conditions exists:
         (1)   The combined Group B occupant load of all floors is 500 or more.
         (2)   The Group B occupant load is more than 100 persons above or
below the lowest level of exit discharge.
         (3)   The Group B fire area contains an educational occupancy for
students above the twelfth (12th) grade with an occupant load greater than 50
persons.
         (4)   The fire area contains an ambulatory care facility.
   (K)   Section 915.1 Carbon monoxide general is amended as follows:
      Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in new buildings in
accordance with Sections 915.1.1 through 915.6. Carbon monoxide detection shall
be installed in existing buildings in accordance with Section 1103.9, and Iowa
Administrative Code 661-211.
   (L)   Section 1010.1.6.1 Frost protection at exterior landings is added as
follows:
      Exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost protection.
   (M)   Section 1028.6 Exit discharge pathway is added as follows:
      Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or
other approved hard surface.
   (N)   Section 1103.9 Carbon monoxide alarms is amended is follows:
      Existing I-1, I-2, I-4, and R occupancies and in classrooms in Group E
occupancies shall be equipped with carbon monoxide alarms in accordance with
Section 915 and Iowa Administrative Code 661-211.
   (O)   Chapter 41 Special Events is added.
   (P)   Section 4101 General is added.
   (Q)   Section 4101.1 Scope is added as follows:
      Special events including trade shows and exhibitions, outdoor assembly
events, and special amusement buildings shall comply with this chapter and
Section 1028. Temporary indoor vehicle displays and vehicle competition or
demonstrations shall comply with this chapter and Section 314.
   (R)   Section 4101.2 Site plan as follows:
      A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the fire code official with
each permit application for approval. Permit application and site plan shall be
submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall
include, but not be limited to:
         (1)   Location of fencing or means to confine attendees.
         (2)   The means of egress.
         (3)   Location and width of exits and aisles.
         (4)   Location of exit signs.
         (5)   Total square footage of the enclosed space.
         (6)   Location and arrangement of all tents, booths, and cooking
equipment.
         (7)   Location of all fire protection equipment.
         (8)   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where
applicable.
         (9)   Location of fire and emergency service access roads where
applicable.
   (S)   Section 4102 General Requirements is added.
   (T)   Section 4102.1 Access for firefighting and medical services is added
as follows:
      Approved vehicle access for firefighting and medical services shall be
provided in accordance with Section 503.
   (U)   Section 4102.2 Combustible storage is added as follows:
      Combustible materials stored at special events shall be stored in
approved locations and containers.
   (V)   Section 4102.3 Fire protection equipment clearance is added as
follows:
      Clearance around all fire protection equipment shall be in accordance
with Section 507.5.4 and 507.5.5.
   (W)   Section 4102.4 Fire extinguishers is added as follows:
      Fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Section 906 and NFPA 10.
   (X)   Section 4102.6 Housekeeping is added as follows:
      The special event area and related areas shall be kept free from
combustible debris.
   (Y)   Section 4102.7 Portable Outdoor LP-gas heater is added as follows:
      Portable outdoor gas-fired heating appliances located outdoors shall be
in accordance with Sections 605.5.2.1 through 605.5.2.3.4.
   (Z)   Section 4102.8 Open flame device is added as follows:
      Open flame devices shall comply with Section 308.
   (AA)   Section 4102.8 Waste disposal is added as follows:
      Combustible debris shall not be allowed to accumulate at special events.
Combustible debris, rubbish, and waste material shall be removed from special
events at the end of each shift worked. Combustible debris, rubbish, and waste
material shall not be disposed of by burning on the site.
   (BB)   Section 4103 Trade shows and exhibitions is added.
   (CC)   Section 4103.1 General is added as follows:
      Trade shows and exhibitions conducted within any occupancy shall comply
with the fire code.
   (DD)   Section 4103.2 Vehicles is added as follows:
      Liquid and gas fueled and electric vehicles, boats, or other motor-craft
and equipment used for display or demonstration within a building shall be in
accordance with Section 314.4.
   (EE)   Section 4103.3 Means of egress is added as follows:
      Means of egress from an indoor trade show or exhibition area shall comply
with Chapter 10 and Sections N108.2 and N108.3.
   (FF)   Section 4103.4 Travel distance is added as follows:
      The maximum travel distance from any point in an exhibit to an exit
access aisle shall not exceed 50 feet.
   (GG)   Section 4103.5 Aisle width is added as follows:
      Minimum aisle width inside a trade show or exhibition shall comply with
the following:
 
Square Footage of Exhibition    Minimum Aisle Width
Less than 5,000 square feet     6 feet
5,000 to 15,000 square feet     8 feet
Greater than 15,000 square feet 10 feet
 
   (HH)   Section 4103.5.1 Obstructions is added as follows:
      Aisles shall be kept clear of all obstructions, including but not limited
to, fixtures and displays of goods for sale, chairs, tables, products, and
displays.
   (II)   Section 4103.5.2 Exit signs is added as follows:
      Exit signs shall be visible from all locations in the occupancy.
   (JJ)   Section 4103.6 Demonstration cooking and warming equipment or devices
is added as follows:
      Equipment and devices shall be isolated from the public by not less than
4 feet or by a non-combustible 3-sided barrier between the equipment and the
public.
   (KK)   Section 4103.6.1 Protection is added as follows:
      Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils shall meet the
following:
         (1)   A noncombustible lid of sufficient size to cover the cooking
well completely shall be immediately available.
         (2)   The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches.
         (3)   The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
         (4)   Cooking equipment shall be separated from combustible materials
by a horizontal distance of at least 2 feet.
   (LL)   Section 4103.6.2 Butane is added as follows:
      Butane for cooking equipment shall be limited to one 10-ounce cylinder
and one spare of the same size in storage, per appliance.
   (MM)   Section 4104 Outdoor assembly events is added.
   (NN)   Section 4104.1 General is added as follows:
      Outdoor assembly events shall be in accordance with Chapter 31. An
operational permit is required to conduct an outdoor event where the planned
attendance exceeds 1,000 persons.
   (OO)   Section 4105 Mobile food vehicles is added.
   (PP)   Section 4105.1 General is added as follows:
      Mobile food preparation vehicles that are equipped with appliances that
produce smoke or grease laden vapors shall comply with Section 319.
   (QQ)   Section 4106 Special amusement buildings is added.
   (RR)   Section 4106.1 General is added as follows:
      Special amusement buildings shall be in accordance with this section and
Section 411 of the International Building Code.
         Exception:
            (1)   Amusement buildings or portions thereof, which are without
walls or a roof and are constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke.
   (SS)   Section 4106.2 Use of combustible decorative material is added as
follows:
      Use of decorative combustible materials shall be in accordance with
Chapter 8.
   (TT)   Section 4106.3 Assistance is added as follows:
      Adult monitors with flashlights shall be available to provide assistance
in the event someone becomes disoriented or lost. One adult monitor shall be
provided for every 60 persons.
   (UU)   Section 4106.4 Automatic sprinkler system is added as follows:
      Special amusement buildings shall be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Chapter 9.
   (VV)   Section 4106.5 Temporary special amusement building is added as
follows:
      Where the special amusement building is temporary, the sprinkler water
supply shall be of an approved temporary means. The sprinkler piping shall be
connected to a temporary water supply having sufficient capacity (flow and
pressure) to supply residential or standard quick spray response heads at a
minimum design density of 0.15 gpm per square foot of protected floor space.
The temporary water supply may be connected to a domestic water line, a fire
line, or temporary on-site storage tank as long as the minimum design densities
are met.
(Ord. 15061, passed 6-12-2023; Ord. 15083, passed 2-12-2024; Ord. 15084, passed
4-8-2024)
§ 91.003 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the enforcing officer of the
provisions of the International Fire Code and take such action upon reports of
the Fire Marshal as are required hereby to obtain or enforce compliance
herewith and shall have the assistance of the Legal Department in relation
thereto.
(2013 Code, § 12-3) (Ord. 14184, passed 7-9-1984; Ord. 14231, passed 5-27-1986;
Ord. 14373, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 14543, passed 6-10-1996; Ord. 14805, passed
4-9-2007)
§ 91.004 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief or designated subordinate disapproves an application or
refuses to grant a permit applied for, or which it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or the true intent and meaning of the code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the
decision of the Chief to the Fire Code Board of Appeals as provided for by §
108 of the International Fire Code as amended in §
91.002(UUU) within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(2013 Code, § 12-4) (Ord. 14184, passed 7-9-1984; Ord. 14231, passed 5-27-1986;
Ord. 14373, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 14543, passed 6-10-1996; Ord. 14805, passed
4-9-2007; Ord. 15025, passed 10-25-2021)
§ 91.005 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, occupy, use or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of
this code.
(2013 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 14184, passed 7-9-1984; Ord. 14231, passed 5-27-1986;
Ord. 14373, passed 3-23-1993; Ord. 14543, passed 6-10-1996; Ord. 14805, passed
4-9-2007) Penalty, see §
91.999
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BACKYARD. Any area as defined under Ch. 158 of this code of ordinances.
   BACKYARD BURNING. TThe burning of natural vegetation origination on the
premises and burnt by individuals domiciled on or owning the premises. NATURAL
VEGETATION includes, but is not limited to, leaves, grass, small branches,
flower remains and trimmings.
   BONFIRE. An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes that exceeds the
size requirements of a recreational fire.
   GARBAGE. All solid and semi-solid putrescible and non-putrescible animal and
vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing and
serving of food or of material intended for use as food.
   HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS. Environmental factors, such as wind, temperature, and
relative humidity that contribute to hazardous burning conditions.
   OPEN BURNING. Any burning of materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber as defined by the International Fire Code as
adopted by the city. OPEN BURNING does not include recreational fires or the
use of outdoor portable fireplaces.
   PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE. A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel burning
fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay, or other non-
combustible material.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire burning material other than rubbish or
yard waste where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator,
outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, and barbeque grill and has a
total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes.
   RUBBISH. All waste materials of non-putrescible nature.
(2013 Code, § 12-77) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-
2019)
§ 91.021 BURNING GARBAGE PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of garbage at any time by
burning same.
(2013 Code, § 12-78) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022 BURNING OF RUBBISH PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do open burning
of rubbish.
(2013 Code, § 12-79) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-
2019) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.023 BURNING DISEASED TREES.
   Diseased trees may be burned in areas designated by the Fire Chief or his
designee and upon terms and conditions he or she may prescribe.
(2013 Code, § 12-80) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-
2019)
§ 91.024 PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING.
   It shall be lawful to engage in open burning of plant material grown on the
premises or deposited thereon by the elements by the owner or occupant of the
premises involved, subject to the following.
   (A)   Open burning is allowed between the dates of April 1 through June 30
and October 1 through November 30.
   (B)   Open burning shall occur in the backyard Monday through Sunday between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and is limited to single-family dwellings
only. Burning on public streets and alleys is prohibited. Burning on the
property of another is prohibited unless the property owner grants permission,
i.e. neighbors, neighborhoods, and all open burning regulations shall apply.
All open burning piles shall be extinguished by 7:00 p.m.
   (C)   Open burning of any material is not allowed by an owner or occupant of
premises upon which more than one family dwelling unit is found.
   (D)   Open burning is not allowed on holidays as defined: Good Friday,
Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's Day.
   (E)   Open burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions make such
fires hazardous and includes:
      (1)   Wind speed greater than 15 mph;
      (2)   Extended dry weather conditions.
   (F)   Open burning shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure. Fire
in enclosed containers with a cover to control flying embers shall not be less
than 15 feet from any structure.
   (G)   Any opening burning must be constantly supervised by a competent
person equipped with a satisfactory means of fire control.
   (H)   Burning by commercial business is prohibited unless a burn permit is
obtained from the Fire Department. If a permit is issued, all requirements for
open burning shall be followed.
   (I)   All open burning must be in compliance with the International Fire
Code as adopted by the city. (2013 Code, § 12-81)
(Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-2019)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.025 RECREATIONAL BURNING ALLOWED ; REAR AND SIDE YARD RESTRICTIONS; PINE
AND SPRUCE TREES.
   (A)   Recreational fires are allowed both on the ground and in a container
designed for this purpose at one-and two-family dwellings.
      (1)   Recreational fires on the ground shall not be conducted within 25
feet of a structure or combustible material.
      (2)   Recreational fires contained in appliances specifically designed
for this purpose shall not be operated within 15 feet of a structure or
combustible material.
      (3)   Bonfires shall follow the listed requirements for recreational
burning with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A permit is required from the fire code official;
         (b)   Bonfires are required to be 50 feet from any structure and 15
feet from property lines.
      (4)   The responsible party must provide a means to control flying
embers.
      (5)   All recreational fires must be extinguished by 2:00 a.m.
      (6)   Recreational fires shall be attended at all times until the fire is
extinguished.
      (7)   Responsible party shall have available at all times a sufficient
means of extinguishment to include any of the following:
         (a)   Garden hose connected to a continuous water supply;
         (b)   Fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 of the
International Fire Code;
         (c)   Dirt or sand.
      (8)   Municipal camping areas are exempt from the requirements of this
section except for the restrictions on size.
      (9)   Recreational fires are allowed year round.
   (B)   Subject to contrary provisions of the International Fire Code, as
adopted by the city, open burning of permitted plant material, on permitted
premises, shall be at least 15 feet from side and rear yard boundary lines.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to engage in open burning within 20 feet of any
part of a pine or spruce tree.
(Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-2019)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.026 FIRE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE FEE.
   Any violation of the rules concerning prohibited and open burning, which
require a response by the city's Fire Department to control or extinguish, will
be subject to a response fee as established by resolution. Commercial property
found in violation of this subchapter shall be charged the permit fee for open
burning as established by resolution.
(2013 Code, § 12-85) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 14985, passed 7-22-
2019)
GAS STATIONS
§ 91.040 UNLAWFUL TO KEEP OR STORE GASOLINE OR INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS WITHOUT
PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or store gasoline or other inflammable liquids
in quantities of 25 gallons, or more, in any gasoline station, store or other
place, whether above or below ground, for the purpose of sale or distribution
therefrom, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Council.
(2013 Code, § 17-111) (Ord. 40, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 91.041 INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL; GRANTING PERMIT.
   The Council shall investigate such application, the plats submitted
therewith, the location, kind and construction of the magazines or tanks to be
installed and, if in compliance with the provisions of law and this code or
ordinances and other ordinances, may grant the permit therefor.
(2013 Code, § 17-112) (Ord. 40, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 91.042 PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS OF PREMISES.
   Any person, firm or corporation, desiring a permit for the construction,
maintenance or operation of any magazine, tank, building or other place for the
keeping or storing for sale or distribution of gasoline or other inflammable
liquids, shall make application therefor to the Council, and shall file with
such application a plat drawn to scale showing thereon the location of the
premises, the buildings or structures to be erected or used thereon, the plans
and specifications of buildings, the location, description and kind of the
magazines or tanks to be installed and the location and present use of all
buildings within 100 feet of such premises.
(2013 Code, § 17-113) (Ord. 40, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to a municipal infraction pursuant to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances. Municipal infractions brought upon simple
notice as provided in § l0.999(4) of this code of ordinances for violating any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
 
First offense                 $110 (after 30 days $130)
Second offense                $210 (after 30 days $230)
Third and additional offenses $310 (after 30 days $330)
 
(2013 Code, § 12-86) (Ord. 14825, passed 2-11-2008; Ord. 15084, passed 4-8-
2024)
CHAPTER 92: HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS AND SUBSTANCES
Section
   
92.001   Definitions
   
92.002   Clean-up required; liability for costs
   
92.003   Notifications
   
92.004   Police authority
   
92.005   Liability
 
   
92.999   Penalty
§ 92.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEAN-UP. Actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze,
clean-up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance or
hazardous waste.
   HAZARDOUS CONDITION. Any situation involving the actual, imminent or
probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance or hazardous
waste onto the land, into a water of the state or into the atmosphere that
creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance or mixture of substances that presents a
danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive or flammable or that is an irritant or that
generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means. HAZARDOUS
SUBSTANCE may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6941 et seq., as amended by the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.,
or any toxic pollutant listed under § 307 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, as amended to 1-1-1977, or any hazardous
substance designated under § 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
being 33 U.S.C. § 1321, as amended to 1-1-1977, or any hazardous material
designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.
      (1)   A waste or combination of wastes that, because of its quantity;
concentration; biological degradation; leaching from precipitation; or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, has either of the following
effects:
         (a)   Causes or significantly contributes to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
         (b)   Poses a substantial danger to human health or the environment.
      (2)   Hazardous waste may include, but is not limited to, wastes that are
toxic, corrosive or flammable or irritants, strong sensitizers or explosives.
HAZARDOUS WASTE does not include the following:
         (a)   Agricultural wastes, including manures and crop residues that
are returned to the soil as fertilizers or soil conditioners; and
         (b)   Source, special nuclear or byproduct material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq., as amended to 1-1-
1979.
   PERSON. Individual, corporation, firm, government or governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or
association or any other legal entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person who at any time produces, handles, stores,
uses, transports, refines or disposes of a hazardous substance or hazardous
waste, the release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees,
carriers and any other person in control of a hazardous substance or hazardous
waste when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous
substance or waste or is operating under a lease, contract or other agreement
with the legal owner of the hazardous substance or waste.
   TREATMENT.
      (1)   A method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed
to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of a
hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance non-
hazardous, safe for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage or
to reduce it in volume.
      (2)   TREATMENT includes any activity or processing designed to change
the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous substance to render it
non-hazardous.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-1) (Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987)
Statutory reference:
   “Clean-up” defined, see I.C.A. § 455B.381(1)
   “Hazardous condition” defined, see I.C.A. § 455B.381(4)
   “Hazardous substance” defined, see I.C.A. § 455B.381(5)
   “Person” defined, see I.C.A. § 4.1(20)
§ 92.002 CLEAN-UP REQUIRED; LIABILITY FOR COSTS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a hazardous condition is created so that a hazardous
substance or waste or a constituent of the hazardous waste or substance may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be
remedied by a clean-up, as defined in §
92.001 of this chapter, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable safe condition
and restore the affected area to its state prior to the hazardous condition as
far as practicable. The cost of clean-up shall be borne by the responsible
person.
      (2)   If the responsible person does not cause the clean-up to begin in a
reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident,
the city may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice based on the
character of the hazardous condition, setting a deadline for commencing and
accomplishing the clean-up or the city may proceed to procedure clean-up
services. If the cost of the clean-up is beyond the capacity of the city to
finance, the authorized officer shall report to the City Council and
immediately seek any state or federal funds available for such clean-up.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-2)
   (B)   Under this chapter, the responsible person shall be strictly liable to
the city for all of the following:
      (1)   The reasonable clean-up costs incurred by the city as a result of
the failure of the person to clean up a hazardous substance or waste involved
in a hazardous condition caused by that person, including emergency treatment
of the hazardous condition;
      (2)   The reasonable costs incurred by the city to evacuate people from
the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person; and
      (3)   The reasonable damages to the city for the injury to, destruction
of or loss of city property, including parks and roads, resulting from a
hazardous condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the
injury, destruction or loss.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-3)
(Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.003 NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting or
disposing of a hazardous substance or waste shall notify the city’s Fire
Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible, but
not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or
discovery of the hazardous condition.
      (2)   The Fire Department shall notify the proper state office in the
manner established by the state.
   (B)   Any city employee or any member of a law enforcement agency or any
member of the city’s Fire Department who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Fire Department, which shall notify the appropriate city departments
and the proper state office in the manner established by the state.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-4) (Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987)
§ 92.004 POLICE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   If the circumstances reasonably so require under this chapter, the
Police Chief may:
      (1)   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition; and
      (2)   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to clean-up personnel.
   (B)   No person shall disobey an order of the Police Chief or any other
peace officer/law enforcement officer issued under this section.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-5) (Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.005 LIABILITY.
   The city shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, except if the city is the
responsible person, as defined in §
92.001 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-6) (Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision, section or paragraph of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof be punished by a
penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of the code of ordinances. Each day a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2013 Code, § 14.5-7) (Ord. 14256, passed 5-11-1987; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION; LEISURE
Section
   
93.001   Camping; time limits; permit; fee
   
93.002   Fires
   
93.003   Animals in park or playground
   
93.004   Litter and sewage disposal
   
93.005   Removal of plants prohibited
   
93.006   Hours for public use
   
93.007   Alcoholic beverages
 
   
93.999   Penalty
§ 93.001 CAMPING; TIME LIMITS; PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   General. Camping in all parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds in
the city is prohibited, except as may be permitted by the Director of Parks and
Recreation at designated areas at Riverview Park or other sites for special
events. Camping on private property is similarly prohibited, except on a parcel
permitting agricultural or single-family residential use, provided such camping
shall not exceed 14 cumulative days in any calendar year.
   (B)   Time limit for camping in Riverview Park. Camping in the designated
areas of Riverview Park shall be limited to no more than seven consecutive days
per unit. The Director of Parks and Recreation may extend the limitation under
this section for special events or special circumstances, but in no event shall
the extension exceed seven additional consecutive days. The Director may
shorten the limitation under this section or prohibit camping when camping may
cause damage to the area.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-2)
   (C)   Camping permitted in other parks. The Director of Parks and Recreation
may permit additional camping at other sites in Riverview Park or other
locations for special events, but in no event for a period of longer than three
days.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-3)
   (D)   Camping fee and permit required. Any person who camps in any
designated camping area shall pay a fee to be set by the Director of Parks and
Recreation and shall be issued a permit. The Director, for good cause, may
revoke the camping permit.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-4)
   (E)   Parking of vehicles and camping units. All camping units and motor
vehicles shall be parked in the areas designated in parks as directed by the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-5)
(Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-1981; Ord. 15078, passed 11-13-2023) Penalty, see §  
93.999
§ 93.002 FIRES.
   (A)   No fire shall be permitted in any park, except in a place designated,
and the fire shall be extinguished when the site is vacated.
   (B)   All fires shall be safe and the Director of Parks and Recreation may
order any fire extinguished which, in his or her opinion, is unsafe.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-6) (Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-1981) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.003 ANIMALS IN PARK OR PLAYGROUND.
   (A)   No privately owned animal shall be permitted to run at large in any
park or playground, except dogs in areas specifically designed and set apart as
an off-leash dog park by the city’s Park and Recreation Department, if the dog
and its owner are confined within such an area, and the owner has registered
and followed the policies set for the area.
   (B)   No animal shall be permitted to do any damage to the parks or
playgrounds.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-7) (Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-1981; Ord. 14872, passed 4-26-
2010) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.004 LITTER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No person shall place any waste, refuse, litter or foreign substance
in any park area or receptacle, except for those provided for that purpose.
   (B)   Sewage waste shall not be emptied in any camping area, unless a hook-
up is provided.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-8) (Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-1981) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.005 REMOVAL OF PLANTS PROHIBITED.
   No plants, trees, flowers or other foliage may be removed, damaged,
disturbed or defaced in any city-owned area.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-9) (Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-1981) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.006 HOURS FOR PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   Established. All municipal parks and playgrounds in the city shall be
closed to the public and public use between the hours of 11:30 p.m. through 6:
00 a.m., and no person shall be allowed on the park premises between such
hours, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to city employees whose
official duties may require them to be on the premises during the closed hours,
persons lawfully camped at Riverview Park, or persons on the premises under the
express written authority of the Parks and Recreation Director.
   (C)   Signs. The Parks and Recreation Director shall post suitable signs in
conspicuous locations to advise the public of the closing and opening hours
provided in this section.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-11) (Ord. 13202, passed 9-12-1977; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)    No person shall possess, use or consume beer, wine, or alcoholic
liquor in a public park or nature area, including park roads and parking areas,
except when the following criteria have been met:
      (1)    A public use permit has been issued by the City Clerk; and
      (2)    The premise is covered by an alcohol license issued by the State
of Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division.
   (B)   The following designated areas within park shelters and on cement
patios attached to park shelters:
      (1)   Log Cabin, Riverview Park; Reunion Hall, Riverview Park; Community
Building, Riverview Park; provided, the lessee:
         (a)   Has notified the Park and Recreation Department of the intent to
serve alcoholic beverages at the time of the rental reservation;
         (b)   Has signed a responsibility agreement permitting this use;
         (c)   Shall be available for personal contact by park and recreation
personnel at all times during the rental period; and
         (d)   Shall comply with all state and city codes regarding the use of
alcoholic beverages.
      (2)   Within the campground at Riverview Park; provided, the person is a
registered camper or the guest of a registered camper.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-12) (Ord. 14545, passed 6-24-1996; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017 ; Ord. 15062, passed 7-10-2023 ) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating the provisions of §§
93.001 through
93.007 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21.5-10) (Ord. 13202, passed 9-12-1977; Ord. 14051, passed 8-10-
1981; Ord. 14545, passed 6-24-1996; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 94: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
95.001   Definition
   
95.002   Nuisances enumerated
   
95.003   Other conditions regulated
   
95.004   Nuisances prohibited; authority to abate
   
95.005   Right of entry for inspection
   
95.006   Notice to abate; contents; service
   
95.007   Request for hearing
   
95.008   Abatement in emergency
   
95.009   Abatement by the city; costs
   
95.010   Nuisance vehicles; removal, storage, redemption or disposal
 
   
95.999   Penalty
§ 95.001 DEFINITION.
   A NUISANCE is defined as whatever is injurious to health, indecent or
unreasonably offensive to the sense, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.
(2013 Code, § 21-61) (Ord. 42, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974;
Ord. 14169, passed 11-14-1983; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-2017)
§ 95.002 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   Offensive smells. The erecting, continuing or using any building or
other place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which,
by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property
of individuals or the public;
   (B)   Filth or noisome substance. The causing or suffering any offal, filth
or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice
of others;
   (C)   Impeding passage of navigable river. The obstructing or impeding
without legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or
collection of water;
   (D)   Water pollution. The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (E)   Blocking public or private ways. The obstructing or encumbering by
fences, buildings or otherwise the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places or burying grounds.
   (F)   Houses of ill fame. A house kept for the purpose of prostitution and
lewdness, gambling houses, places resorted to by persons participating in
criminal gang activity prohibited by I.C.A. Ch. 723A, or places resorted to by
persons using controlled substances, as defined in I.C.A. § 124.101, sub. 5, in
violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches
of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others;
   (G)   Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof;
   (H)   Airport air space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including
take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use
or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located;
   (I)   Storing of flammable junk. The depositing or storing of flammable
junk, such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in
such articles within the fire limits of a city, unless in a building of fire-
proof construction;
   (J)   Air pollution. The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash;
   (K)   Weeds, brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush or other
vegetation so as to constitute a health, safety or fire hazard;
   (L)   Cotton bearing or diseased trees. Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees and
all other cotton-bearing poplar trees on private property; trees infected with
Dutch elm disease or knowingly impacted or damaged by the emerald ash borer on
private property;
   (M)   Grass and weeds. Allowing the growth of grass and weeds in excess of
ten inches in height on a parcel or the adjacent public terrace, street
shoulder or street-side ditches. The following exceptions apply:
      (1)   Land in an A-1 Agricultural Reserve District may have grass
exceeding ten inches in height except within 100 feet of any parcel of real
property possessed by another or on any portion of the property within 100 feet
of a street owned or controlled by the city;
      (2)   Parcels which have no occupied structure may have grass exceeding
ten inches in height except within 100 feet of any parcel of real property
possessed by another or on any portion of the property within 100 feet of a
street owned or controlled by the city;
      (3)   Recognized growing of agricultural products or the city flood
control system;
      (4)   Woody perennials, purposefully planted, shall be permitted if they
are planted and maintained in compliance with this code;
      (5)   Prairie grass areas, wild flower planting areas, natural reserve
and preserve areas, urban wood lots, wildlife refuge and conservation areas,
wetlands and natural water ways, all as recognized and identified by a
governmental agency or a respected private conservation organization; and
      (6)   Publicly-owned open spaces, no mow meadows, and commercial
developments maintaining prairie and pollinator habitat.
   (N)   Snow and ice accumulations. Snow and ice accumulations on sidewalks
not removed within 24 hours after the precipitation has stopped;
   (O)   Containers. Refrigerators and freezers which are not stored under a
roofed enclosure and which have doors that latched, lock or otherwise secure
the door in a closed position;
   (P)   Water service deficiency. Any break or leak in the water service link
between the city water main and any house or other building, when the break or
leak results in the escape of such volume of water as to constitute a hazard to
street, sidewalk or terrace construction or as to interfere with the normal use
thereof;
   (Q)   Stables. The keeping or stabling of horses, mules or asses so as to
cause obnoxious odors, noise, hazard, annoyances or danger because of failure
of confinement;
   (R)   Stagnant water. The permitting of water to accumulate and stand until
stagnant or upon any privately owned lot;
   (S)   Junk, refuse, garbage. The permitting of junk, refuse, garbage or
filth to accumulate on any lot or parcel;
   (T)   Graffiti. All real property defaced by graffiti vandalism which is
visible to public view;
   (U)   Junk or abandoned vehicles. The keeping or storing of a junk vehicle
or salvage vehicle on public property or private property not in an enclosed
area. A JUNK OR SALVAGE VEHICLE is defined as having one or more of the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Unlicensed: any vehicle not licensed for the current year as
provided by law;
      (2)   Broken glass: any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken
windshield or any other broken glass;
      (3)   Broken or loose parts: any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a
broken or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, trunk top or
tailpipe;
      (4)   Missing engine or wheels: any vehicle which is lacking an engine or
one or more wheels or other structural parts which renders such vehicle totally
inoperable;
      (5)   Habitat for animals or insects: any vehicle or part of a vehicle
which has become a habitat for rats, mice or snakes or any other vermin or
insects;
      (6)   Defective or obsolete condition: any vehicle or part of a vehicle
which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety; and
      (7)   Inoperable condition: any vehicle that is not capable of moving in
both forward and reverse gears.
   (V)   Certain stopped or parked vehicles. Vehicles parked in a street, alley
or highway for more than 24 consecutive hours, or found standing, parked or
stopped in front of a theater, auditorium or hotel, on a sidewalk, in front of
a public or private driveway or on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street. This shall not apply to the following
situations:
      (1)   A vehicle owned by a person serving in the United States armed
services; and
      (2)   Motor vehicle junkyards that are duly licensed under provisions of
this code or other city ordinances.
   (W)   Dangerous or unsafe building or structure. A DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE shall mean any structure or building meeting any or all
of the following conditions or defects provided that such conditions or defect
exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or
its occupants are endangered whenever:
      (1)   Any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or
to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property;
      (2)   Any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such
an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
      (3)   The building or structure or any portion thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundations; or any other cause is likely to partially or completely collapse;
      (4)   For any reason the building or structure or any portion thereof is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (5)   The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
      (6)   The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become
an attractive nuisance to children or a harbor for vagrants, criminals or
immoral persons or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing unlawful or immoral acts;
      (7)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities or otherwise is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary,
unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is likely to cause
sickness or disease;
      (8)   Any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire
resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating
apparatus or other cause is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard;
and/or
      (9)   Any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or any building or
structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
(2013 Code, § 21-62) (Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-2017)
§ 95.003 OTHER CONDITIONS REGULATED.
   The following actions are required and may also be abated in the manner
provided in this chapter:
   (A)   The removal of diseased trees or dead wood, but not diseased trees and
dead wood outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public street (see § 156.025 of this code of ordinances);
   (B)   The numbering of buildings (see §§
151.070 through
151.079 of this code of ordinances);
   (C)   The repair or replacement of broken and defective sidewalks (see §
57.043 of this code of ordinances);
   (D)   The connection to public drainage systems from abutting property when
necessary for public health or safety as set out in I.C.A. § 364.12; and
   (E)   The connection to public sewer systems from abutting property, and the
installation of sanitary toilet facilities and removal of other toilet
facilities on such property as set out in I.C.A. § 364.12
(2013 Code, § 21-63) (Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-
2017)
§ 95.004 NUISANCES PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY TO ABATE.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 21-64) (Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-
2017) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.005 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   Right of entry and administrative search warrants. Whenever necessary
to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or whenever there is reasonable
cause to believe there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon
any premises or real estate within the jurisdiction of the city, a city
official, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter the building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the official by this code of ordinances. Except in emergency
situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has
otherwise been obtained, the city official shall give the owner and/or
occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24-hours’ written
notice of the official’s intention to inspect.
   (B)   Warrants. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure
or property is withheld by any person having the lawful right to exclude, the
city official having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply
to the state’s District Court in and for the county, pursuant to I.C.A. §
808.14, for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant or
any other person having charge, care or control of any dwelling, unit, rooming
unit, structure, building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation
of a search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer, designee
or employee.
(2013 Code, § 21-65) (Ord. 42, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974;
Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-2017)
§ 95.006 NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS; SERVICE.
   (A)   Required. Whenever a city official finds that a nuisance exists, such
official shall cause to be served upon the property owner as shown by the
records of the County Auditor and any other party in possession of the property
a written notice to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
If a junk or abandoned vehicle is part of the nuisance to be abated, the
registered owner of the vehicle must also be notified.
(2013 Code, § 21-66)
   (B)   Contents of notice to abate. The notice to abate served under this
subchapter shall contain the following:
      (1)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance;
      (3)   A statement of the necessary act to abate the nuisance;
      (4)   A stated reasonable time within which to complete the abatement;
and
      (5)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for hearing is made within the period prescribed for the abatement, the
city will abate the nuisance and assess the costs against the owner of the
property.
(2013 Code, § 21-67)
   (C)   Service of notice to abate.
      (1)   The notice to abate shall be served either by:
         (a)   Personal delivery;
         (b)   Sending a copy of the notice by certified United States mail; or
         (c)   Posting the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises
where the nuisance exists.
      (2)   Service of the notice by personal delivery may be completed by any
city official.
(2013 Code, § 21-68)
(Ord. 42, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-
13-2017)
§ 95.007 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Any person served with a notice to abate a nuisance shall be
entitled to a hearing before the City Administrator as to whether a nuisance
exists.
      (2)   A request for such hearing must be made in writing and delivered to
the City Administrator within the time stated in the notice for the abatement
of the nuisance.
      (3)   If such request is not made within the time provided in this
section, it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and the
nuisance shall be abated as ordered.
   (B)   If the City Administrator finds that a nuisance exists, the abatement
of the nuisance shall still occur with the discretion of the City Administrator
as to whether additional time for abatement shall be allowed.
(2013 Code, § 21-69) (Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-
2017)
§ 95.008 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   If it is determined that an emergency exists because of the continuing
maintenance of a nuisance, the city may perform any action which would be
required under this subchapter without prior notice.
   (B)   A determination may be made as to whether a nuisance exists based on
the following criteria:
      (1)   Inability to contact the property owner by normal efforts;
      (2)   The seriousness of the violation due to health hazards or physical
hazards to a private individual or to the public as determined by a city
official; and
      (3)   Frequency of violations of a property owner or a tenant when the
property owner or a tenant has received more than two nuisance violation
notifications within one calendar year. This determination is in effect for one
calendar year beginning on the date of the most recent nuisance violation
notification.
(2013 Code, § 21-70) (Ord. 42, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974;
Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-2017)
§ 95.009 ABATEMENT BY THE CITY; COSTS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred.
      (2)   The itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.
(2013 Code, § 21-71)
   (B)   Collection of costs of abatement. The City Clerk shall mail a
statement of the total expense incurred to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate a nuisance under this chapter. If the amount shown
on the statement has not been paid within 30 days, the costs of the abatement
shall be certified to the County Treasurer, and shall then be collected with
and in the same manner as general property taxes pursuant to I.C.A. Ch. 384.
(2013 Code, § 21-72)
(Ord. 42, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-
13-2017)
§ 95.010 NUISANCE VEHICLES; REMOVAL, STORAGE, REDEMPTION OR DISPOSAL.
   When a vehicle on public or private property is found to be a nuisance, the
vehicle may be removed and stored upon the premises secured by the city for
such storage purposes. The vehicle shall remain so stored upon said property
for a period of 14 days. At the end of such time, the vehicle shall be disposed
of by the city unless previously claimed by the owner. The city shall charge a
reasonable fee for the handling and storage of the vehicle to an owner claiming
a vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 21-74) (Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 14959, passed 3-13-
2017)
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   In lieu of the foregoing abatement procedures, the city may elect to
treat an unabated nuisance as a violation of this chapter, punishable as
provided in §
10.999(B) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-73)
   (B)   In addition, the creation or maintenance of a nuisance is a municipal
infraction, as defined by §
10.999(B) of this chapter, and is punishable by a civil penalty of not more
than $750 for the first offense and not to exceed $1,000 for each repeat
offense.
(2013 Code, § 21-64)
(Ord. 12447, passed 4-11-1974; Ord. 13162, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 14959, passed
3-13-2017)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSES AND PERMITS
      
111.   (RESERVED)
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
      
114.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
115.   GAS AND PLUMBING
      
116.   HOTELS
      
117.   SECONDHAND DEALERS, ITINERANT DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
      
118.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
119.   PUBLIC SALES
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section
   
110.001   Review and revocation for all licenses and permits issued by the city
   
110.002   License required to carry on business; exceptions
   
110.003   Appeal of license or permit denial
   
110.004   Licenses not assignable
   
110.005   License issuance
   
110.006   Location of work restricted by licenses
   
110.007   Contents of licenses
 
   
110.999   Penalty
§ 110.001 REVIEW AND REVOCATION PROCEDURE FOR ALL LICENSES AND PERMITS ISSUED
BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Application of section. This section is applicable to all licenses or
permits issued by the city, regardless of their nature or subject matter,
unless provision is established for any such license review or revocation.
   (B)   Review or revocation. The city may, after following the established
procedures in this section, review or revoke any license or permit previously
issued by the city. A review may include imposing reasonable restrictions upon
the holder of the permit or license.
   (C)   Scheduling of hearing; notice to license or permit holder. Any license
or permit issued by the city may be reviewed by the City Council on its own
motion. Whenever the Council votes to so review any such license or permit, it
shall, at that time, set a time, date and place of the review and the holder of
the license or permit shall be notified of this hearing by the City Clerk
mailing, by ordinary mail, a notice of the hearing to the license or permit
holder at the last known address therefor. The notice shall state that the City
Council has voted to review the permit and that upon review the City Council
has the authority pursuant to this section to revoke the license or permit or
review the license or permit and impose such additional restrictions thereon as
are reasonable or allowed by law and that the license or permit holder must
then appear and offer any comments or defenses he or she has to the action of
the Council. The Council shall afford the license or permit holder adequate
time to offer his or her relevant proofs. In addition, the notice may recite a
brief summary of the alleged facts, and all appropriate matters may be
considered at the hearing, even though not known when the notice is prepared
and mailed. This notice shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the last known
address of the license or permit holder by ordinary mail, with sufficient
postage attached thereto to guarantee delivery, all at least ten days prior to
the hearing date.
   (D)   Decision of Council concerning review. Any decision of the City
Council to revoke or to review and further restrict any license or permit shall
be made only after a majority vote of the Council following the hearing. If
additional restrictions are imposed, an amended permit shall be issued with
these restrictions noted thereon and delivered to the permit or license holder
either personally or by ordinary mail addressed to the last known address of
the permit or license holder with sufficient postage attached thereto to
guarantee delivery. These additional restrictions shall be effective upon
receipt of the amended permit.
   (E)   Application to existing permit and license holders. This section
applies to all holders of city permits and licenses, regardless of when issued.
(2013 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. 14159, passed 6-27-1983)
§ 110.002 LICENSE REQUIRED TO CARRY ON BUSINESS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall within the city engage in, transact, carry on or do or
cause to be done in public with a profit motivation, any vocation, trade,
business, profession, exhibition, entertainment, game or act described in this
chapter within the city without having paid the required license fee and
without having first obtained a license.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to local service clubs or persons selling
by wholesale or by the distribution of samples, or by pre-appointment, or to
lecturers on scientific, historical or literary subjects, or to sales made by
any person authorized by law to sell real or personal property, such as
realtors and auctioneers.
   (C)   The City Council, taking into consideration the nature of the business
or licensed activity and all other circumstances bearing on the business
activity, shall fix the license fee by resolution so that all license fees
shall be reasonable and uniform under like conditions.
(2013 Code, § 17-1.1) (Ord. 14733, passed 1-12-2004; Ord. 14884, passed 3-14-
2011; Ord. 14886, passed 6-27-2011)
§ 110.003 APPEAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT DENIAL.
   (A)   This section is applicable to all city licenses or permits issued by a
city officer or employee and not otherwise approved by the City Council, unless
a different appeal provision is established by ordinance or other law for any
such license or permit denied.
   (B)   Upon denial of a city license or permit issued by a city officer or
employee, the applicant shall have seven calendar days to request a hearing on
the denial before the City Council. The request, if made, shall be submitted in
writing to the City Clerk. Upon timely receipt of the written request for a
hearing, such hearing shall be scheduled for the next following City Council
meeting. At such hearing, the City Council may reverse or affirm the denial of
the license or permit.
(2013 Code, § 17-1.2) (Ord. 29, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 110.004 LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE.
   No license provided for in this chapter shall be assignable or transferable,
except with the consent of the Mayor.
(2013 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. 29, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 110.005 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   Unless otherwise provided, any person desiring a license from the city for
any of the purposes referred to in this chapter shall make application
therefore to the City Clerk on a blank furnished for that purpose and, upon
payment of the license fee together with a fee of $1, the City Clerk shall
issue to such person the proper license. The Mayor may revoke the license
where, in his or her judgment, the proposed exhibition, amusement or
entertainment will be obscene under state law.
(2013 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 29, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 110.006 LOCATION OF WORK RESTRICTED BY LICENSES.
   All licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
specify the particular place in the city where the business, entertainment or
affair thereby licensed is to be performed or carried on, to which location the
licensee must confine himself or herself under penalty of forfeiture of his or
her license unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Mayor. However, this
section shall not apply to peddlers, plumbers, excavators, scavengers,
billposters, auctioneers with a general license, or any other licensee whose
duties require him or her to go from place to place within the city in
pursuance of his or her work and duties under his or her license.
(2013 Code, § 17-4)
§ 110.007 CONTENTS OF LICENSES.
   Each license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be numbered consecutively, shall show the date of issuance thereof, and shall
specify the person to whom issued, the purpose for which issued, and shall
describe the place where the business is to be carried on, the time of its
expiration, the amount paid for the license and shall be signed by the Mayor.
(2013 Code, § 17-5)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the sections of this chapter or proceeding in a
manner different from or contrary to the mode and procedure stated in this
chapter or failing or refusing to procure a license when required to do so by
the provisions of this chapter or to do any of the acts for which a license is
required in this chapter without such license shall be punished in accordance
with §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. The violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter on separate and distinct days shall each be considered a separate
and distinct offense. The violation by the licensee or his or her employees of
any of the provisions of this chapter may be sufficient cause upon conviction
for revocation of the license by the Mayor or Council. The penalties provided
in this section are in addition to any fees, charges, forfeitures or
liabilities otherwise imposed.
(2013 Code, § 17-6)
CHAPTER 111: (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   References to state law
   
112.002   Marshalltown Memorial Coliseum; sale and consumption
   
112.003   Minors; selling or furnishing
   
112.004   Alcohol prohibited in certain commercial establishments
Permits Generally
   
112.015   License or permit required
   
112.016   General prohibition
   
112.017   Investigation
   
112.018   Action by Council
   
112.019   Permit revocation
   
112.020   Distribution of funds
   
112.021   Use of certain words prohibited on premises
   
112.022   Closing hours
   
112.023   Class B permit for use on fairgrounds; issuance; transferability
Police Services
   
112.035   Purpose
   
112.036   Definitions
   
112.037   Enforcement services at large parties, gatherings or events
   
112.038   Unsupervised consumption of alcohol by minor at private property
   
112.039   Serving alcohol and/or controlled substances to minors
   
112.040   Enforcement services fee
   
112.041   Appeals
   
112.042   Reservation of legal options
 
   
112.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 REFERENCES TO STATE LAW.
   The city has the ability to issue, suspend and revoke licenses and permits
as permitted under I.C.A. Ch. 123. Where state law defines words and phrases
used in this chapter, such definitions shall apply to their use in this chapter
and are adopted by reference. Where “Administrator” is used in I.C.A. Ch. 123,
for definitional purposes, shall mean the “City Council of the City of
Marshalltown, Iowa”.
(2013 Code, § 5-1)
§ 112.002 MARSHALLTOWN MEMORIAL COLISEUM; SALE AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHARITABLE EVENT. An activity sponsored by an organization or person
whose purpose is to collect funds for a charitable cause.
      NON-PROFIT EVENT. An activity sponsored by an organization or person
whose receipts from the activity are not intended nor do they in fact exceed
expenses. No person or organization shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages in
the Marshalltown Memorial Coliseum unless the person or organization is
sponsoring a NON-PROFIT OR CHARITABLE EVENT.
   (B)   All persons or organizations selling or serving alcoholic beverages at
the Marshalltown Memorial Coliseum shall have the appropriate liquor license
and shall complete all required application forms for use of the Marshalltown
Memorial Coliseum.
(2013 Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 14449, passed 12-20-1993) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.003 MINORS; SELLING OR FURNISHING.
   (A)   Selling or furnishing to minors. No person shall knowingly sell, give,
supply or offer any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to any person under the
age of 21.
(2013 Code, § 5-101)
   (B)   Minors prohibited on certain premises.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         GUARDIAN. An individual who has been duly appointed as the guardian of
a minor pursuant to Iowa Probate Code §§ 633.552 through 633.565 and any future
amendments thereto.
         MINOR. Any person who has not attained the lawful age for the
purchase, consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage, including beer,
wine or liquor, under state laws.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) below, it shall be unlawful
for the holder of a license or permit issued pursuant to the state’s Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, I.C.A. §§ 123.1 et seq., for premises where more than 50%
of the business of the business conducted is the sale or dispensing of
alcoholic beverages, and for every person employed with respect to such
premises, to knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable measures to prevent
entry into such premises of any and all minors. Either the Chief of Police or
the City Administrator may request, upon ten days’ notice, a verified statement
from a certified public accountant which establishes that more than 50% of the
licensee’s or permittee’s gross sales are from the sale of goods or services
other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer, which shall not
include income from cover charges, entertainment fees, drink mixes, non-
alcoholic beverages or any goods or services not sold directly on the
licensee’s or permittee’s premises. In addition, any licensee or permittee may
tender such a verified statement, at any time, so as to justify his or her
lawful conduct of business. Failure to provide the verified statement as
requested shall be considered a violation of this section, which may result in
a revocation of all licensee permits issued by the city.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) below, it shall be unlawful
for a minor to go onto the premises described in division (B)(2) above.
      (4)   The provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above shall not apply
when:
         (a)   The minor is an employee of the license or permit holder and
performing scheduled duties or is performing contracted services with respect
to such premises;
         (b)   The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who is
not a minor;
         (c)   The minor is on the premises during a time that the license or
permit holder has, after written notice to the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, suspended the dispensing of alcoholic beverages on the premises or on
a clearly delineated part of the premises operating under a differentiating
trade name. It shall be the duty of the license or permit holder allowing
minors onto the licensed premises and all employees of the licensed premises to
prevent minors from purchasing, possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages
thereon. Police officers shall be immediately admitted to the premises at any
time. Failure to fulfill the duties set forth in this division (B)(4)(c) shall
be a violation of this section; or
         (d)   The licensee or permit holder has provided a separate room in
which no alcoholic beverages may be served, dispensed, possessed or found. In
such room minors may be allowed through an entrance that does not involve
passage through any area where such alcoholic beverages are served, dispensed,
possessed or found.
(2013 Code, § 5-102)
   (C)   Special event exception. Notwithstanding any provision of division (B)
above, the licensee or permittee may apply for a special event exception from
the Chief of Police and City Administrator that shall allow the holder to
provide entertainment to persons under legal age, subject to the following.
      (1)   A licensee or permittee may qualify for a special event exception
when an application is submitted to the Chief of Police or his or her designee
at least seven business days prior to the proposed special event. Such
application shall include the name and address of the licensed or permitted
establishment, the type of event for which an exception is applied, the
proposed date for the event and the time of the event.
      (2)   All alcoholic liquor, wine or beer shall be removed or stored so
that it is not available for sale or consumption during the period of the
special event.
      (3)   A special event exception shall be valid through the date of the
special event or for the duration of the alcoholic liquor control license, wine
or beer permit, whichever is first in time.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the terms of this special event exception
shall result in the revocation or denial of such an exception application for
one year.
      (5)   The licensee or permittee shall post a current exception
certificate in a conspicuous place in the view of patrons of the licensed or
permitted establishment.
(2013 Code, § 5-103)
   (D)   Posting of notices prohibiting minors. All license or permit holders
shall post a conspicuous notice at all entrances notifying all those who enter
that minors are prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 5-104)
   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above shall
not apply to the holder of the license or permit at the Marshalltown Softball
Complex and any event held outdoors where the premises are not enclosed by a
structure, fence, tent or similar enclosure.
(2013 Code, § 5-105)
(Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 10440, passed 7-11-1963; Ord. 14293, passed 7-
10-1989; Ord. 14527, passed 3-11-1996; Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011) Penalty,
see §
112.999
Statutory reference:
   Supplying alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to person under legal age, see
I.C.A. § 123.49(2)h
§ 112.004 ALCOHOL PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any owner, manager, officer, agent, employee or person in
charge of any commercial establishment within the city, to allow the possession
of beer, wine or liquor, for on-site consumption, in connection with any show,
performance or other presentation upon the premises, which in whole or in part,
presents or depicts nudity or sexual conduct or any simulation thereof. As used
in this section, NUDITY means the showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the darkened area surrounding the nipple.
(2013 Code, § 5-151) (Ord. 14799, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-
2011) Penalty, see §
112.999
PERMITS GENERALLY
§ 112.015 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of the
I.C.A. Ch. 123. All applications for new licenses or permits or renewal of
licenses or permits must be filed in the City Clerk’s office at least 30 days
prior to the intended opening date or expiration date. In the event the
application is filed less than 30 days prior to the intended opening date or
expiration date, the license or permit may not be approved by the City Council
prior to the date and the licensee will not be able to serve alcoholic
beverages.
(2013 Code, § 5-26) (Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
112.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 123.122
§ 112.016 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in the I.A.C. Ch. 123, and
a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
Penalty, see §
112.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 123.2, 123.39 and 123.50
§ 112.017 INVESTIGATION.
   The City Council shall make, or cause to be made, a thorough investigation
to determine the fitness of the applicant as required by I.A.C. Ch. 123 and the
truth of the statements made in and accompanying the application. The Council
shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any premises which
does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the city.
(2013 Code, §§ 5-26 and 5-34) (Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 123.30
§ 112.018 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the liquor
control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its approval or
disapproval on each application. Thereafter, the application, necessary fee and
bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of
the State Department of Commerce for further action as is provided by law.
(2013 Code, § 5-34) (Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 123.32(2)
§ 112.019 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The City Council may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke any permit issued
under the terms of this chapter as provided by state law.
(2013 Code, § 5-42)
Statutory reference:
   Effect of revocation, see I.C.A. § 123.40
   Suspension or revocation of beer permit, see I.C.A. § 123.39
§ 112.020 DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
   All fees collected under this subchapter shall be retained by the city and
allocated to its General Fund.
(2013 Code, § 5-44) (Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950)
Statutory reference:
   Distribution of funds, see I.C.A. § 123.143
§ 112.021 USE OF CERTAIN WORDS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit to exhibit or display or
permit to be exhibited or displayed on the premises any sign or poster
containing the words “bar”, “barroom”, “saloon” or words of like import.
(2013 Code, § 5-45) (Ord. 47, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 10440, passed 7-11-1963)
Penalty, see §
112.999
Statutory reference:
   Advertisement for alcoholic liquor or beer, see I.C.A. § 123.51
§ 112.022 CLOSING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or deliver any
alcoholic beverage, wine or beer to any person between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday. Holders of Sunday sales permit may sell or
dispense alcoholic liquor or beer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and
2:00 a.m. on the following Monday.
(2013 Code, § 5-47) Penalty, see §
112.999
Statutory reference:
   Hours when sale or dispensing illegal, see I.C.A. § 123.49(2)b
§ 112.023 CLASS B PERMIT FOR USE ON FAIRGROUNDS; ISSUANCE; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   A Class B beer permit may be issued by the City Council for use by the
holder of such permit on the fairgrounds of the Central Iowa Fair Association.
(2013 Code, § 5-51)
   (B)   The permit required by division (A) above shall not be used in any
other location or place and shall not be transferred from one location to
another.
(2013 Code, § 5-53)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispense beer at the
Central Iowa Fair Association grounds, except in compliance with this
subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 5-54)
(Ord. 48, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
112.999
POLICE SERVICES
§ 112.035 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The control of large parties, gatherings or events on private property
is necessary when such continued activity is determined to be a threat to the
peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Police officers have been required to make repeated return calls to
the location of a party, gathering or event in order to disperse uncooperative
participants, which constitutes a drain of manpower and resources, often
depriving other areas of the city of necessary levels of police protection.
   (C)   All of these circumstances create a significant hazard to the safety
of the police officers and to the public in general and constitutes a public
nuisance.
   (D)   The consumption of alcohol and illegal drugs by minors is harmful to
the health, safety and welfare of the community and imposing both criminal and
financial liability on adults permitting such conduct is an effective means to
prevent consumption of alcohol and illegal drugs by minors.
(2013 Code, § 5-125) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains 0.5% or
more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone
or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES or ILLEGAL DRUGS. All narcotics or drugs, the
possession which is illegal under the laws of the state, as defined under the
Penal Code, Health and Safety Code and related statutes.
   ENFORCEMENT SERVICES. The salaries and benefits of police officers or other
code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding
to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering or event and the administrative
costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to
injured police officers or other code enforcement personnel; and the cost of
repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and the cost arising from the
use of any damaged equipment in responding to or remaining at the party,
gathering or event.
   JUVENILE. Any person under 18 years of age.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 21 years of age.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of
another person.
   PARTY, GATHERING or EVENT. A group of persons who have assembled or are
assembling for a party, social occasion or social activity.
   PERSON(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EVENT. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The person(s) who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of
the premises where the party, gathering or event takes place;
      (2)   The person(s) in charge of the premises; or
      (3)   The person(s) who organized the event. If a person responsible for
the event is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be
jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for enforcement services
pursuant to this chapter.
   SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENT. The assignment of police officers and services
to a location of a party, gathering or event that violates the law.
(2013 Code, § 5-126) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.037 ENFORCEMENT SERVICES AT LARGE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS.
   When a large party, gathering or event occurs on private property and any
police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) responsible for the
event shall be liable jointly and severally for the cost of providing such
enforcement services as may be necessary to control the threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare, including the actual cost of
enforcement services provided during the response as a result of conduct
violating this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 5-127) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.038 UNSUPERVISED CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY MINOR AT PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Except as permitted by state law, no minor shall consume in any public place
or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage and/or controlled
substance, or consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic
beverage and/or controlled substance.
(2013 Code, § 5-128) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.039 SERVING ALCOHOL AND/OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES TO MINORS.
   (A)   Except as permitted by Iowa Code, no person shall permit, allow or
host a party, gathering or event at his or her place of residence or other
private property, place or premises under his or her control where three or
more persons are present and alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs are being
consumed by any minor.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcohol
which occurs exclusively between a minor child and his or her parent or legal
guardian.
(2013 Code, § 5-129) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.040 ENFORCEMENT SERVICES FEE.
   (A)   The enforcement services fee shall include the actual reasonable cost
of providing personnel and equipment. Such fee is deemed to be supplementary to
all other applicable fines and penalties, and the city may seek reimbursement
for actual costs through any available legal remedies or procedures.
   (B)   The amount of such fee charged shall be deemed a debt owed to the city
by the person or persons receiving such services and, if minors, their parents
or guardians, recoverable in an action brought in the name of the city for
recovery of such amount, plus court costs and including the city’s reasonable
attorney fees.
(2013 Code, § 5-130) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.041 APPEALS.
   Any individual aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police to assess
any penalty under the provisions of this subchapter may request an
administrative hearing before a hearing officer designated by the City
Administrator by filing a written notice with the City Clerk’s office within
ten days of the violation notice.
(2013 Code, § 5-131) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.042 RESERVATION OF LEGAL OPTIONS.
   The city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of
enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure
provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or
law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the statutory authority
of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense
arising out of conduct regulated by this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 5-132) (Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A violation of §
112.038 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided
in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 5-128)
   (C)   A violation of §
112.039 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided
in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 5-129)
(Ord. 14889, passed 9-26-2011)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
Section
   
113.001   Permit required
   
113.002   Application for permit
   
113.003   Circuses or menageries
   
113.004   Carnivals
 
   
113.999   Penalty
§ 113.001 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or legal entity, directly
or indirectly, to stage, manage, promote or put on any circus, menagerie, or
carnival without first making application to the City Clerk and obtaining a
permit as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 15031, passed 12-13-2021) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.002 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person, corporation, or legal entity desiring to hold an event
described in §
113.001 must make application to the City Clerk for a permit. Such application
must include the insurance requirements as set out in §
10.009 of the Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   No permit holder shall assign, sell or allow others to use such permit
or to conduct business thereunder.
(Ord. 15031, passed 12-13-2021) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.003 CIRCUSES OR MENAGERIES.
   Any combination of shows or exhibitions under one management commonly known
as a "circus or menagerie". Council shall determine the license fee by
resolution for circuses or menageries.
(Ord. 15031, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 113.004 CARNIVALS.
   Any combination of shows or exhibitions under one management, commonly known
as a "carnival". Council shall determine the license fee by resolution for
carnivals.
(Ord. 15031, passed 12-13-2021)
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, corporation, or legal entity violating any section of this
chapter shall be subject to the provisions in §
10.999 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 15031, passed 12-13-2021)
CHAPTER 114: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
114.001   Definitions
   
114.002   Franchise required
   
114.003   Action of parties
   
114.004   Equal protection
   
114.005   Notices
   
114.006   Descriptive headings
   
114.007   Severability
Grant of Franchise
   
114.020   Purpose
   
114.021   Length of franchise
   
114.022   Significance of franchise
   
114.023   Rights reserved to grantor
   
114.024   Application for franchise
   
114.025   Acceptance and effective date of franchise
Standards of Service
   
114.040   Geographical coverage
   
114.041   Conditions of street occupancy
   
114.042   Restoration of public ways
   
114.043   Relocation at request of franchising authority
   
114.044   Safety requirements
   
114.045   Underground and aboveground installation requirements
   
114.046   Extension of service
   
114.047   Service to public buildings
   
114.048   Customer service standards; FCC model
   
114.049   Local office
   
114.050   Deposits
   
114.051   Subscribers’ antennas
   
114.052   Disconnection
   
114.053   Reconnections
   
114.054   Downgrades
   
114.055   Termination of service
   
114.056   Notification to grantor of service interruptions
   
114.057   Subscriber credit for service interruptions
   
114.058   Service repair standards
   
114.059   Refunds to subscribers
   
114.060   Channel card
   
114.061   Customer handbook
   
114.062   Subscriber privacy
   
114.063   Discriminatory or preferential practices
   
114.064   Identification of employees
System Design and Equipment Requirements
   
114.075   Emergency use
   
114.076   Switching device
   
114.077   Parental control devices
   
114.078   Education and government channels
   
114.079   Access equipment and facilities fees
   
114.080   Leased access channels
   
114.081   Non-subscriber interference
   
114.082   Additional services
   
114.083   Technical standards
   
114.084   Filing of maps
Franchising Authority
   
114.095   Franchise fee
   
114.096   Rates and charges
   
114.097   Franchise renewal
   
114.098   Conditions of sale
   
114.099   Transfer of franchise
   
114.100   Right of inspection of construction
   
114.101   New developments
Compliance and Monitoring
   
114.115   Testing for compliance
   
114.116   Books and records
   
114.117   Communications with regulatory agencies
   
114.118   Complaint records
   
114.119   City’s role in complaints
   
114.120   Performance testing
   
114.121   Review sessions
   
114.122   Regulatory responsibility
   
114.123   Annual report
Insurance and Indemnification
   
114.135   Indemnification
   
114.136   Insurance coverage and notifications
   
114.137   Insurance for contractors and subcontractors
   
114.138   Foreclosure
   
114.139   Receivership
   
114.140   Continuity of service
   
114.141   Franchise processing costs
   
114.142   Taxes
Enforcement and Termination of Franchise
   
114.155   Notice of violation
   
114.156   Grantee’s right to cure or respond
   
114.157   Public hearing
   
114.158   Enforcement
   
114.159   Closing streets
   
114.160   Reservation of rights
   
114.161   Impossibility of performance
   
114.162   Termination of franchise
   
114.163   Security fund
   
114.164   Faithful performance bond
 
   
114.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC CABLE. The lowest priced tier of service that includes the
retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act
of 1996, as amended.
   CABLE OPERATOR. The same as the definition used in the Cable Act, as
amended.
   CABLE SERVICE. The same as the definition used in the Cable Act, as amended.
   CABLE SYSTEM. The same as the definition used in the Cable Act, as amended.
   CITY. The City of Marshalltown and the geographical area within the
corporate boundaries of the city.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity
thereto.
   FRANCHISE. The initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise,
permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which
authorizes construction and operation of the cable system.
   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY or GRANTOR. The City Council or the lawful successor,
transferee or assignee thereof.
   GRANTEE. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity granted a franchise
under this chapter or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.
   GROSS REVENUES. Any and all revenue received by the grantee from the
operation of the cable system in the service area, to provide cable services;
provided, however, that, such phrase shall not include any fees or franchise
fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber
thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the
grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
   HEAD-END. The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower,
building and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at the
starting point of a cable system.
   HOUSE DROP. A cable that connects each building or home to the nearest
feeder line of the cable network.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar businesses in
the community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, NORMAL BUSINESS
HOURS shall include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions that are within the
control of the grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions, which are ordinarily within the control of the
grantee, include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance
or upgrade of the cable system.
   OUTLET. The point of connection of the cable or wire to a television.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation or governmental entity.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property, real, personal or mixed, owned by a private
person, including property owned by a public utility not owned or operated by
the city.
   PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE. All property, real, personal or mixed, owned or
used by the grantee, however arising from or related to or connected with the
franchise.
   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL. Channel capacity designated for public use.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. All property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used by the
city, including property owned or used by a public utility owned or operated by
the city.
   PUBLIC WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land, path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or other public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility
strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or
permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon held by the franchising
authority in the service area which shall entitle the franchising authority and
the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating,
repairing and maintaining the system. The term PUBLIC WAY shall also mean any
easement held by the franchising authority within the service area for the
purpose of public travel or for utility or public service use dedicated for
compatible uses and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall
within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the
grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the
grantee’s cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may
be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
   SERVICE AREA. The present municipal boundaries of the franchising authority.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of video or audio on one or more channels.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by a
cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable operator.
   SHALL and WILL. The acts referred to are mandatory; the term MAY is
permissive.
   SUBSCRIBER. A person or user of the system who lawfully receives
communications and other services therefrom with the grantee’s express
permission.
(2013 Code, § 8-1.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.002 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   Subject to federal and state law, no person, firm, company, corporation or
association shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any public
street in the city or within any other public property of the city any
equipment or facilities for the distribution of television signals over a cable
system to any subscriber, unless a franchise authorizing the use of the streets
or properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.
(2013 Code, § 8-1.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.003 ACTION OF PARTIES.
   In any action by the franchising authority or the grantee that is mandated
or permitted under the terms of this chapter, such party shall act in a
reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, when any approval or
consent is required under the terms of this chapter, such approval or consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(2013 Code, § 8-9.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.004 EQUAL PROTECTION.
   If the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit or license of
any kind with any other person or entity other than the grantee to enter into
the franchising authority’s streets and public ways for the purpose of
constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part
of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably
comparable to those contained in this chapter in order that one operator not be
granted an unfair competitive advantage over another and to provide all parties
equal protection under the law.
(2013 Code, § 8-9.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.005 NOTICES.
   Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response required by this chapter or a cable franchise to be served upon the
franchising authority or the grantee shall be in writing and shall be deemed to
have been duly given to the required party five business days after having been
posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand-
delivered or sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid.
(2013 Code, § 8-9.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.006 DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS.
   The captions to sections contained in this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of the text in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-9.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.007 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, sentence, division, term or provision of this chapter is
determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having
jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity
of any other section, sentence, division, term or provision of this chapter,
all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise
or any renewal thereof. If the Federal Communications Commission declares any
section invalid, the franchising authority and the grantee may renegotiate such
section.
(2013 Code, § 8-9.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
GRANT OF FRANCHISE
§ 114.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify requirements for the
establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system in the
city pursuant to I.C.A. Ch. 364 and applicable federal law. If a new applicant
submits a proposal acceptable to the grantor, meets the requirements of this
chapter and those of the Federal Communications Commission, and receives a
majority of the votes cast in a franchise election, the grantor may then
proceed to enter into a non-exclusive franchise agreement with such prospective
grantee, subject to the provisions of this chapter. If the incumbent operator
submits a proposal acceptable under the terms of the Cable Act of 1992, as
amended, and meets the requirements of the Federal Communications Commission,
the city shall proceed to fulfill its obligations under § 626 of the Cable Act
of 1992.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.021 LENGTH OF FRANCHISE.
   The term of a franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto shall be determined by the grantor from the
effective date of such franchise or the effective date of any transfer or
assignment thereof in accordance with §
114.099 of this chapter. The term of agreement will be specified in the
franchise agreement. Such term shall not exceed ten years. The grantor shall
award a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain in,
upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and
public places laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions
thereto in the city poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other conductors and fixtures necessary for the operation and maintenance in
the city of a cable system, and to furnish and to sell service from such cable
system to the inhabitants of the city pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.022 SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Franchise non-exclusive. Any franchise granted under this chapter by
the city shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a
similar franchise to any person at any time.
   (B)   Privileges must be specified. No privilege of exemption shall be
inferred from the granting of any franchise, unless it is specifically
prescribed.
   (C)   Authority granted. Any franchise granted under this chapter shall give
to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and
maintain in, upon, above, over and under streets, as defined in §
114.001 of this chapter, which have been or may be dedicated and open to public
use in the city, towers, antennas, poles, cables, electronic equipment and
other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of a cable system in
the city, subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Other regulatory agency’s rules and regulations. The grantee shall at
all times during the life of any franchise granted under this chapter be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the grantor and other
duly authorized regulatory state and federal bodies and shall comply with any
and all ordinances which the grantor has adopted or shall adopt applying to the
public generally and to other grantees.
   (E)   Pole use agreements required. Any franchise granted under this chapter
shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole or
conduit use agreements from the gas, electric and the telephone companies or
others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of the city.
   (F)   Revisions. Any franchise granted under this chapter is made subject to
any revisions of this chapter and the general ordinances of the grantor;
provided that, such revisions do not materially alter or impair the obligations
of the grantee set forth in any franchise agreement and are mutually agreed to
by the grantor and grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.023 RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.
   (A)   Right of amendment reserved to grantor. The grantor may from time to
time add to, modify or delete provisions of this chapter as it shall deem
necessary in the exercise of its regulatory powers and as may be mutually
agreed to by the grantor and grantee. Such additions or revisions shall be made
only after a public hearing for which the grantee shall have received written
notice at least 30 days prior to such hearing.
   (B)   No impairment of city’s rights. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way to any extent any right of
the grantor pursuant to state law.
   (C)   Grantee agrees to city’s rights. The grantor reserves every right and
power which is required to be reserved or provided by an ordinance of the
grantor, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be
bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the grantor in
its exercise of such rights or powers which have been or will be enacted or
established subject to the provisions of division (A) above.
   (D)   Powers of grantor. Neither the granting of any franchise, nor any
provision governing the franchise, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the
exercise of any governmental right or power of the grantor.
   (E)   Grantor transfer of functions. Any administrative right or power in or
administrative duty imposed upon any elected official of the city shall be
subject to transfer by the grantor to any other elected official, officer,
employee, department or board.
   (F)   Grantor right of inspection. The grantor reserves the right, during
the life of any franchise granted under this chapter, to inspect and oversee
all construction or installation work performed in the public right-of-way.
   (G)   Grantor right of network installation. The grantor reserves the right,
during the life of any franchise granted under this chapter, to install and
maintain for a reasonable charge upon or in the poles and conduits of the
grantee and pole fixtures necessary for municipal purposes other than providing
cable service on the condition that such installation and maintenance thereof
does not interfere with the operation of the grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.024 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.
   No new cable franchise may be granted unless the applicant has successfully
completed the application procedure in accordance with filing instructions
promulgated by the grantor, as follows.
   (A)   Filing fee. Payment of a non-refundable filing fee to the grantor of
$100 shall be paid, which sum shall be due and payable at the time with the
submission of the application.
   (B)   Content. All applicants must complete an application that shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant. The name and business address of the
applicant, date of application and signature of the applicant or appropriate
corporate officer;
      (2)   Description of proposed operation. A general description of the
applicant’s proposed operation, including, but not limited to, business hours,
operating staff, maintenance procedures beyond those required in this chapter,
management and marketing staff policies and procedures and, if available, the
rules of operation for public access;
      (3)   Signal carriage. A statement of the television and radio services
to be provided, including both off the air and locally originated signals;
      (4)   Special services. A statement setting forth a description of the
automated services proposed as well as a description of the production
facilities to be made available by the grantee for the public, governmental and
educational channels required to be made available by the provisions of this
chapter;
      (5)   Corporate organization. A statement detailing the corporation
organization of the applicant, if any, including the names and addresses of its
officers and directors and the number of shares held by each officer and
director;
      (6)   Stockholders. A statement identifying the number of authorized
outstanding shares of the applicant’s stock, including a current list of the
names and current addresses of its shareholders holding 5% or more of the
applicant’s outstanding stock;
      (7)   Intercompany relationships. A statement describing all intercompany
relationships of the applicant, including parent, subsidiary or affiliated
companies;
      (8)   Agreements and understandings. A statement setting forth all
agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the
applicant and any other person with respect to any franchise awarded under this
chapter and the conduct of the operation thereof existing at the time of the
proposal submittal;
      (9)   Financial statement. A copy of the financial statements for the two
previous fiscal years;
      (10)   Financial projection. A five-year operations pro forma which shall
include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual profit and loss
statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance sheets and annual
levels of subscriber penetration. Costs and revenues anticipated for voluntary
services shall, if presented, be incorporated in the pro forma as required in
this chapter, but shall be separately identified in the pro forma;
      (11)   Financial support. Suitable written evidence from a recognized
financing institution, addressed to both the applicant’s financial ability and
planned operation have been analyzed by the institution and that the financing
institution is prepared to make the required funds available to the applicant
if it is awarded a franchise. If the planned operation is to be internally
financed, a board resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment and
expenditure of such funds as are required to construct, install and operate the
cable television system contemplated under this chapter;
      (12)   Construction timetable. A description of system construction
including the timetable for provision and extension of service to different
parts of the city;
      (13)   Technical description. A technical description of the type of
system proposed by the applicant, including, but not limited to, system
configuration (i.e., hub, dual cable), system capacity, two-way capability and
the like;
      (14)   Existing franchises. A statement of existing franchises held by
the applicant indicating when the franchises were issued and when the cable
systems were constructed and the present states of the cable systems in each
respective governmental unit, together with the name and address and phone
number of a responsible governmental official knowledgeable of the applicant;
      (15)   Convictions. A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its
officers or directors or holders of 5% or more of its voting stock has in the
past ten years been convicted of or has any charges pending for any crime other
than a routine traffic offense and the disposition of each such case; and
      (16)   Operating experience. A statement detailing the prior cable
television experience of the applicant, including that of the applicant’s
officers, management and staff to be associated, where known, with the proposed
franchise.
   (C)   Supplementation to applications. The grantor reserves the right to
require such supplementary, additional or other information that the grantor
deems reasonably necessary for its determinations. Such modifications,
deletions, additions or amendments to the application shall be considered only
if specifically requested by the grantor.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.025 ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Franchise acceptance, procedures. Any franchise awarded under this
chapter and the rights, privileges and authority granted thereby shall take
effect and be in force from and after the award thereof; provided that, the
grantee shall file with the grantor the following:
      (1)   A statement by the grantee of the unconditional acceptance of the
franchise;
      (2)   A certificate of insurance as set forth in §
114.136 of this chapter; and
      (3)   Reimbursement to the grantor for the costs of publication of the
franchise ordinance and the holding of the election connected therewith, if
required by law.
   (B)   Recourse of grantee. The grantee shall have no monetary recourse
whatsoever against the grantor for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising
out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or its regulation. This
shall not include negligent acts of the grantor, its agents or employees that
are performed outside the regulatory or franchise awarding authority under this
chapter.
   (C)   Acceptance of power and authority of grantor. The grantee expressly
acknowledges that, in accepting any franchise awarded under this chapter, it
has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the grantor to grant this franchise.
   (D)   Inducements not offered. The grantee, by acceptance of any franchise
awarded under this chapter, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter
into this franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether
verbal or written, by or in behalf of the grantor concerning any term or
condition of this franchise that is not included in this chapter.
   (E)   Grantee accepts terms of franchise. The grantee acknowledges by the
acceptance of the franchise and the terms in the franchise and in this chapter
that it has carefully read such terms and conditions and it is willing to and
does accept all other obligations of such terms and conditions and further
agrees that it will not claim that any provision of this chapter as adopted, or
any franchise granted under this chapter, is unreasonable or arbitrary.
   (F)   Incorporation of proposals. The grantee, by the acceptance of any
franchise awarded under this chapter, agrees that the matters contained in the
grantee’s application for the franchise and as stated in oral presentations,
except as inconsistent with the Federal Communications Commission rules and
regulations, law or ordinance, shall be incorporated into the franchise as
though set out verbatim.
   (G)   Forfeiture of proposal bond. If the grantee fails to comply with this
section, it shall acquire to rights, privileges or authority under this chapter
whatever, and the amount of the proposal bond or certified check in lieu
thereof, submitted with its application, shall be forfeited in full to the
grantor as liquidated damages.
(2013 Code, § 8-2.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
STANDARDS OF SERVICE
§ 114.040 GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.
   The grantee shall provide a cable system in such manner as to pass and
provide adequate tap-off facilities for every single dwelling unit, multiple-
dwelling unit or other residential unit and commercial and industrial
establishment within the service area, subject to the provisions of §
114.046 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.041 CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.
   All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and
equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the
proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who own property that adjoins any of such public ways. A
grantee shall first obtain a permit from the grantor prior to commencing
construction on the streets, alleys, public grounds or places and the permit
shall be on a form provided by the grantor. A grantee shall not open or disturb
the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway or public place for any purpose
without having first obtained a permit to do so in the manner provided by
ordinance. All excavation shall be coordinated with other utility excavation or
construction so as to minimize disruption to the public.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.042 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.
   If, during the course of the grantee’s construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system, there occurs a disturbance of any public way
by the grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way
to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way
existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.043 RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than ten
business days, the grantee under this chapter shall, at its own expense,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way or remove
from the public way any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the
franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; street
abandonment; freeway and street construction; change or establishment of street
grades; or installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes or any other type
of structures or improvements by the franchising authority, but the grantee
shall, in all cases, have the right of abandonment of its property.
   (B)   If public funds are available to any person using such street,
easement or right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the
foregoing, the franchising authority shall make application for such funds on
behalf of the grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.044 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall
be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner.
   (B)   All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with
applicable Federal Communications Commission or other federal, state and local
regulations and the National Electrical Safety Code.
   (C)   The cable system shall not reasonably endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the service area.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.045 UNDERGROUND AND ABOVEGROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Pole agreements. Under this chapter, the grantee may lease, rent or in
any other manner by mutual agreement obtain the use of towers, poles, lines,
cables and other equipment and facilities from utility companies operating
within the city and use towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and
facilities for the system. When and where practicable, the poles used by the
grantee’s distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by such
utility companies operating within the city; provided, mutually satisfactory
rental agreements can be reached. It is the grantor’s desire that all holders
of public franchises in the city cooperate with the grantee and allow the
grantee the use of their poles and pole line facilities whenever possible so
that the number of new or additional poles installed in the city may be
minimized.
   (B)   Grantee’s poles. The grantee shall have the right to erect, install
and maintain its own towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits and
manholes as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the
antenna site, head-end and distribution system; providing that, the grantee has
at the work site the necessary grantor permit or copy thereof, for scheduled
work, obtained in advance from the appropriate department of the grantor.
   (C)   Rent of grantee’s poles. The grantee shall have the right to establish
terms, conditions and specifications governing the form, type, size, quantity
and location of equipment of others on its poles and shall have the further
right to charge a fair rental for attachment space occupied by the equipment
and plant of others. The grantor shall pay any costs incurred by the grantee in
providing space for the grantor’s attachments, including any necessary
rearrangements of the grantee’s equipment and plant to provide room for the
grantor’s attachments. Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a
franchise or if a grantee wishes to dispose of any of its poles, conduit or
manholes being used by the grantor, the grantor shall have the option to
purchase them in place for their fair market value.
   (D)   Underground facilities. In those areas of the city where transmission
or distribution facilities of both telephone and power companies are
underground or may be placed underground, the grantee shall likewise construct,
operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities
underground to the maximum extent the then-existing technology permits, in
accordance with the most recent National Electrical Code and its successor
document, as well as in conformance with all applicable state and municipal
ordinances and codes. If and when necessary, amplifiers and/or transformers in
the grantee’s transmission and distribution lines shall be in appropriate
housings on the surface of the ground. The grantee shall obtain a permit from
the grantor for such underground and construction of all work required or
pursuant to this section. Even when not required, underground installation is
preferable to the placing of additional poles.
   (E)   Compliance to codes.
      (1)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the grantee in the city shall be located so as not to endanger or
interfere with the normal use of streets, alleys or other public ways and
places so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of the general public and adjoining property owners and so as not
to interfere with existing public utility installations and so as to comply
with the most recent National Electrical Code, as amended, as well as in
conformance with all applicable state and municipal ordinances and codes of
general applicability.
      (2)   If any disturbance occurs by the grantee or its equipment of
pavement, sidewalks, driveway, lawn or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at
its expense and in the manner required by ordinance, promptly replace and
restore all such surfacing as near as reasonably possible to its prior
condition.
      (3)   The construction, installation, operation, maintenance and/or
removal of the cable communications system shall meet all of the following
safety, construction and technical specifications and codes and standards:
         (a)   Occupational Safety and Health Administration regulations
(OSHA);
         (b)   National Electrical Code;
         (c)   National Electrical Safety Code (NESC);
         (d)   All federal, state and municipal construction requirements,
including Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations;
         (e)   All Building and Zoning Codes and all land use restrictions as
they exist or may be amended; and
         (f)   This code of ordinances.
   (F)   Interference with other utilities. The grantee shall not place poles,
conduits or other fixtures aboveground or belowground where the poles, conduits
or other fixtures shall interfere with any prior placement of gas, electric,
telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utilities, and all such poles,
conduits or other fixtures aboveground or belowground shall be so placed as to
comply with all the requirements of the grantor.
   (G)   Moving permits. The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a
moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal shall be
paid in advance by the person requesting the removal and the grantee shall be
given not less than 15 working days’ advance notice to arrange for such
temporary changes.
   (H)   Authority to trim trees. The grantee shall have the authority to trim
trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the street
or alley right-of-way so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the
grantee’s wires, cables or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably
compensate the franchising authority or property owner for any damages caused
by such trimming or shall, in its sole discretion, and at its own cost and
expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any
construction of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Such replacement shall
satisfy any and all obligations the grantee may have to the franchising
authority pursuant to the terms of this section.
   (I)   Service area. The grantee shall design and construct the cable system
in such a manner as to pass by and provide adequate tap-off facilities for
every single-family dwelling, apartment, school and city building located
within the city limits based upon the corporate boundaries at the time of the
granting of the franchise; provided that, such locations meet the density
requirements pursuant to §
114.046 of this chapter, pertaining to extension of service.
   (J)   Burial of temporary drops. Temporary drops will be buried within two
months of installation, weather permitting.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.046 EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Under this chapter, the grantee shall, at its expense, promptly extend
its cable system to have service available to all residents of the following:
      (1)   Newly annexed areas to the city not then served by a system where
the average density is at least 30 dwelling units per lineal mile of proposed
trunk and feeder cable route;
      (2)   New housing areas developed within the city limits, providing the
new areas developed meet the requirements of division (A)(1) above; and
      (3)   Any new single-family dwelling unit, multiple-dwelling unit or
other residential unit or commercial establishment which shall be extended
simultaneously with electric power and telephone utilities, subject to the
requirements of division (A)(1) above. The grantor may modify or exempt
designated commercial and/or industrial areas of the city from the requirements
of this division (A)(3) and as may be defined in the cable franchise agreement
granted to the grantee.
   (B)   The grantee shall submit to the grantor, upon request, a written line
policy that shall provide that cable service will be extended to potential
subscribers who become located within 125 feet of distribution cable.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.047 SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Under this chapter, the grantee shall upon request provide, without
charge, one outlet of basic service and expanded basic service to public
buildings that shall include, but are not limited to, the locations listed in
this division (A). Any additional locations other than the following must be
within 500 feet of the grantee’s cable system:
      (1)   City hall;
      (2)   Fire station;
      (3)   Park and Recreation Office;
      (4)   Police Department Office;
      (5)   Street Department Building;
      (6)   Wastewater treatment plant;
      (7)   Buena Vista University;
      (8)   Iowa Valley Community College;
      (9)   Marshalltown Community College;
      (10)   Area Education Agency 6;
      (11)   St. Henry’s Catholic School;
      (12)   St. Mary’s Catholic School;
      (13)   Fisher Community Center;
      (14)   City coliseum;
      (15)   Marshalltown Community High School Auditorium;
      (16)   Anson and Miller Middle Schools;
      (17)   Anson Elementary School;
      (18)   Fisher Elementary School;
      (19)   Hoglan Elementary School;
      (20)   Rogers Elementary School;
      (21)   Woodbury Elementary School; and
      (22)   Franklin Elementary School.
   (B)   The one outlet shall not be used to sell or further distribute
services in or throughout such buildings. Users of such outlets shall hold the
grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use
of such outlets, including, but not limited to, those arising from copyright
liability. If additional outlets are provided to such buildings, the building
owner shall pay the fees for labor and materials only.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.8) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.048 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS; FCC MODEL.
   Under this chapter, the grantee agrees to adhere to the Federal
Communications Commission’s customer service standards. A copy of such
standards effective as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter derives is attached as App. A to Ord. 14586.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.9) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.049 LOCAL OFFICE.
   A cable system business and service office, conveniently located within the
city, shall be open during normal business hours and adequately staffed to
accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests and complaints.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.10) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.050 DEPOSITS.
   If required by federal law, the grantee under this chapter shall bear
interest at the current lending rate on any subscriber deposit.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.11) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.051 SUBSCRIBERS’ ANTENNAS.
   The grantee shall not require the removal or offer to remove or provide any
inducements for removal of any potential or existing subscriber’s antenna as a
condition of provision of cable service.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.12) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.052 DISCONNECTION.
   There shall be no charge for a total disconnection of cable service. If any
subscriber fails to pay a fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the
subscriber’s service. Such disconnection shall not be affected until the
subscriber has been given ten days’ advance written notice of the intention to
disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment of any required delinquent fee or
reconnection charge, the grantee shall reinstate the subscriber’s service.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.13) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.053 RECONNECTIONS.
   The grantee shall restore cable service to a customer wishing restoration of
service; provided, the customer shall first satisfy any previous obligations
owed.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.14) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.054 DOWNGRADES.
   (A)   Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected or
downgraded in accordance with Federal Communications Commission rules.
   (B)   The billing for such service will be effective immediately and such
disconnection or downgrade shall be made as soon as practicable.
   (C)   A refund of unused service charges shall be paid to the customer
within 45 days from the date of termination of service.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.15) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.055 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   Within 30 days of termination of cable service to any subscriber for any
reason, the grantee may, upon the subscriber’s written request, promptly remove
all its aerial facilities and equipment from the subscriber’s premises,
pursuant to Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.16) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.056 NOTIFICATION TO GRANTOR OF SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
   (A)   The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor in writing or, if
appropriate, by oral communication of any significant interruption in the
operation of the cable system.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term SIGNIFICANT INTERRUPTION IN
THE OPERATION OF THE CABLE SYSTEM shall mean any interruption of audio or video
on one or more channels a duration of at least one hour to at least 5% of the
subscribers.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.17) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.057 SUBSCRIBER CREDIT FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
   Upon service interruption of subscriber’s cable service, the following shall
apply: for service interruptions of over 24 hours, the grantee shall provide,
at the subscriber’s request, a credit of 1/30 of one month’s fees for affected
services for each 24-hour period service is interrupted.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.18) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.058 SERVICE REPAIR STANDARDS.
   (A)   The grantee shall render efficient cable service, make repairs
promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time
possible.
   (B)   Scheduled service interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be
preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable
system.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.19) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.059 REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS.
   (A)   If the grantee fails to provide any material cable service requested
by a subscriber in accordance with the current Federal Communications
Commission standards, the grantee shall, after adequate notification and being
afforded the opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits
or advance charges paid for the service in question by the subscriber.
   (B)   If any subscriber terminates service for any other reason, the grantee
shall refund the unused portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee on a
daily pro rata basis.
   (C)   Any disputes arising under this section shall be finally resolved in
accordance with §
114.119 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.060 CHANNEL CARD.
   (A)   The grantee shall prepare and make available, at no charge to the
subscribers, an accurate and up-to-date channel card listing the cable channels
and services available over the cable system.
   (B)   The channel card shall be distributed to every new subscriber and
within 30 days after a change or addition in channels or services offered
affecting three or more channels.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.21) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.061 CUSTOMER HANDBOOK.
   The grantee shall provide written customer policies or a handbook to all new
cable subscribers and, thereafter, upon request. The grantee’s written customer
policies or handbook shall, at a minimum, comply with all notice requirements
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. If the grantee’s
operating rules are changed, subscribers shall be notified in a timely manner.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.22) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.062 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.
   (A)   The grantee shall be constantly alert to possible abuses of the right
of privacy or other legal rights of any cable system subscriber, programmer or
general citizen resulting from any device or signal associated with the cable
system.
   (B)   The grantee shall abide by current federal law and Federal
Communications Commission regulations and § 631 of the Cable Act regarding
protection of subscriber privacy.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.23) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.063 DISCRIMINATORY OR PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES.
   The grantee shall not, in making available the services or facilities of its
cable system or in its rules or regulations or in any other manner, make or
grant preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber or to
any user or potential user and shall not subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage, based on their race, color, national origin or gender. This
section shall not prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to
the cable system or other legitimate uses thereof, nor the establishment of a
graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any
subscriber coming within such classification shall be entitled.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.24) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.064 IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Under this chapter, every employee of the grantee shall be clearly
identified by an identification card, badge or uniform shirt.
   (B)   All employees of the grantee shall display proper identification upon
request of a subscriber; provided that, the grantor requires all utilities
operating in the city to do the same.
   (C)   Every vehicle of the grantee shall be clearly marked by logo or
decals; provided that, the grantor requires all the utilities operating in the
city do the same.
(2013 Code, § 8-3.25) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
SYSTEM DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 114.075 EMERGENCY USE.
   (A)   In accordance with and at the time required by the provisions of
Federal Communications Commission regulations part 11, subpart D, § 11.51(h)
(1), and as such provisions may from time to time be amended, the grantee shall
install, if it has not already done so, and maintain an emergency alert system
(EAS) for use in transmitting emergency act notifications (EAN) and emergency
act terminations (EAT) in local and statewide situations as may be designated
to be an emergency by the local primary (LP), the state primary (SP) and/or the
state emergency operations center (SEOC), as those authorities are identified
and defined within Federal Communications Commission regulations § 11.51.
   (B)   The franchising authority shall permit only appropriately trained and
authorized persons to operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable
precautions to prevent any use of the grantee’s cable system in any manner that
results in inappropriate use thereof or any loss or damage to the cable system.
Except to the extent expressly prohibited by law, the franchising authority
shall hold the grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless from any
claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the franchising
authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.076 SWITCHING DEVICE.
   The grantee, upon request from any cable subscriber, shall install at a
reasonable charge a switching device to permit a subscriber to continue to
utilize the subscriber’s television antenna. The grantee shall not require the
removal or offer to remove any subscriber’s antenna lead-in wire.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.077 PARENTAL CONTROL DEVICES.
   Upon request and within 120 days, the grantee shall provide, at a reasonable
charge to subscribers, parental control devices that allow any cable channel to
be locked out. Such devices shall block both the video and the audio portion of
such channels to the extent that both are unintelligible.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.078 EDUCATION AND GOVERNMENT CHANNELS.
   During the term of the franchise under this chapter, the grantee shall
provide at least one specially dedicated, non-commercial education and
government channel to be made available to the public, groups and individuals
on a first-come non-discriminatory basis. Such channels shall be operated in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations. The
grantee shall make no charge for use of such channel. The franchising authority
or its designee shall exercise sole control over the operation and shall
establish rules providing for access to the education and government channel.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.079 ACCESS EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES FEES.
   (A)   If authorized by the grantor and after 60 days’ notice from the
grantor to the grantee, the grantor shall provide ongoing support for public,
educational and governmental access equipment and facilities in the amount of
not to exceed $0.25, as adjusted for inflation, per subscriber per month for
the entire term of this franchise, payable in the same manner as the franchise
fee payment pursuant to §
114.095 of this chapter. The maximum amount of this fee shall be adjusted on
March 30 of each year of the term of the franchise by a percentage equal to the
percentage of increase in the cost of living, as defined by the Consumer Price
Index (CPI), for the previous calendar year. The grantor acknowledges that this
amount shall not be considered gross revenues subject to the payment of
franchise fees pursuant to §
114.095 of this chapter.
   (B)   Furthermore, payments of this ongoing support shall not be deemed to
be “franchise fees” within the meaning of § 622 of the Cable Act, and such
payment shall not be deemed to be “payments in kind” or any involuntary
payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the grantor by the
grantee pursuant to §
114.095 of this chapter. The grantee shall be allowed to collect such fee as a
pass through to cable subscribers.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.080 LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall make a portion of the remaining unused cable channels
available for lease to any organization, group or individual on a first come,
first served basis as provided in this chapter and as required by § 612 of the
Cable Act of 1992, as amended.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.081 NON-SUBSCRIBER INTERFERENCE.
   The grantee’s cable system shall be designed, engineered and maintained so
as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of residents of the
city who are not subscribers on the cable system.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.082 ADDITIONAL SERVICES.
   Under this chapter, the grantee is encouraged to make available such
additional video, radio, digital, point-to-point service and other services as
are requested by subscribers and programmers who are willing to pay for such
services; provided that, such services are technologically and economically
feasible.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.8) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.083 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Methods of construction, installation and maintenance of the cable
television system shall comply with the most recent National Electrical Code to
the extent that such code is consistent with local law affecting the
construction, installation, maintenance of electric supply and communications
lines. To the extent that such code is inconsistent with other provisions of
this franchise or with local law, the latter shall govern. The grantee must
obtain all necessary construction or excavation permits in advance from the
grantor.
   (B)   Installation and physical dimensions of any tower constructed for use
in the cable television system shall comply with all appropriate Federal
Aviation Administration regulations.
   (C)   Any antenna structure used in the cable system shall comply with all
appropriate local, state and federal regulations.
   (D)   All working facilities and conditions used during construction,
installation and maintenance of the cable system shall comply with the
standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
   (E)   Unless it is beyond the knowledge of the grantee, the grantee shall
notify the franchising authority at least 30 days prior to or as soon as it is
known by the grantee of any of the following changes:
      (1)   Addition to, deletion of or change in received channels;
      (2)   Addition to, deletion of or change in distributed channels or in
channel conversion;
      (3)   Change in location of head-end or antenna sites; and
      (4)   Interconnection with other cable systems.
   (F)   The cable system permitted to be operated under this chapter shall be
maintained and operated in conformance with Federal Communications Commission
rules and regulations. If the Federal Communications Commission ceases to
regulate technical standards, the grantee will comply with the standards of the
successor regulatory authority of the State or Federal Government.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.9) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.084 FILING OF MAPS.
   Upon request of the grantor pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall file
with the grantor strand maps, showing the location of all property and
facilities of the grantee within the city.
(2013 Code, § 8-4.10) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY
§ 114.095 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Payment. In consideration for the use of the streets and public ways
of the city for the construction, operation, maintenance and reconstruction of
a cable system within the city, the grantee shall pay to the grantor an annual
amount equal to 5% of the grantee’s gross revenues as defined in §
114.001 of this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, all subscriber’s
payments, installation fees, converter boxes, local advertising, leased access
channels and pay per view. This amount shall not include any taxes on cable
service that are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by
any governmental unit or agency and which are collected by the grantee on
behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
   (B)   Quarterly payments. Payment due to the grantor under this section
shall be made quarterly at the City Clerk’s office not later than 45 days
following March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. Any fee
not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate of 1.5% per month from the date
due. Each payment shall be accompanied with a report to the city by the grantee
showing the basis for the computation, specific income categories and such
other relevant facts as may be required by the grantor necessary to determine
the accuracy of the franchise payment and shall be in the form provided by App.
B, attached to Ord. 14586 and incorporated in this chapter. The acceptance of
any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in
fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as
a release of any claim the grantor may have for additional sums payable by the
grantee. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the
grantor.
   (C)   Limitation on actions. The period of limitation for recovery of any
franchise fee payable under this section shall be ten years from the date on
which payment by the grantee is due.
   (D)   Audit. The grantee will fully cooperate with a franchise fee audit
performed by a professional firm that is chosen by the grantor. The grantor
will pay for the costs associated with the audit; provided that, the grantee
shall pay for the costs if the audit shows an underpayment of franchise fees in
excess of 5% or more.
   (E)   Increases. The grantor may request an increase in franchise fees at
any time during the term of the franchise equal to the maximum allowed by
federal law. However, such request shall be made in writing, and the grantee
will not be liable for the increase until proper notice, as defined by federal
law, is given to its subscriber. Prior to making a final decision regarding an
increase in franchise fees, the grantor shall conduct a public hearing and
shall grant an opportunity to the grantee to discuss the proposed increase in
franchise fees.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.096 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The franchising authority may regulate rates for the provision of
basic cable and equipment as expressly permitted by § 623 of the Cable Act of
1992, as amended, and applicable law.
   (B)   Any rate adjustments shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than
30 days prior to the implementation of the adjustment.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.097 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings
undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the
grantee’s cable franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions
of § 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and substantive
protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by
the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal or state law.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.098 CONDITIONS OF SALE.
   If a renewal or extension of the grantee’s cable franchise is denied or the
franchise is lawfully terminated and the franchising authority either lawfully
acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects a
transfer of ownership of the cable system to another person, any such
acquisition or transfer shall be at a price determined pursuant to the
provisions set forth in § 627 of the Cable Act.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.099 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   (1)   Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be a privilege to
be held for the benefit of the public. Any franchise so granted cannot, in any
event, be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but
not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, except to the entity controlling,
controlled by or under common control with the grantee, without the prior
written consent of the franchising authority.
      (2)   Such consent as required by the franchising authority shall be
given or denied no later than 120 days following any request and shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
      (3)   Prior consent shall not be required when transferring the franchise
between wholly owned subsidiaries of the same entity, nor shall such consent be
required for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation or
assignment of any rights, title or interest of the grantee in the cable system
in order to secure indebtedness.
   (B)   If the grantee sells or otherwise transfers ownership in the cable
system, such sale or transfer shall conform to § 617 of the Cable Act. For the
purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or
acquisition of control, the franchising authority may inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall
assist the franchising authority in any such inquiry. In seeking the grantee’s
consent to any change in ownership or control, the transferee shall have the
responsibility to:
      (1)   Show to the satisfaction of the franchising authority whether the
proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee (referred to as the “proposed
transferee”) which, in the case of a corporation, shall include all directors
and all persons having a legal or equitable interest of 50% or more of the
voting stock, has:
         (a)   Ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral
turpitude, including, but not limited to, any violation of federal, state or
local law or regulations or is presently under an indictment, investigation or
complaint charging such acts;
         (b)   Ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction; or
         (c)   Pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding
arising out of or involving a cable system. The franchising authority retains
the right to withhold approval of the transfer until the transferee has
provided the information required in this division (B)(1).
      (2)   Establish, to the satisfaction of the franchising authority, the
financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current
financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to
submit in its franchise application, and such other data as the franchising
authority may request, where such shall be audited, certified and qualified by
a certified public accountant; and
      (3)   Establish to the satisfaction of the franchising authority any
technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to
maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise
under the existing franchise terms.
   (C)   (1)   Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or
its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation
of the franchise shall have the right to notify the franchising authority that
the financial institution or its designee, as approved in writing by the
franchising authority, shall take control and operate the cable system if the
grantee defaults in its financial obligations.
      (2)   Further, such financial institution shall also submit a plan for
such operation that will ensure continued service and compliance with all
franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the cable system for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the
franchising authority at its discretion, but, during such period of time, it
shall have the right to petition the franchising authority to transfer the
franchise to another grantee.
      (3)   Except insofar as the enforceability of this division (C) may be
limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or
similar laws affecting creditors’ rights generally, and further subject to
applicable federal, state or local law, if the franchising authority finds that
such transfer, after considering the legal, financial and technical qualities
of the proposed transferee, is satisfactory, the franchising authority shall
transfer and assign the right and obligations of such franchise as in the
public interest.
   (D)   The consent or approval of the franchising authority to any transfer
by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the
franchising authority in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its
terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any franchise.
   (E)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved
without the successor in interest becoming a signatory of the franchise
agreement.
   (F)   The franchising authority may approve the transfer or deny the
transfer pursuant to § 617 of the Cable Act.
   (G)   When the grantor approves a transfer under this section, the new
grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in §
114.025 of this chapter, including the filing of all necessary bonds, funds,
proofs of insurance and certifications.
   (H)   The restrictions of this section shall be effective immediately upon
execution of a franchise agreement.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.100 RIGHT OF INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The grantor shall have the right to visually inspect all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and to
make such visual inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of law.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.101 NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   The grantee is encouraged to upgrade its facilities, equipment and service
so that its cable system is as advanced as the current state of production
technology will allow.
(2013 Code, § 8-5.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING
§ 114.115 TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test,
analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. The grantor may also
perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a
manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business
operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether or
not the grantee is in compliance with the terms of this chapter and applicable
state or federal laws. Such tests may be undertaken only after giving the
grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than ten business days, and
providing a representative of the grantee has an opportunity to be present
during such tests. If such testing demonstrates that the grantee has
substantially complied with such material provisions of this chapter, the cost
of such testing shall be borne by the franchising authority. Except in
emergency circumstances, the franchising authority agrees that such testing
shall be undertaken no more than once a year and that the results thereof shall
be made available to the grantee.
   (B)   Any special performance tests or measurements required by the grantor
shall be reported to the grantor within 14 business days after such tests or
measurements are performed. Such report shall include the following
information: the nature of the complaint that precipitated the special tests;
the results of such tests; and the method in which such complaints were
resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be
recorded.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.116 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The franchising authority or its certified public accountant, upon
reasonable notice to the grantee, may review such of its books and records at
the grantee’s business office, during normal business hours and on a non-
disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms of this chapter. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to,
any public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee shall not be required to
disclose information that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential
in nature under state and federal rules of evidence. The franchising authority
agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee as confidential and
only to disclose it to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have
a need to know or in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of
§ 631 of the Cable Act.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.117 COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.
   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, reports and all other
documents pertaining to the cable system and franchise submitted by the grantee
or its parent companies to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency shall be made available to the grantor upon written request to the
grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.118 COMPLAINT RECORDS.
   (A)   A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable
of access and reproduction shall be maintained for all service interruptions or
complaints regarding cable system service problems.
   (B)   The grantee shall maintain detailed logs setting forth the date and
substance of each service interruption or complaint regarding the system
service problems received by phone, mail or other means during the preceding
calendar month and the date and nature of action taken by the grantee to
respond to such complaints or, if still pending, the status thereof.
   (C)   Such logs shall be available to the grantor for review for two years
thereafter.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.119 CITY’S ROLE IN COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   (1)   Unresolved complaints concerning the cable system or its
operation or maintenance shall be directed to the City Administrator.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall forward the complaint to the grantee
or shall take up the question by correspondence with the grantee.
   (B)   The procedure to handle complaints and grievances with respect to
subscriber complaints and the quality of services rendered by the grantee,
equipment malfunctions and other matters shall be as follows.
      (1)   Within 30 days from the occurrence of the facts and circumstances
giving rise to a complaint or grievance, the complainant shall state his or her
complaint or grievance to the grantee in writing. If the grantor receives such
a complaint or grievance, the complaint shall be forwarded to the grantee in
writing.
      (2)   Within five days from the receipt of a complaint or grievance by
the grantee, the grantee shall state to the complainant its intentions with
respect to the complaint or grievance in writing.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall limit or alter the requirements
contained in this chapter for customer service standards as contained in App. A
to Ord. 14586.
      (4)   The grantor shall be notified of the action taken to resolve
grievances or complaints.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.120 PERFORMANCE TESTING.
   The grantee shall perform all cable system tests and maintenance procedures
as required by the Federal Communications Commission and this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.121 REVIEW SESSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   In recognition of the fact that a great many technical,
financial, marketing and legal uncertainties are associated with all aspects of
cable communications at the present time, it is the intent of the city to
provide for a maximum feasible degree of flexibility in this franchise
throughout its term to achieve an advanced and modern cable system for the
city. The principal means for accomplishing this flexibility will be the
scheduled review sessions provided for in this chapter. It is intended that
such review sessions will serve as a means of cooperatively working out
solutions to problems that develop. Furthermore, such review sessions shall be
two-way processes.
      (2)   For example, if either party has perceived that some major problem
has developed, the session shall be devoted primarily to working out solutions
acceptable to both parties.
   (B)   The grantor may hold periodic review sessions. All such review
sessions shall be open to the public, and notice thereof shall be published
once, not less than four days or more than 20 days before each review session,
as provided by law. The published notice shall specify the topics to be
discussed. The review sessions may be canceled by mutual agreement of the
grantor and grantee. The following topics may be discussed at every scheduled
review session:
      (1)   Recent and developing judicial and federal communications rulings;
      (2)   Service rate structures;
      (3)   Free and discounted services;
      (4)   Application of new technology or new developments;
      (5)   Cable system performance;
      (6)   Cable system extension policy;
      (7)   Services provided;
      (8)   Programming offered;
      (9)   Customer complaint review;
      (10)   Community development and education;
      (11)   Interconnection;
      (12)   New services;
      (13)   Franchise fees;
      (14)   Subscriber privacy abuse issues; and
      (15)   New developments.
   (C)   Other topics, in addition to those listed in division (B) above, may
be added by either party. Members of the general public may also request
additional topics.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.122 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.
   The franchising authority, acting alone or acting jointly with other
franchising authorities, may exercise or delegate the following
responsibilities under this chapter:
   (A)   Administering the provision of the cable system franchise;
   (B)   Coordinating the operation of community access channel and facilities;
   (C)   Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions;
   (D)   Establishing jointly with the grantee, or as otherwise specified in
the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated
to public use and the sharing of public facilities, if provided for in any
franchise agreement;
   (E)   Planning the expansion and growth of public benefit cable services;
and
   (F)   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.8) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.123 ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   No later than 90 days after the close of the grantee’s fiscal year,
the grantee shall submit a detailed written informative report to the city,
including the following information pertaining only to the cable franchise in
the city:
      (1)   A summary of the previous year’s activities in development of the
cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or dropped and
subscribers gained or lost;
      (2)   A detailed revenue statement including a breakdown of all revenue
sources upon which the city can verify franchise fee accuracy. The list of
revenues shall include, but not be limited to, a specific breakdown of the
following items: basic tier service charges; expanded basic service charges;
installation charges; reconnection fees; advertising revenues; premium channel
revenues; shopping service revenue; revenue from other sources such as
contracted or subleased video, audio and data transmission services; pay per
view and miscellaneous revenue; and total customers per month per category;
      (3)   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and specific nature
of complaints and their disposition;
      (4)   A list of key management persons for the franchise along with their
addresses and job titles;
      (5)   The annual report of the parent company, if a public corporation;
      (6)   A summary of types of communication signals and services provided
without charge or provided under a barter arrangement along with their dollar
equivalent; and
      (7)   A written confirmation that insurance coverages are maintained as
required in §
114.136 of this chapter.
   (B)   The grantee shall only be required to provide the information listed
in division (A) above upon written request by the grantor.
(2013 Code, § 8-6.9) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 114.135 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Under this chapter, the grantee shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold
harmless the grantor from and against any and all liability, losses and damage
to property or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made
under worker’s compensation laws, which may arise out of or be caused by the
erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance or operation of
grantee’s cable system and caused by any act or failure to act on the part of
the grantee, its agents, officers, servants or employees. The grantor shall
give the grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify
(2013 Code, § 8-7.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.136 INSURANCE COVERAGE AND NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the grantee shall maintain insurance
in such amounts and kinds of coverage’s as may be specified in this section.
The grantee shall maintain such insurance with insurance underwriters
authorized to do business in the state. All policies shall name the grantor,
its employees, servants, agents and officers as additional insured parties.
Each policy shall provide that it may not be canceled, nor the amount of
coverage altered until 30 days after receipt by the City Clerk of a registered
mail notice of such intent to cancel or alter coverage.
   (B)   The grantee shall maintain and provide to the City Clerk proof of
public liability insurance for not less than the following amounts:
      (1)   Any one occurrence, bodily injury or property damage: $1,000,000;
      (2)   Products/completed operations annual aggregate liability:
$1,000,000; and
      (3)   General aggregate: $1,000,000.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.137 INSURANCE FOR CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS.
   The grantee shall provide coverage for any contractor or subcontractor
involved in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its
cable system by either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance
policies or requiring such contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate
insurance coverage consistent with this section and appropriate to the extent
of its involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation
of the grantee’s cable system.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.138 FORECLOSURE.
   A foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or part of the cable system
shall be treated as a change in control of the grantee and the provisions of §
114.162 of this chapter shall apply.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.139 RECEIVERSHIP.
   The city shall have the right to cancel the franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take
over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of
such 120 days or unless, within 120 days after being elected or appointed, such
receiver or trustee shall have:
   (A)   Fully complied with all provisions of this chapter and remedied all
defaults there under; and
   (B)   Executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction,
whereby such receiver or trustee agrees to be bound by this chapter and the
franchise granted to the grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.140 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If
the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the cable system or
the franchising authority gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew
this franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted service for three months. If a change in the
grantee occurs or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original
grantee shall cooperate with the franchising authority, a new grantee or
operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such
period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenue for any period during
which it operates the cable system and shall be entitled to reasonable costs
for its services when it no longer operates the cable system.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.141 FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.
   (A)   New franchises. For a new cable franchise awarded, the costs to be
borne by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, all costs of
publication of notices prior to any public meeting and publication of relevant
ordinances and franchise agreements incurred by the franchising authority.
   (B)   Franchise renewal. For a franchise renewal, the grantee shall
reimburse the franchising authority the cost of publication of the relevant
franchise agreement.
   (C)   Franchise transfer. For a franchise transfer, the transferee shall
reimburse the franchising authority the cost of publication of relevant
franchise agreements. The franchising authority reserves the right to withhold
approval of such transfer until the transferee has reimbursed all publication
costs.
   (D)   Other costs. The processing costs provided for in this section shall
be in addition to any other inspection or permit fee or other fees due to
franchising authority under any other ordinance of general applicability.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.142 TAXES.
   Subject to federal and state law, the grantee under this chapter shall pay
all real estate taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes, license
fees, permit fees and other charges of a like nature which may be taxed,
charged, assessed, levied or imposed upon the property of the grantee and upon
any services rendered by the grantee.
(2013 Code, § 8-7.8) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE
§ 114.155 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   If the franchising authority believes that the grantee has not complied with
the terms of the franchise granted under this chapter, it shall notify the
grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged non- compliance.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.1) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.156 GRANTEE’S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND.
   The grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in §
114.155 of this chapter to:
   (A)   Respond to the franchising authority, contesting the assertion of non-
compliance;
   (B)   Cure such default; or
   (C)   If, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the
30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the
franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they
will be completed.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.2) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.157 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   If the grantee fails to respond to the notice described in §
114.155 of this chapter, pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
114.156 of this chapter, or if the alleged default is not remedied within 30
days or the date projected pursuant to §
114.156(C) of this chapter, the franchising authority shall schedule a public
hearing to investigate the default.
   (B)   The franchising authority shall notify the grantee in writing of the
time and place of such meeting no less than five business days in advance and
shall provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.3) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.158 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If the franchising authority, after the public hearing as provided in
§
114.157 of this chapter, determines that the grantee is in default of any
provision of the franchise, the franchising authority, subject to applicable
federal law, may:
      (1)   Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends
itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;
      (2)   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief; or
      (3)   If there is a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this section.
   (B)   The franchising authority shall give written notice to the grantee of
its intent to revoke the franchise on the basis of non-compliance by the
grantee, including one or more instances of substantial non-compliance with a
material provision of the franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact
nature of the non-compliance. The grantee shall have 30 days from such notice
to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. If the
franchising authority has not received a response satisfactory from the
grantee, it may then seek termination of the franchise at a public meeting. The
franchising authority shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least five
days prior to such public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and
place of such meeting and stating its intent to request such termination.
   (C)   (1)   At the designated meeting, the franchising authority shall give
the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it
shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked.
      (2)   The grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court,
which shall have the power to review the decision of the franchising authority
de novo and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require.
      (3)   Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 120 days
of the issuance of the determination of the franchising authority.
   (D)   The franchising authority may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful
action that it deems appropriate to enforce the franchising authority’s rights
under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.4) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.159 CLOSING STREETS.
   Under this chapter, the grantee shall not be entitled to damages from the
grantor sustained by the virtue of the closing, vacation or relocation of any
streets or alleys.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.5) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.160 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with this
chapter by reason of the grantor’s failure to enforce prompt compliance.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.6) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.161 IMPOSSIBILITY OF PERFORMANCE.
   The grantee shall not be held in default or non-compliance with the
provisions of the franchise granted under this chapter or suffers any
enforcement or penalty relating thereto where such non- compliance or alleged
defaults are caused by the following circumstances if reasonably beyond its
control:
   (A)   Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change outs or obtainment of
easement rights;
   (B)   Governmental or regulatory restrictions;
   (C)   Lockouts;
   (D)   War;
   (E)   National emergencies;
   (F)   Fire; and
   (G)   Acts of God.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.7) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.162 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Grounds for revocation. Under this chapter, the grantee reserves the
right to revoke any franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated
with the franchise if:
      (1)   The grantee should default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under this chapter or the franchise and fails to cure the
default within 60 days after receipt of written notice of the default from the
grantor, or such longer time as specified by the grantor;
      (2)   A petition is filed by or against the grantee under the bankruptcy
act or any other insolvency or creditors’ rights law, state or federal, and the
grantee shall fail to have it dismissed;
      (3)   A receiver, trustee or liquidator of the grantee is applied for or
appointed for all or part of the grantee’s assets;
      (4)   The grantee makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors;
      (5)   The grantee violates any order or ruling of any state or federal
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee, unless the grantee or any
party similarly affected is lawfully contesting the legality or applicability
of such order or ruling and has received a stay from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction;
      (6)   The grantee evades any of the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise agreement;
      (7)   The grantee practices intentional fraud or deceit upon the grantor
or cable subscribers;
      (8)   The grantee materially misrepresents facts in the application for a
franchise; and/or
      (9)   The grantee ceases to provide services over the cable system for
seven consecutive days for any reason within the control of the grantee.
   (B)   Restoration of property.
      (1)   In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall
refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall
leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior
to the grantee’s removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the
electric or telephone cables, wires or attachments.
      (2)   The grantor shall inspect and approve the condition of the public
ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles after removal.
      (3)   Liability insurance indemnity provided in §
114.136 of this chapter and the performance bond in §
114.164 of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect during the
period of removal.
   (C)   Reimbursement of costs. If the grantee fails to complete any work as
required in divisions (A) and (B) above or any work required by law or
ordinance within the time established and to the satisfaction of the grantor,
the city may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall reimburse the
grantor the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs or the grantor may recover such costs as provided in §
114.136 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.8) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.163 SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   Within ten days after execution of the franchise agreement pursuant to
this chapter, the grantee shall deposit with the City Clerk and shall maintain
on deposit through the term of this franchise the sum of $10,000 as security
for the faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise and
compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the contract and the
payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which
arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
   (B)   Within ten days after notice that any amount has been withdrawn from
the security fund deposited pursuant to division (A) above, the grantee shall
pay to or deposit with the City Clerk a sum of money sufficient to restore such
security fund to the original amount of $10,000.
   (C)   (1)   If the grantee fails to pay to the grantor any compensation
within the time fixed or fails after ten days’ notice to pay to the grantor any
taxes due and unpaid or fails to repay to the grantor within such ten days any
damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with this franchise
or fails after three days’ notice of such failure by the grantor to comply with
any provision of this contract which the grantor reasonably determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of the security, the City Clerk may immediately
withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security
fund.
      (2)   Upon such withdrawal, the City Clerk shall notify the company of
the amount and date thereof.
   (D)   The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the grantor if this contract is canceled by reason of the default
of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of such
security fund or portion thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the
term of this franchise; provided that, there is then no outstanding default on
the part of the grantee. Interest earned by the investment of the security fund
will accrue to the grantee.
   (E)   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund
are in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether reserved by this
franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the
grantor may have.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.9) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.164 FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE BOND.
   Upon acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall
submit and maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance
bond in the amount of $100,000. The bond shall ensure compliance with all
applicable laws, regulations, ordinances and provisions of this permit; shall
provide for recoverable loss or damages, compensation, indemnification,
reasonable attorney fees, cost of removal or abandonment of the grantee’s
property; and shall cover penalties of $100 per day for failure to meet the
construction requirements of any franchise agreement.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.10) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
§ 114.999 PENALTY.
   If a grantee fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or a
cable franchise agreement, the city may proceed against the grantee in
accordance with §
10.999(B), (C) and (D) of this code of ordinances, pertaining to municipal
infractions of this code or as authorized by I.C.A. § 364.22. However, this
section does not limit the pursuit by either the grantor or a grantee of any
other civil remedy for any breach of a cable franchise agreement.
(2013 Code, § 8-8.11) (Ord. 14586, passed 4-13-1998)
CHAPTER 115: GAS AND PLUMBING
Section
   
115.001   Enforcement by Plumbing and Gas Inspector
   
115.002   Inspector a part of the Building Department; inspections
   
115.003   Gas fitting and plumbing permit required
   
115.004   Insurance
 
   
115.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Ch. 151
   Housing Code, see
Ch. 152
   Plumbing Code, see
Ch. 153
§ 115.001 ENFORCEMENT BY PLUMBING AND GAS INSPECTOR.
   The Plumbing and Gas Inspector shall enforce all ordinances relating to the
gas heating contractors, gasfitters and plumbing; the rules and regulations of
the state’s Board of Health relating to gas heating contractors, gasfitters and
plumbing; the laws of the state relating thereto; and shall have and perform
such other duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be delegated to
him or her. The Chief Building Official will supervise the Inspector.
(2013 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. 14309, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 14535, passed 4-8-
1996)
§ 115.002 INSPECTOR A PART OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT; INSPECTIONS.
   The city’s Plumbing and Gas Inspector shall be a part of the office of the
city’s Building Department, and the officers therein can inspect any work under
this chapter at any time without notice. Any license, permit or certificate
provided for in this chapter shall be exhibited to such official upon request.
(2013 Code, § 14-4) (Ord. 14309, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 14535, passed 4-8-
1996)
§ 115.003 GAS FITTING OR PLUMBING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall begin the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or repair of any gas fitting, plumbing or house drainage system in
or for any building in the city, without first having obtained a permit from
the City’s Building Department. The City Council shall establish by resolution
a schedule of fees for issuance of gas and plumbing permits.
(2013 Code, § 14-75) (Ord. 14309, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 14535, passed 4-8-
1996)
§ 115.004 INSURANCE.
   Before a gas fitting or plumbing permit shall be issued, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk a liability insurance policy pursuant to §
10.009 of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 14-73) (Ord. 14309, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 14425, passed 5-10-
1993; Ord. 14535, passed 4-8-1996)
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. In addition, a violation of this chapter
is a municipal infraction. In addition to the foregoing, the city’s Plumbing
and Gas Inspector may order the removal, correction or disconnection of any gas
or plumbing installation that does not meet the code specifications and shall
have the authority to disconnect installation when it is found that it
endangers life and health.
(2013 Code, § 14-2) (Ord. 14309, passed 12-18-1989; Ord. 14535, passed 4-8-
1996; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 116: HOTELS
Section
   
116.001   Hotel guest registry
§ 116.001 HOTEL GUEST REGISTRY.
   (A)   The guest register, which is required by I.C.A. § 137C.25E to be
maintained by hotels disclosing the room number, name, residence, date of
arrival and date of departure of each individual renting or leasing a room,
accommodations or facilities of the hotel, shall be immediately disclosed to
any law enforcement officer upon request and proper identification, for
purposes of inspection and copying.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a HOTEL is as defined in I.C.A. § 137C.2
(5), as any building or structure, equipped, used, advertised as or held out to
the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, motor inn or place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to transient guests for hire.
   (C)   Any information which is known or available to the proprietor of the
hotel shall also be provided to law enforcement, but not yet included in the
registry for any reason, shall also be disclosed upon request.
(2013 Code, § 21-151) (Ord. 14887, passed 7-11-2011)
CHAPTER 117: SECONDHAND DEALERS, ITINERANT DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
117.001   Definitions
   
117.002   Permit required
   
117.003   Application
   
117.004   Fee requirement
   
117.005   Issuance
   
117.006   Appeal
   
117.007   Expiration
   
117.008   Revocation
   
117.009   Records of transactions and retention of purchases
   
117.010   Inspection of premises
   
117.011   Prohibitions
 
   
117.999   Violations
§ 117.001 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them for the purpose of the regulations in this section.
   ANTIQUE DEALER. Any dealer primarily engaged in the buying and selling of
collectible objects, including but not limited to pieces of furniture or works
of art that have high value because of the item’s considerable age.
   BULLION. Any bar, ingot or coin comprised of one or more precious metals,
including but not limited to gold, silver, platinum, and palladium, and which
can be exchanged on the basis of the commodity market price for its metal
composition.
   ENGAGED IN or CONDUCTING BUSINESS. The purchase, sale, barter, pawn, or
exchange of any item in this section, including the advertising therefor, by
any business entity or individual subject to state sales tax in the city.
   ITINERANT DEALER. Any dealer as defined herein who engages or has engaged in
any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, hotel room,
motel room, or other premises used for any duration less than 30 consecutive
days or used on a temporary basis.
   MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD. Any place, parcel, or tract of ground, wherein or
whereon there is assembled or brought together six or more used, damaged,
obsolete, worn out, or discarded motor vehicles for the purpose of stripping,
wrecking, disassembling, or otherwise reducing the vehicles into their several
component parts for the purpose of salvaging the materials or parts thereof.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person who shall in any manner lend or advance money or
other things for profit on the pledge or possession of personal property, or
other valuable things, other than securities or written evidence of
indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a
stipulated price.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person who engages in the business of purchasing,
selling, receiving, trading, consignment selling or otherwise transferring for
value any secondhand property. This definition shall include the use of any
automated or camera-enabled kiosk used to purchase secondhand goods from a
seller without the buyer’s physical presence.
   SECONDHAND GOODS. Tangible personal property previously owned by another
person, whether used or not, which property, in its present state, possesses
utility for the purpose for which it was originally intended.
   TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items including:
      (1)   Items made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, copper,
or other precious metals;
      (2)   Items containing or consisting of precious or semiprecious
gemstones or other polished stones used for decoration or jewelry;
      (3)   Fashion accessories with a sale value of $100 or more;
      (4)   Articles with serial numbers, model numbers, or other identifying
marks, including, but not limited to appliances, tools, radios, stereo
equipment, radar detectors, televisions, cellular phones, video recorders,
camcorders, video equipment, computers, computer equipment and accessories,
digital music recorders and players, and cameras;
      (5)   Musical instruments;
      (6)   Rifles, shotguns, handguns, and other firearms;
      (7)   Auto parts; and any other item of value, except:
      (8)   Music or movie cassette tapes and discs, record albums, computer
software and diskettes, and video game cartridges;
      (9)   Clothing;
      (10)   One or more coins collected or exchanged for their numismatic
value, where the scarcity, historical significance, quality, and other unique
factors determine the market value of a coin rather than the commodity price of
the metals that comprise it;
      (11)   Books and textbooks; and
      (12)   Clothes washers and dryers, refrigerators.
   TRANSACTION. Any purchase, sale, barter, pawn, or exchange of any item.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.002 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A secondhand dealer or pawnbroker as defined above must apply for and
obtain a permit prior to being engaged in or conducting business as a
secondhand dealer or pawnbroker. Such permit shall be posted conspicuously in
each place of business named therein.
   (B)    Itinerant dealers as defined above must apply for and obtain a permit
prior to engaging in or conducting business in the city.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.003 APPLICATION.
   (A) The applicant shall file a written, sworn application provided by the
City Clerk. The application must be signed by the applicant, if an individual;
by all partners, if a partnership; or by the president, if a corporation;
   (B)   The application shall include the name of the principals, agents, and
employees of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that
such business will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of
such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or
addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or
persons will act (as proprietor, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and
the address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business
will be carried on if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state
it is incorporated;
   (C)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that
said business shall be conducted;
   (D)   The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, where the applicant within the next six months preceding the date of
said application conducted an itinerant business, stating the nature thereof
and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in
which such business was conducted; and
   (E)   Credentials from the person, firm, or corporation for which the
applicant proposed to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.004 FEE REQUIREMENT.
   Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by the application fee.
The fee shall be in such amount as is set by resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.005 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an original application for a permit, the City Clerk
shall forward the application to the Chief of Police or their designee, who
shall investigate and shall submit a written report on the applicant as to the
truth of the facts averred in the application and a recommendation to the City
Clerk as to the approval of the permit.
   (B)   Applications will also be forwarded to the Zoning Administrator for
compliance review with the zoning ordinance. Certain uses may require a special
use permit which extends the review period.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of
the offense of receiving stolen goods, burglary, or robbery, or to a person who
has been convicted of a financial crime more serious than a simple misdemeanor,
or to a person who has been convicted of any felony, nor shall any permit be
issued to any applicant whose employees, co-owners or business partners have
been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods, burglary or robbery,
or convicted of a financial crime more serious than a simple misdemeanor, or
convicted of any felony. However, the prohibition against applicants who are
felons or against employees, partners, or other persons involved in the
business who are felons obtaining a permit shall not apply to a felon whose
citizenship rights, including the right to possess firearms, have been fully
restored by the Governor.
   (D)   Within ten business days of the completion of the review, the City
Clerk shall issue a permit or deny a permit for reasons including but not
limited to the following:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement of material or
relevant facts contained in the application; or
      (2)   That the applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or
enterprise; or
      (3)   That the applicant has engaged in a pattern of criminal activity,
fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement of material or relevant facts
contained in the application; or
      (4)   Zoning code violation.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.006 APPEAL.
   If the application for a permit is denied, the City Clerk shall mail to the
applicant, by certified mail, a written statement of the decision with a brief
statement of the reason(s) therefor. An appeal may be made in writing to the
City Clerk, or their designee, within ten days of the receipt of the decision.
The written appeal shall state the specific grounds for the appeal. The Mayor
shall designate three Council members to hold a hearing within a reasonable
time from the receipt of the appeal. At the hearing, the applicant or permit
holder may be represented by counsel, may cross-examine witnesses, and may
present evidence in their favor. The panel of Council members may grant or deny
the appeal. That decision shall be final.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.007 EXPIRATION.
   Secondhand dealer, itinerant dealer, and pawnbroker permits shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which it is issued. If a business is discontinued,
moved, or sold within one year after issuance, the permit expires and a new
permit must be obtained before the business is recommenced. The annual permit
is a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be a
partial refund of the application fee where the permit holder discontinues
their business prior to December 31 of the year in which the permit was issued.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.008 REVOCATION.
   Any permit may be recommended for revocation by the City Clerk, or their
designee if it is found that the permit holder has knowingly violated any
provision of this chapter. The Mayor shall designate three Council members to
hold a hearing. The City Clerk shall mail to the permit holder, by certified
mail, a written notice of the hearing 20 days before the hearing date. The
notice shall set forth the grounds of the proposed revocation and the time and
place of the hearing. At the hearing, the permit holder may be represented by
counsel, may cross-examine witnesses, and present evidence in their favor. The
decision of the panel of council members shall be final.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.009 RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS AND RETENTION OF PURCHASES.
   (A)   Records. The city Chief of Police shall designate an Internet-based
property tracking service. Every permit holder shall report each transaction of
secondhand goods and tangible personal property within 72 hours of the
transaction to the Internet-based tracking service. Itinerant dealers have the
option to keep and maintain a physical record book of transactions that shall
be presented to the city Police Department for inspection and photocopying
before the itinerant dealer leaves the city if they choose not to utilize the
Internet-based tracking service. The record of each transaction shall include:
      (1)   An accurate and detailed account of the sale, purchase, pawn,
trade, or exchange;
      (2)   Serial and model numbers, a transcription of any engraving or other
identifying labels, marking, or writings located on the item, the brand name,
and model name;
      (3)   The number and description of any decorative precious or
semiprecious gems, stones, or jewelry;
      (4)   The date and time of the transaction; and
      (5)   A description of the person selling, consigning, purchasing,
pawning, trading, or exchanging the item, which description shall include the
person’s first and last name, address of residence, date of birth, and driver’s
license or state-issued identification card number including the state.
   (B)   Antique dealer. Every antique dealer shall be exempt from the
recording, reporting, and retention requirements of this section.
   (C)   Transactions exempt from reporting. Any transaction of the following
shall not be required to comply with the reporting and retention requirements
of this section:
      (1)   Any transaction of goods at a garage sale, yard sale, or estate
sale, which shall be construed as the infrequent, periodic sale of
miscellaneous household or personal articles on the premises of a private
residence;
      (2)   Any consignment transaction of secondhand goods or the sale of
secondhand goods donated without compensation;
      (3)   Any transaction of goods at an auction.
   (D)   Retention of items. No dealer shall sell, deliver, melt, change the
form of, or dispose of any item subject to this section of the Code of
Ordinances within ten business days of the acquisition of such item unless one
of the following exceptions is met:
      (1)   Permission to do so is granted in writing by the city Chief of
Police or designee; or
      (2)   A pawned item is returned to the person who pawned the item within
the ten-day retention period pursuant to the agreed upon terms; or
      (3)   The item is bullion.
      (4)   The city Chief of Police or designee may inspect all items for
which a request to dispose of has been granted before the end of the ten-day
retention period.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.010 INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Every permit holder shall admit any police officer to its premises during
its regular business hours to examine articles purchased or received and to
search for and to take into possession any article known by that officer to
have been reported missing or known or believed by the officer to have been
stolen.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.011 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No permit holder shall conceal, secrete, or destroy for the purpose of
concealing, any item purchased or acquired for the purpose of preventing
identification thereof by a police officer or any person claiming to own the
same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any permit holder in the course of business
to acquire by purchase, barter, exchange, or pawn, any goods from any person
under 18 years of age.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to acquire by purchase,
barter, exchange, or pawn items bearing evidence of a serial number that has
been tampered with or scratched, or obliterated in any manner unless such
person immediately contacts the city Police Department.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to acquire by purchase,
barter, exchange, or pawn any items prior to examining photo identification
with a physical description of the person selling, bartering, exchanging, or
pawning said articles.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any permit holder to intentionally
misrepresent or falsify any record of an item, seller, or transaction required
to be reported to the city Police Department under this chapter.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
§ 117.999 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute municipal
infractions punishable as provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances including but not limited to the imposition
of civil penalties and/or requests for injunctive relief. After written notice
of such violation, each day a violation is permitted to exist beyond the
expiration of the time designated on said notice shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 15053, passed 11-28-2022)
CHAPTER 118: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
118.001   Definitions
   
118.002   License required
   
118.003   Certain exemptions
   
118.004   License application for peddler or solicitor
   
118.005   License application for transient merchant
   
118.006   State food license required
   
118.007   License issuance
   
118.008   Permitted locations
   
118.009   Time restrictions
   
118.010   Permitted mobile facilities or vehicles
   
118.011   Fees
   
118.012   License display
   
118.013   License revocation; right to appeal
   
118.014   Transfer of license and limited use
 
   
118.999   Penalty
§ 118.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery
goods or merchandise from house-to-house, business-to-business, or upon public
property.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house-to-
house, business-to- business, or upon public property an order for goods,
subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
   SPECIAL COMMUNITY-WIDE EVENT. An event or community celebration for which a
public use permit under §
130.003 has been issued and deemed exempt from licensing in this chapter at the
discretion of the City Clerk.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, or corporation who engages in a
merchandising
business on any parcel that requires a State of Iowa mobile food unit license.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15094, passed 10-14-2024)
§ 118.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Unless otherwise exempted by other provisions of this chapter, any peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant operating within the city without first
obtaining a license for such activity as herein provided, or operating in
violation of the terms of the license, commits a simple misdemeanor subject to
a fine.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 118.003 CERTAIN EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following shall be exempt from the license requirement:
      (1)   Newspaper carriers;
      (2)   Youth fundraisers such as Scouts of America, community school
districts;
      (3)   Farmer's Market vendors;
      (4)   Farmer and gardener stands selling agricultural products they have
grown;
      (5)   Persons operating during special community-wide events, at the
discretion of the City Clerk; and
      (6)   Political campaigns.
   (B)   While exempted from the license fee requirement, authorized
representatives of religious, non-profit, and charitable organizations, or
sponsors of a charitable event, desiring to solicit money or to distribute
pertinent literature, must first apply to the City Clerk for approval. Such
application shall set forth the name of such organization or sponsor and
charitable purpose for which such activity is sought, the names and addresses
of the officers and directors of the organization, satisfactory verification of
its 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status, specification of the dates and times during
which such activities are to be conducted and of the amounts of any
commissions, fees or wages which are to be charged in connection with the
activity. Upon proper application by a bona fide charitable or religious
organization, the City Clerk shall issue the applicable license containing the
above information to the applicant free of charge, subject to the time
limitations as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 118.004 LICENSE APPLICATION FOR PEDDLER OR SOLICITOR.
   A written application shall be filed with the City Clerk for a license under
this chapter unless exempted under §
118.003. Such application shall set forth the applicant's company name, contact
person, phone number, address, email address, individuals that will be
licensed, and description of any vehicles. An applicant for a license shall
submit recent photo identification and a copy of a current Department of
Criminal Investigations (DCI) background check. The application shall also set
forth the locations of activities and the length of time requested to be
covered by the license.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 118.005 LICENSE APPLICATION FOR TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
   A written application shall be filed with the City Clerk for a license under
this chapter unless exempted under §
118.003. Such application shall set forth the applicant's company name, contact
person, phone number, address, email address, description of unit, and names of
individuals operating the unit. The applicant must submit a copy of a current
State of Iowa Food License as required by §
118.006. Transient merchants shall make the facility or vehicle available for
visual inspection by the Fire Marshal or their designee at a reasonably
convenient location. A renewal license may be issued annually without
reapplication if completed within 30 days of expiration. For a renewal, the
license holder must supply a valid State of Iowa Food License and pass annual
inspection with the Fire Marshal or their designee.
(Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.006 STATE FOOD LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Before such license is issued under provisions of this chapter, the
applicant for the license shall submit to the City Clerk a state food sales
license when applicable food items are intended to be sold.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.007 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   If the City Clerk finds the application in conformity with the requirements
of this chapter, that all federal and state law requirements have been met,
that the facts stated within the application are accurate, that the applicant
has not committed a crime of violence, theft, fraud or dishonesty, other than
simple misdemeanors, has committed no prior violations of this chapter and is
not a person required to register as a sex offender, the City Clerk shall issue
a license upon payment of the applicable fee. The Clerk may rely upon the
results of any routine background check without responsibility for verifying
the accuracy of any information contained therein. The Chief of Police or City
Attorney may authorize exceptions to criminal histories based on circumstances
such as the number of years since the charge. A State of Iowa Division of
Criminal Investigation background check is valid for one year.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 118.008 PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Peddler or solicitor licenses are issued for use in locations across
the city.
   (B)   Transient merchants issued an annual license are permitted to operate
only on paved portions of private commercial-use property locations. A license
must be obtained even if the transient merchant is operating on their
commercial property.
   (C)   Transient merchants issued a 24-hour license are authorized to operate
on public or private property locations as approved on the application.
   (D)   Requests to operate in the Marshalltown Central Business District will
only be considered if it is at the request of the Marshalltown Central Business
District or a Main Street business. Parking will only be permitted in front of
a business with the owner's written permission and a public use permit issued
by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.009 TIME RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Peddler or solicitor licenses allow activity only between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
   (B)   Transient merchant licenses issued for private commercial-use
properties shall be allowed at all times, Sunday through Saturday, upon
authorization that the owner of the location where sales occur consents to use
of its business premises for that purpose and that neither traffic nor nearby
residents will be adversely affected.
      (1)   If the City of Marshalltown receives complaints from neighboring
residents, the City Clerk reserves the right to require the licensee to move
locations or limit the days and hours of operation.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.010 PERMITTED MOBILE FACILITIES OR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Mobile vendors shall operate only from facilities or vehicles which
are structurally sound, in good repair and appearance, with no visible rust or
damage. Adequate waste disposal receptacles shall be conveniently provided for
customer use. No waste or garbage shall be allowed to accumulate on the
exterior of the facility or vehicle. All grease shall be disposed of lawfully.
Electrical connections shall be outdoor-rated with functioning ground fault
interrupters (GFls) and no extension cords shall cross any sidewalk or public
access.
   (B)   Electrical connections across any sidewalk or public access shall be
made by proper underground wiring method in compliance with the National
Electric Code (NEC).
   (C)   Vendors shall comply with
Chapter 91: Fire Prevention and Protection of this Code.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.011 FEES.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
118.003, every applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay the fee,
set by Council resolution before a license shall be issued.
   (B)   A peddler or solicitor license shall be issued by the day per person.
   (C)   A transient merchant license shall be issued annually per unit for
operation on private commercial-use property.
      (1)   Transient merchants who also have a brick and mortar operation
shall be issued an annual license for operation on private commercial property.
   (D)   A 24-hour transient merchant license may be issued for operation on
public or private property. This is the only eligible license for operation on
public property. It may be issued in addition to an annual license.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022; Ord. 15087, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 118.012 LICENSE DISPLAY.
   (A)   Each solicitor or peddler shall, at all times while doing business in
the city, keep in his or her possession and display upon request of any city
official, peace officer, or prospective customer, the license issued pursuant
to this chapter, and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit
the license as evidence that they have complied with all requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Each transient merchant shall publicly and visibly display the license
at its temporary place of business.
   (C)   Licenses issued to any entity under the provisions of this chapter are
not transferable in any situation and grants authority only to the entity
applying.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.013 LICENSE REVOCATION; RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   (A)   If the licensee, in the application for the license or in the course
of conducting his or her business, has made incorrect or fraudulent statements,
has conducted his or her business or activity unlawfully, or violated an
ordinance or statute, including placement of illegal signage, or if the
licensee has conducted his or her business in such manner as to endanger the
public welfare or safety, the City Clerk may revoke any license issued under
this chapter. If a license is revoked the licensee is not eligible for
reimbursement of any portion of the license fee.
   (B)   The licensee may appeal the revocation of the license to the City
Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a
written request for an appeal to the City Council. The City Council may affirm,
modify or reverse its decision or the decision of the Clerk to revoke such
license.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 118.014 TRANSFER OF LICENSE AND LIMITED USE.
   No license provided for in this chapter shall be transferred without the
consent of the Mayor endorsed thereon in writing. No license issued under this
chapter shall include more than one transient merchant or extend to or include
more than one peddler or solicitor under a single license.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 118.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of §§
118.001 through
118.014 shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties as provided in §
10.999(A) and (B) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 15041, passed 5-23-2022)
CHAPTER 119: PUBLIC SALES
Section
   
119.001   Definitions
   
119.002   License required
   
119.003   Clerk; powers and duties
   
119.004   License application; contents; investigation
   
119.005   Bond
   
119.006   License fees
   
119.007   License issuance
   
119.008   License period; renewal
   
119.009   Fraudulent or misleading advertising
   
119.010   Adding to stock of goods during sale or license period
   
119.011   License renewal
   
119.012   License revocation
   
119.013   License display; inspection; advertising; books and records
   
119.014   Exemptions
   
119.015   Violations
§ 119.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISING and ADVERTISEMENT. Includes the terms PUBLISH and PUBLISHING and
means and includes any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale
or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by
newspaper advertisement, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by circular,
by pamphlet, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed display, by
billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement, by radio program, by
recordings and/or any and all means including oral, written or printed.
   GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE. The sale or an offer to sell at retail to the
public goods, wares and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on
hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by
advertising, on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the
termination, closing, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, moving,
conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. It
shall also include any sale advertised, either specifically or in substance, to
be an adjustment sale, creditor’s sale, trustee’s sale, bankrupt sale,
insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee sale,
adjustor’s sale and the like, receiver’s sale, loss of lease sale, forced out
of business sale, going out of business sale, removal sale, and any and all
sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that,
upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at its existing location.
   LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
   PUBLISH and PUBLISHING. See ADVERTISING.
   RESIDENT MERCHANT. A merchant who has maintained an established place of
retail business within the city for the sale at retail of goods similar to
those to be sold at the sale described in this chapter, for a continuous period
of one year or more directly preceding the opening date of such sale.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any merchant doing or contemplating doing business in
the city and who does not come within the definition of a “resident merchant”
in this section.
(2013 Code, § 17-193) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964)
§ 119.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall publish or conduct any sale of the type defined in this
chapter without a license therefore, duly issued in accordance with this
chapter, and remaining in effect and unrevoked.
(2013 Code, § 17-194) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 119.003 CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City Clerk is authorized and empowered to supervise or regulate sales or
special sales, defined in §
119.001 of this chapter, to issue appropriate licenses therefor upon the proper
application therefor as provided in this chapter, and to provide for the
investigation of applications therefor and for the issuance of licenses thereon
by the necessary officer.
(2013 Code, § 17-195) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 119.004 LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing
to the City Clerk in a form to be approved by the City Council and shall be
verified by the applicant. Such application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
      (2)   The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership, lease or
sublease;
      (3)   The effective date of termination of such occupancy;
      (4)   The means to be employed in publishing such sale;
      (5)   The proposed language to be used in the advertisements to indicate
the nature of the sale;
      (6)   A statement of the intention of the applicant in holding such sale;
      (7)   A statement in what manner such descriptive name is truthfully
descriptive of such sale;
      (8)   A statement as to whether or not any merchandise of any kind,
quantity or description has been purchased by or delivered to the applicant for
the purpose of being included in such sale; and
      (9)   A statement that the applicant agrees not to purchase or accept
delivery of any merchandise, goods or wares of any kind, nature or description
to be sold at such sale after the date of the application.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such application and payment of the fee prescribed in
this chapter, the City Clerk shall cause the application to be examined and
investigated.
(2013 Code, § 17-196) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 119.005 BOND.
   Before the City Clerk shall issue a license under this chapter, the
applicant shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the penal sum of
$1,000 signed by such applicant and also signed by a surety company duly
authorized to transact business in the state. This bond shall be conditioned
upon the faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter and also
conditioned to reimburse and indemnify any purchaser at any such sale, as
provided for in this chapter, duly held by such licensee for any loss incurred
or damage sustained by such purchaser by reason of misrepresentation or fraud
in the sale of any such goods, wares or merchandise.
(2013 Code, § 17-197)
§ 119.006 LICENSE FEES.
   Upon filing an original application or a renewal application for a license
to advertise and conduct a sale as defined in this chapter, if the applicant is
a resident merchant as defined, the applicant shall pay a license fee
determined by Council resolution. If any application or renewal application is
disapproved, one-half of the payment shall be forfeited to the city, as and for
the cost of investigating the statements made in such application or renewal
application. The license fee for each 30-day renewal period shall be one-half
of the respective license fees described in this section.
(2013 Code, § 17-198) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964)
§ 119.007 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   If, upon investigation, the facts as represented by the application for the
license required under this subchapter are found to conform to the
representations thereof, if the reason given for the sale is satisfactory, if
there appears to have been no stockpiling of merchandise for the sale and there
has been no fraud or deception in the application, and the advertisements
proposed to be used truly represent such facts and are not fraudulent or
misleading to the public, the City Clerk may issue a license permitting the
publication and conduct of such sale.
(2013 Code, § 17-199) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 119.008 LICENSE PERIOD; RENEWAL.
   (A)   A license issued under this subchapter shall be for a period not
exceeding 60 days. Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock on
hand at the time of the original application has not been disposed of and upon
proper application, the City Clerk shall cause the application to be examined
and investigated. If satisfied as to the truth of the statements therein
contained, the City Clerk may issue a renewal license for two consecutive
periods of 30 days duration each upon payment of the prescribed renewal fees
therefor.
   (B)   Upon the termination of such sale, no such license shall be issued to
the applicant for the period of one year from such termination sale.
(2013 Code, § 17-200) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 119.009 FRAUDULENT OR MISLEADING ADVERTISING.
   (A)   Under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to advertise
or cause to be advertised goods, wares or merchandise for a sale, as defined in
this chapter, which do not conform to the representations of the advertisement.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to publish or cause to be
published advertising falsely representing the reason for such a sale.
(2013 Code, § 17-201) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 119.010 ADDING TO STOCK OF GOODS DURING SALE OR LICENSE PERIOD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person publishing or conducting a sale under
this chapter to purchase or add to the stock of goods offered for sale any
goods during a sale or during the effective period of a license issued under
this chapter or to sell any goods at such sale, except those on hand at the
time of applying for the license.
(2013 Code, § 17-202) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 119.011 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   Any licensee, as defined in §
119.001 of this chapter, who desires a renewal license shall make application
for such renewal license in writing to the City Clerk in a form to be approved
by the City Council, which shall be verified by the licensee.
   (B)   Such application shall contain the following information as set forth
in §
119.004 of this chapter, including:
      (1)   A statement as to whether or not any merchandise has been purchased
by or delivered to the applicant for the purpose of being included in the sale
and an approximate percentage of unsold merchandise; and
      (2)   A statement as to the proportion of the original inventory on hand
at the time of commencing the sale that still remains on hand and unsold.
(2013 Code, § 17-203) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964)
§ 119.012 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   If, at any time during a sale under provisions of this chapter, the City
Clerk shall determine that any of the sections of this chapter or any of the
statements in such license application were untrue or have been or are being
violated by the applicant, the City Clerk may immediately revoke the license,
and it shall thenceforth be unlawful for the applicant or licensee to continue
such sale until a new license is issued in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
(2013 Code, § 17-204) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 119.013 LICENSE DISPLAY; INSPECTION; ADVERTISING; BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Upon recommencement of any sale, as defined in this chapter, the license
issued by the City Clerk shall be permanently displayed near the entrance to
the premises. A duplicate original of the application and stock list pursuant
to which such license was issued shall, at all times, be available to the City
Clerk or to the Inspector, and the licensee shall permit such inspector to
examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock list at
any and all times during the period of such sale. All advertisements or
advertising and the language contained therein shall be in accordance with the
purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which a license
was issued, and the wording of such advertisement shall not vary from the
wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising shall contain a
statement in these words: “Sale held pursuant to Permit No.            of the
City of Marshalltown, Iowa, granted the                   day of
                            ,                ” and in such blank spaces shall
be indicated the permit number and the requisite dates. Books and records of
the sale shall be kept by the licensee and shall, at all times, be available to
the Inspector.
(2013 Code, § 17-205) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964; Ord. 14609, passed 12-30-
1998)
§ 119.014 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
   (A)   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
   (B)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officers, such as sheriffs, bailiffs or marshals;
   (C)   Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auctions; and
   (D)   Executors, guardians, assignees of insolvent debtors, bankrupts and/or
other persons required by law to sell such property.
(2013 Code, § 17-206) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964)
§ 119.015 VIOLATIONS.
   Any applicant or licensee described in this chapter who shall violate,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the sections of this chapter or who
shall make a false statement in any application for a license as required in
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in §
119.012 of this chapter and any license issued under this chapter shall be
revoked.
(2013 Code, § 17-207) (Ord. 10586, passed 5-11-1964)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
133.   OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
      
134.   NOISE CONTROL
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Unlawful assembly
   
130.002   Riot
   
130.003   Public use and special event permits
   
130.004   Assembly interfering with lawful business, occupations; use of
private property without consent
   
130.005   Driving motor scooter or similar vehicle upon public tennis court
   
130.006   Use of skateboards, roller blades and like instruments limited
   
130.007   Criminal mischief
   
130.008   Spitting in police vehicles and buildings
   
130.009   Disorderly conduct
   
130.010   Obstructing passage
   
130.011   Refusing signal of officer
   
130.012   Loud noises; noises from sirens and tires
   
130.013   Public officials; harassment; impersonation
   
130.014   Deceptive advertising
   
130.015   Radio and television interference
   
130.016   Indecent exposure
   
130.017   Urinating in improper places
   
130.018   Fireworks
   
130.019   Garage sales
Drugs and Alcohol
   
130.030   Intoxication; open containers
   
130.031   Sniffing glue or other chemical substances
   
130.032   Drug paraphernalia
Weapons
   
130.045   [Reserved]
   
130.046   [Reserved]
   
130.047   [Reserved]
   
130.048   Hunting within city boundaries
   
130.049   Animals and fowl; killing, cleaning, butchering in public view
   
130.050   Firearms; discharge
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   An UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY is three or more persons assembled together, with them
or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any of
them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain
a part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe
that it is such.
(2013 Code, § 21-1) (Ord. 11806, passed 1-12-1971; Ord. 12455, passed 4-23-
1974) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful assembly, see I.C.A. § 723.2
§ 130.002 RIOT.
   A RIOT is three or more persons assembled together in a violent manner, to
the disturbance of others and with any use of unlawful force or violence by
them or any of them against another person or causing property damage. No
person shall willingly join in or remain a part of a riot, knowing or having
reasonable grounds to believe that it is such.
(2013 Code, § 21-1.1) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.003 PUBLIC USE AND SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Required. It is unlawful for any person to be or be concerned in or
join or participate in any assembly, meeting, concert, parade, or other
exercise or display or demonstration upon any street, sidewalk or public
ground, or other public places without a written permit issued to one or more
of the participants thereof by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Contents of the online application can be completed on the city
website. The application for a permit shall state the following:
      (1)   The name, phone number, and email address of the applicant;
      (2)   The sponsoring organization, if any;
      (3)   The exact location of the event or the exact starting and ending
points of the parade as well as the exact route to be followed;
      (4)   Exactly what provisions have been made for dispersal of the event
or parade, so such may be accomplished reasonably;
      (5)   What contingency plans exist to maintain order and to control the
group if any;
      (6)   The exact time the event or parade is to commence and terminate;
      (7)   Devices or things that may produce noise, dirt, smoke, litter, or
odor and the applicant's means of limiting, controlling, or removing such; and
      (8)   If alcohol is requested at said event.
      (9)   Such other and further information the City Clerk may request.
   (C)   Conditions. All such permits shall be issued on the express condition
that all laws, statutes, or ordinances be observed and obeyed and that all
activities be organized, peaceful and controlled. Applicants must adhere to
State of Iowa event guidelines and licensing requirements.
   (D)   Restrictions. The Chief of Police may put such reasonable restrictions
that he or she may deem necessary to preserve peace and order or promote
traffic and pedestrian control, and generally protect the rights of others.
   (E)   Fees.
      (1)   The Public Works Division will drop off and pick up a stocked
trailer with barricades, cones, and channelizers for small-scale events for a
required fee as set by resolution. The organizer is responsible for setting up
and taking down all barricades and equipment and returning them to the trailer
after the event.
      (2)   The Public Works Division will drop off and pick up barricades,
cones, and channelizers at requested drop points for large-scale events for a
required fee as set by resolution. The organizer is responsible for setting up
and taking down all barricades, cones, and channelizers and leaving them at the
drop points after the event.
      (3)   The Chief of Police may bill for the use of equipment or extra-duty
police personnel due to public use permits.
(2013 Code, § 21-2) (Ord. 13149, passed 6-13-1977; Ord. 15040, passed 5-9-2022)
Penalty, see §  
130.999
§ 130.004 ASSEMBLY INTERFERING WITH LAWFUL BUSINESS, OCCUPATIONS; USE OF
PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to assemble or congregate with others in such
a manner and for the purpose of preventing or interfering with another’s
pursuit of a lawful occupation, public duty or the ordinary conduct of
business, public or private, or for any persons, individually or collectively,
to use another’s property for any purpose without his or her consent.
(2013 Code, § 21-3) (Ord. 11806, passed 1-12-1971) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.005 DRIVING MOTOR SCOOTER OR SIMILAR VEHICLE UPON PUBLIC TENNIS COURT.
   It is unlawful to drive, propel or ride a motor scooter, scooter, bicycle,
skate scooter, skates, coaster wagon or a similar wheeled contrivance upon any
tennis court owned by the public or dedicated to public use.
(2013 Code, § 21-4) (Ord. 10665, passed 10-12-1964) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.006 USE OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER BLADES AND LIKE INSTRUMENTS LIMITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUSINESS DISTRICTS OF THE CITY. For purposes of this section only,
includes only the following streets: Main Street from 2nd Street to 3rd Avenue;
2nd Street from State Street to Church Street; 1st Street from State Street to
Church Street; Center Street from State Street to Church Street; 1st Avenue
from State Street to Church Street; 2nd Avenue from State Street to Church
Street.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Alleys, parking lots, buildings owned or occupied by the
city, the Iowa Veterans Home and terraces or parkades adjacent to roadways.
      SKATEBOARD (OR OTHER LIKE INSTRUMENT). Any non-motorized instrument used
to transport a person by means of wheels or rollers propelled solely by the
force of its rider and does not include any wagon or other device not so
propelled.
   (B)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   No person shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of any
skateboard or like instrument on any sidewalk, parking lot or public place in
the business districts of the city.
      (2)   No person shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of any
skateboard or like instrument on any street in the city or at the Iowa Veterans
Home.
   (C)   Restricted use.
      (1)   The use of any skateboard or other like instrument is permitted on
all other sidewalks and in all other public places, except those mentioned in
divisions (A) and (B) above, within the city.
      (2)   Provided, however, that, any person who shall use, operate or
permit to be used or operated any such skateboard or like instrument shall do
so in a careful and prudent manner and not in a manner so as to cause or be
likely to cause danger or injury to any person or property.
   (D)   Right-of-way. The user or passenger of any such skateboard or like
instrument shall give the right-of-way to any pedestrian, motor vehicle or any
other user of the sidewalk or public place and shall not interfere with the
proper use of any sidewalk or public place by any other person.
(2013 Code, § 21-4.1) (Ord. 13525, passed 4-9-1979; Ord. 14498, passed 2-27-
1995) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   Any damage, defacing, alteration or destruction of tangible property is
criminal mischief when done intentionally by one who has no right to so act,
which is prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 21-5) (Ord. 10665, passed 10-12-1964; Ord. 10905, passed 5-11-
1966) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.008 SPITTING IN POLICE VEHICLES AND BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to spit within any police vehicle, public
building or private building commonly open to the public, food establishment,
restaurant, hotel, motel, motor inn, cocktail lounge or tavern.
(2013 Code, § 21-9) (Ord. 14423, passed 4-26-1993) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.009 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person commits a violation of this section when the person does any of the
following:
   (A)   Engages in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons; provided that, participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport;
   (B)    Directs abusive epithets or makes any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another;
   (C)   Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs
any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly;
   (D)   By words or action initiates or circulates a report or warning of
fire, epidemic or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or such
warning to be baseless; and/or
   (E)   Without authority or justification, obstructs any street, sidewalk,
highway or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful
use by others.
(2013 Code, § 21-13) (Ord. 10877, passed 2-28-1966; Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-
2020)  Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.010 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE.
   It is unlawful to join any group or company of persons so as to obstruct the
entrance to any building, sidewalk or stairway.
(2013 Code, § 21-33) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.011 REFUSING SIGNAL OF OFFICER.
   It is unlawful to refuse, neglect or fail to obey the signal of any flag
person on duty at a railroad crossing.
(2013 Code, § 21-36) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.012 LOUD NOISES; NOISES FROM SIRENS AND TIRES.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle stereo (stereo, tape player,
compact disc player, radio or any other sound amplification device) in a public
place or on any public right-of-way that can be heard a distance of 50 feet or
more from the motor vehicle stereo. The provisions of this section may be
enforced following personal observation or hearing, or both, of any police
officer or upon receipt of a complaint made or filed with the Police Department
by any person observing and hearing a violation. The Noise Control Office may
grant a temporary variance to this section to facilitate special events. The
Noise Control Office is specifically authorized to revoke the variance if the
applicant shall fail to meet any of the limitations placed on the noise permit
or other circumstances occurring subsequent to the grant of the variance
requiring such revocation, or both.
   (B)   It is unlawful to use a siren on any vehicle, except an emergency
vehicle.
   (C)   It is unlawful to make an unreasonable loud noise by means of
squealing tires on a vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 21-37) (2013 Code, § 21-37.1) (Ord. 14740, passed 7-12-2004; Ord.
14749, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 14999, passed 7-
13-2020; Ord. 15063, passed 7-10-2023) Penalty, see  
130.999
§ 130.013 PUBLIC OFFICIALS; HARASSMENT; IMPERSONATION.
   (A)   Any person who willfully prevents or attempts to prevent any public
officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty commits a
violation of this division (A).
(2013 Code, § 21-38)
   (B)   Any person who falsely claims to be or assumes to act as an elected or
appointed officer, magistrate, peace officer or person authorized to act on
behalf of the state or any subdivision thereof, having no authority to do so,
commits a violation of this division (B).
(2013 Code, § 21-39)
(Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. §§ 718.2 and 718.4
§ 130.014 DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING.
   (A)   The term MATERIAL FACT, as used in this section, does not include
repairs of damage to or adjustments on or replacements of parts with new parts
of otherwise new merchandise if the repairs, adjustments or replacements are
made to achieve compliance with factory specifications and are made before sale
of the merchandise at retail and the actual cost of any labor and parts charged
to or performed by a retailer for any such repairs, adjustments and parts does
not exceed $300 or 10% of the actual cost to a retailer including freight of
the merchandise, whichever is less; providing that, the seller posts in a
conspicuous place notice that repairs, adjustments or replacements will be
disclosed upon request. The exemption provided in this division (A) does not
apply to the concealment, suppression or omission of a material fact if the
purchaser requests disclosure of any repair, adjustment or replacement.
   (B)   The act, use or employment by a person of an unfair practice,
deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise or misrepresentation or the
concealment, suppression or omission of a material fact with intent that others
rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission, in connection with the
lease, sale or advertisement of any merchandise or the solicitation of
contributions for charitable purposes, whether or not a person has in fact been
misled, deceived or damaged, is an unlawful practice.
   (C)   It is DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING, within the meaning of this section, for a
person to represent in connection with the lease, sale or advertisement of any
merchandise that the advertised merchandise has certain performance
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits or that certain services are
performed on behalf of clients or customers of that person if, at the time of
the representation, no reasonable basis for the claim existed. The burden is on
the person making the representation to demonstrate that a reasonable basis for
the claim existed.
   (D)   A retailer who uses advertising for a product, other than a drug or
other product claiming to have a health-related benefit or use, prepared by a
supplier shall not be liable under this section unless the retailer:
participated in the preparation of the advertisement; knew or should have known
that the advertisement was deceptive, false or misleading; refused to withdraw
the product from sales upon the request of the Attorney General pending a
determination of whether the advertisement was deceptive, false or misleading;
refused upon the request of the Attorney General to provide the name and
address of the supplier; or refused to cooperate with the Attorney General in
an action brought against the supplier under this section.
(2013 Code, § 21-47) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 714.16(2)(a)
§ 130.015 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful to use, operate or maintain or permit the use, operation or
maintenance of any electrical machine, instrument, motor, appliance, device,
fixture or accessory which causes radio or television interference or
interference with radio or television reception by any radio or television
receiving set, apparatus or appliance.
(2013 Code, § 21-48) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.016 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   A person who exposes the person’s genitals or pubes to another not the
person’s spouse or who commits a sex act in the presence of or view of a third
person commits a violation of this section, if the person:
   (A)   Does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of either party; and/
or
   (B)   Knows or reasonably should know that the act is offensive to the
viewer.
(2013 Code, § 21-52) (Ord. 12787, passed 9-25-1975) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 709.9
§ 130.017 URINATING IN IMPROPER PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in any place in the city,
except where toilet facilities are provided for such purpose.
(2013 Code, § 21-52.1) (Ord. 14357, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 14709, passed 3-24-
2003; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.018 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. As defined in I.C.A. § 727.2, including items such as
firecrackers, Roman candles, bottle rockets, and other similar devices intended
for personal use.
      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks intended for commercial or public
display, requiring a permit under state law and local regulations.
      NOVELTIES. Legal items such as party poppers, snappers, and sparklers,
which are not classified as consumer fireworks.
   (B)   Prohibited use.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C) below, the use, discharge, or
ignition of consumer fireworks is prohibited within the city limits of
Marshalltown.
      (2)   It shall also be unlawful for any property owner, or any person in
possession of the property, to knowingly permit the use of consumer fireworks
or display fireworks on the owner’s property within city limits in violation of
this section.
   (C)   Permitted use.
      (1)   Consumer fireworks may only be used, discharged, or ignited during
the following periods: July 3, July 4, December 31.
      (2)   Use of consumer fireworks outside of these designated dates is
strictly prohibited.
      (3)   Display fireworks may be used only by permit, issued by the City of
Marshalltown in accordance with applicable state and local regulations.
(2013 Code, § 21-54) (Ord. 14971, passed 3-13-2018; Ord. 15105, passed 6-9-
2025) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.019 GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GARAGE SALE. The casual sale or offering for sale of personal property on
residential premises in the city and includes a porch sale, yard sale, moving
sale or any other sale that falls within the definition of this term. The term
GARAGE SALE shall not mean a home occupation, as defined by Ch. 158 of this
code of ordinances.
      RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Any zoning classification preceded by an “R”.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a garage sale for more
than three days in any one month. A garage sale shall not follow a preceding
garage sale unless seven days have elapsed between such sales. No person, firm
or corporation shall permit or allow the personal property being offered for
sale to remain visible from the street or from any other contiguous or
adjoining property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. the following
day. No person shall allow signs advertising garage sales to remain upon
conclusion of the sale and no advertising signs shall be posted on city or
other street or light poles.
(2013 Code, § 21-58) (Ord. 14138, passed 8-23-1982; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
130.999
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL
§ 130.030 INTOXICATION; OPEN CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Intoxication; simulated intoxication in a public place. It is unlawful
and an offense against the peace and dignity of the city for any person to be
intoxicated or simulate intoxication in a public place.
(2013 Code, § 21-10)
   (B)   Open containers prohibited on public ways.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open or unsealed
bottle, can, jar or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage on any
public sidewalk, street, alley or parking lot, or within a motor vehicle.
      (2)   The Council shall have the power to grant exceptions to this
division (B) for special events and activities. Exceptions may be granted after
City Council review and approval by resolution.
(2013 Code, § 21-11.1)
(Ord. 14489, passed 1-19-1995; Ord. 14643, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 14768, passed
8-22-2005; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.031 SNIFFING GLUE OR OTHER CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or
nervous system, smell or inhale the fumes from any model glue or cement, hair
spray, spray paint, inhalers and other solvents or chemicals having the
property of releasing toxic vapors.
(2013 Code, § 21-12) (Ord. 14424, passed 4-26-1993) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.032 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the use,
possession with intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia,
as defined in this section.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The same as the term “controlled substance” is
defined in I.C.A. Ch. 124, as amended.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, business, trust, estate, partnership
or association or any other legal entity.
   (C)   Possession prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to use or to
possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, package, repackage, store, conceal, contain, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
   (D)   Manufacture, delivery or offering for sale prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or offer for sale
drug paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used or
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know it will be used
or where one reasonably should know it will be used or knowing that it is
designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, conceal, contain, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance.
   (E)   Exceptions. The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply
to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians,
technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical
laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists,
veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their
respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehousers or
their employees engaged in lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, or to
public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official
duties, or to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical
condition requiring self-injection.
(2013 Code, § 21-12.5) (Ord. 14529, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. 14709, passed 3-24-
2003; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
130.999
WEAPONS
§ 130.045 [RESERVED]
§ 130.046 [RESERVED]
§ 130.047 [RESERVED]
§ 130.048 HUNTING WITHIN CITY BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HUNTING. Pursuing, killing, searching for, shooting at, stalking or lying
in wait for any animal or bird, whether or not such animal or bird then is
subsequently captured, killed or injured.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Any building, structure or similar place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons; or utilized by persons for the purpose of
carrying on business or other activity therein; or used by persons for the
housing of livestock or animals; or used by persons for storage.
   (B)   Offense of hunting within city limits with exceptions. No person shall
engage in hunting within the city limits, subject to the following exceptions.
      (1)   (a)   AG, Agricultural District. Any person in lawful possession
and control of real property zoned AG Agricultural District, or any person with
the permission of any such possessor may engage in hunting, pursuant to the
regulations provided in division below, upon such real property in areas
further than 200 yards of any occupied structure in the lawful possession of
another.
         (b)   The following regulations shall apply to hunting upon real
property zoned AG Agricultural District.
            1.   No rifle, pistol or revolver shall be used for hunting.
            2.   No weapons other than shotguns, utilizing slug ammunition only
or bow and arrow shall be used to hunt deer.
      (2)   Deer management area. Any person with a city deer hunting permit
and the permission of the owner of the property where hunting will take place
within the city’s deer management area, may engage in bow hunting, for deer
only, within the allowed area. No game other than deer shall be hunted in the
area.
   (C)   Miscellaneous exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to lawfully designated law enforcement personnel and city employees
performing official duties in the course of their employment, trappers
conducting trapping operations pursuant to an independent contract with the
city or employees of the animal rescue league acting within the scope of their
employment.
(Ord. 15063, passed 7-10-2023)
§ 130.049 ANIMALS AND FOWL; KILLING, CLEANING, BUTCHERING IN PUBLIC VIEW.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term ANIMAL shall exclude mice, rats,
snakes, fish, turtles, amphibians and insects. Also excluded are fowl for which
hunting licenses or stamps are required.
   (B)   The slaughtering, butchering, cleaning, gutting and killing in public
view of any animal or fowl not excluded in division (A) above is prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 21-31.2) (Ord. 14422, passed 4-26-1994) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.050 FIREARMS; DISCHARGE.
   It is unlawful for any person, except one in lawful defense of himself,
herself or another, or in defense of his or her property, or a peace officer,
including, but not limited to, the designated Animal Control Officer, in the
performance of his or her duties, or at a licensed shooting gallery, or one in
lawful possession and control of land used for agricultural purposes, when on
such land, to fire off or discharge any cannon, gun, rifle or other firearm
within the city. However, nothing in this section shall apply to military
organizations of the state or the United States in military funeral ceremonies
or in firings conducted by education, sport or recreation organizations,
including, but not limited to, organizers of competitive exhibitions or
training events as provided for in §
90.020 of this code of ordinances, at scheduled periods, on an established
range or at a scheduled event and under the supervision of a designated
individual who is qualified to ensure that adequate safety precautions are
established and observed.
(2013 Code, § 21-40) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this general offenses code for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.012(A) of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-37)
   (C)   Any person violating §
130.017 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-52.1)
   (D)   (1)   A violation of §
130.018 of this chapter shall be simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
less than $250.
      (2)   Any person violating the provision of §
130.018(C) of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-54)
   (E)   Any violation of §
130.019 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-58)
   (F)   Any person violating §
130.030(B) of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-11.1)
   (G)   Any person violating §
130.032 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-12.5)
   (H)   Any person violating §
130.048 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine pursuant to §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-31.1)
(Ord. 14138, passed 8-23-1982; Ord. 14357, passed 9-23-1991; Ord. 14409, passed
12-30-1992; Ord. 14489, passed 1-19-1995; Ord. 14529, passed 3-25-1996; Ord.
14575, passed 8-11-1997; Ord. 14643, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 14709, passed 3-24-
2003; Ord. 14768, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 14787, passed 9-25-2006; Ord. 14854,
passed 4-13-2009; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017; Ord. 14971, passed 3-13-2018)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.001   Theft
   
131.002   Tampering with, damaging or trespassing upon motor vehicle
   
131.003   Library materials and equipment
   
131.004   Trespass
   
131.005   Throwing missiles
   
131.006   Littering
§ 131.001 THEFT.
   A person commits theft, which is prohibited, when the person does any of the
following:
   (A)   Takes possession or control of the property of another or property in
the possession of another, with the intent to deprive the other thereof;
   (B)   Misappropriates property which the person has in trust or property of
another which the person has in the person’s possession or control, whether
such possession or control is lawful or unlawful, by using or disposing of it
in a manner which is inconsistent with or a denial of the trust or of the
owner’s rights in such property, or conceals found property or appropriates
such property to the person’s own use, when the owner of such property is known
to the person. Failure by a bailee or lessee of personal property to return the
property within 72 hours after a time specified in a written agreement of lease
or bailment shall be evidence of misappropriation;
   (C)   Obtains the labor or services of another or a transfer of possession,
control or ownership of the property of another or the beneficial use of
property of another, by deception. Where compensation for goods and services is
ordinarily paid immediately upon the obtaining of such goods or the rendering
of such services, the refusal to pay or leaving the premises without payment or
offer to pay or without having obtained from the owner or operator the right to
pay subsequent to leaving the premises gives rise to an inference that the
goods or services were obtained by deception;
   (D)   Exercises control over stolen property, knowing such property to have
been stolen, or having reasonable cause to believe that such property has been
stolen, unless the person’s purpose is to promptly restore it to the owner or
to deliver it to an appropriate public officer. The fact that the person is
found in possession of property which has been stolen from two or more persons
on separate occasions or that the person is a dealer or other person familiar
with the value of such property and has acquired it for a consideration which
is far below its reasonable value shall be evidence from which the court or
jury may infer that the person knew or believed that the property had been
stolen;
   (E)   Takes, destroys, conceals or disposes of property in which someone
else has a security interest, with intent to defraud the secured party;
   (F)   Makes, utters, draws, delivers or gives any check, share draft, draft
or written order on any bank, credit union, person or corporation and obtains
property, the use of property, including rental property, or service in
exchange for such instrument, if the person knows that such check, share draft,
draft or written order will not be paid when presented. Whenever the drawee of
such instrument has refused payment because of insufficient funds, and the
maker has not paid the holder of the instrument the amount due thereon within
ten days of the maker’s receipt of notice from the holder that payment has been
refused by the drawee, the court or jury may infer from such facts that the
maker knew that the instrument would not be paid on presentation. Notice of
refusal of payment shall be by certified mail or by personal service in the
manner prescribed for serving original notices. Whenever the drawee of such
instrument has refused payment because the maker has no account with the
drawee, the court or jury may infer from such fact that the maker knew that the
instrument would not be paid on presentation; and/or
   (G)   Obtains gas, electricity or water from a public utility or obtains
cable television or telephone service from an unauthorized connection to the
supply or service line or by intentionally altering, adjusting, removing or
tampering with the metering or service device so as to cause inaccurate
readings.
(2013 Code, § 21-8) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 131.002 TAMPERING WITH, DAMAGING OR TRESPASSING UPON MOTOR VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to do or commit any of the following acts within the
city limits:
   (A)   Willfully attempt to tamper with or tamper with any motor vehicle, or
break or remove any part or parts of or from a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner;
   (B)   Climb upon or enter into any motor vehicle whether it is in motion or
at rest and pilfer its contents or remove items of personal property therefrom;
   (C)   Climb upon or enter into any motor vehicle without the consent of the
owner and commit any malicious mischief thereon whether it is in action or at
rest; and/or
   (D)   Climb upon or enter into any motor vehicle without the owner’s
consent, whether it is in action or at rest, and manipulate any of the levers,
starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or device of the motor vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 21-14) (Ord. 9751, passed 1-13-1959) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 131.003 LIBRARY MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The fact that a person has concealed library materials or equipment,
as defined in I.C.A. § 702.22, or unpurchased property of a store or other
mercantile establishment, either on the premises or outside the premises, is
material evidence of intent to deprive the owner, and the finding of library
materials or equipment or unpurchased property concealed upon the person or
among the belongings of the person is material evidence of intent to deprive
and, if the person conceals or causes to be concealed library materials or
equipment or unpurchased property, upon the person or among the belongings of
another, the finding of the concealed materials, equipment or property is also
material evidence of intent to deprive on the part of the person concealing the
library materials, equipment or goods.
   (B)   The fact that a person fails to return library materials for two
months or more after the date the person agreed to return the library materials
or fails to return library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the library equipment is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment. Notices stating the provisions of this section and I.C.A. § 808.12
with regard to library materials or equipment shall be posted in clear public
view: in all public libraries; in all libraries of educational, historical or
charitable institutions, organizations or societies; in all museums; and in all
repositories of public records.
   (C)   After the expiration of three days following the due date, the owner
of borrowed library equipment may request the assistance of a dispute
resolution center, mediation center or appropriate law enforcement agency in
recovering the equipment from the borrower.
   (D)   The owner of library equipment may require deposits by borrowers and,
for late returns, the owner may impose graduated penalties of up to 25% of the
value of the equipment, based upon the lateness of the return.
   (E)   For lost library materials or equipment, arrangements may be made to
make a monetary settlement.
(2013 Code, § 21-45) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 714.5
§ 131.004 TRESPASS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PROPERTY. Any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other
temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
      TRESPASS.
         (a)   One or more of the following acts:
            1.   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense; to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate; or to hunt, fish or trap on
or in the property. This division (a)1. does not prohibit the unarmed pursuit
of game or fur-bearing animals lawfully injured or killed which come to rest on
or escape to the property of another;
            2.   Entering or remaining upon or in property without
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to
remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession
or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee or person in lawful possession or
by any peace officer, magistrate or public employee whose duty it is to
supervise the use or maintenance of the property;
            3.   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the
effect of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others;
and/or
            4.   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing or placing thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner,
lessee or person in lawful possession.
         (b)   The term TRESPASS shall not mean entering upon the property of
another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property which has
accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed or blown onto the
property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the
most direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved,
quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere
with the lawful use of the property. The term TRESPASS does not mean the
entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
   (B)   Any person committing a trespass commits a violation of this section.
(2013 Code, § 21-49) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 716.7
§ 131.005 THROWING MISSILES.
   It is unlawful to propel, drive or operate any missile, bomb, projectile or
rocket, whereby any person may or shall be hurt or any window broken or other
property damaged or destroyed or person injured. Discharging a BB gun or pellet
gun within the city limits is also prohibited.
(2013 Code, § 21-51) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 10665, passed 10-12-1964)
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 131.006 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land of the
city; except that, nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the
authorized collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or
receptacles provided for such purpose.
   (B)   LITTER shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, any refuse
or discarded item, including cans, bottles, trash or abandoned household items
(e.g., used furniture, appliances, toys, implements, bicycles or the like).
   (C)   To enforce this provision, any police officer, the Public Housing
Director or other city official designated by the Public Housing Director or
the City Council, who shall find litter placed or stored in the open upon
public property within the city, may cause such litter to be removed and shall
issue written notice to the adjacent property owner at the address as reflected
by the tax records of the County Auditor, by both regular and certified mail,
that unless the litter is removed and all costs of removal and disposal
incurred by the city are paid within 14 days of the date of mailing, the litter
shall be disposed of and the cost of removal and disposal will be imposed
against the property owner by civil complaint.
   (D)   The written notice prescribed under division (C) above shall contain
provisions that the person may appeal the imposition of the costs of removal
and disposal by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten days of
the date the notice is mailed, which appeal shall then be scheduled for hearing
and a decision rendered by the City Administrator or a designee of the City
Administrator prior to the filing of a civil complaint.
(2013 Code, § 21-60) (Ord. 14642, passed 2-14-2000; Ord. 14894, passed 12-19-
2011) Penalty, see §
130.999
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
132.001   Window peeping
   
132.002   Assault
§ 132.001 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It is unlawful to peep into the windows of the dwelling house or residence
of another any time.
(2013 Code, § 21-22) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 132.002 ASSAULT.
   (A)   A person commits an assault when, without justification, the person
does any of the following:
      (1)   Any act which is intended to cause pain or injury to or which is
intended to result in physical contact which will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act;
      (2)   Any act that is intended to place another in fear of immediate
physical contact that will be painful, injurious, insulting or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act; and/or
      (3)   Intentionally points any firearm toward another or displays in a
threatening manner any dangerous weapon toward another.
   (B)   Where the person doing any of the acts enumerated in division (A)
above and such other person are voluntary participants in a sport, social or
other activity and does not create an unreasonable risk of serious injury or
breach of the peace, the act shall not be an assault.
   (C)   Where the person doing any of the acts enumerated in division (A)
above is employed by a school district or accredited non-public school or is an
area education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school
district and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or other disruptive
situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member
performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an
official school function regardless of the location, the act shall not be an
assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation
is between students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety
of those assembled.
(2013 Code, § 21-25) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
130.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 708.1
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
Section
   
133.001   Curfew; minors on streets; hours
   
133.002   Minors in pool and billiard rooms where alcoholic beverages sold
   
133.003   Selling cigarettes to minors; minors buying cigarettes
   
133.004   Minors pretending to be of age
   
133.005   Exhibiting persons
 
   
133.999   Penalty
§ 133.001 CURFEW; MINORS ON STREETS; HOURS.
   (A)   (1)   Minors under age 15 generally. It shall be unlawful for any
minor under the age of 15 years to be or remain in or upon any streets, alleys,
public places, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the city between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. without reasonable cause, unless such minor is
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor at the direction of the parents or the guardian.
      (2)   Minors under age 18.
         (a)   Downtown area. The downtown area is established as follows: that
area included within the entire boundaries of the intersections of West Linn
Street and South 3rd Street, north to and including the intersection of North
3rd Street and West State Street and east to and including the intersection of
East State Street and North 3rd Avenue, south to and including the intersection
of South 3rd Avenue and East Linn Street and west therefrom to the point of
beginning. Within the downtown area, it shall be unlawful for any minor under
the age of 18 years to be or remain in or upon any streets, alleys, public
places, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the city between the hours
of 10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless satisfying the exception set out in division
(A)(3) below.
         (b)   Non-downtown areas. All other portions of the city are, by
definition, to be considered outside of the downtown area, as defined in
division (A)(2)(a) above. In this other area, it shall be unlawful for any
minor under the age of 18 years to be or remain in or upon any streets, alleys,
public ways, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the city between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless satisfying the exception set out in
division (A)(3) below.
      (3)   Exceptions. No minor shall be considered in violation of the curfew
of the city if satisfying one or more of the following:
         (a)   The minor is accompanied by a parent;
         (b)   The minor is traveling to or returning from employment or a
religious, political, economic or cultural assembly, and is journeying directly
to such an activity or home, and not otherwise. This exception requires prior
parental approval concerning such activity;
         (c)   The minor is accompanied by a supervising adult who has been
previously approved, for the purpose involved, by a parent;
         (d)   The minor is an emancipated minor;
         (e)   The minor is traveling interstate for a lawful purpose and with
the consent of a parent; and/or
         (f)   The minor is found on the public sidewalk between the street and
the home of his or her parent or the home of one of the members of the group
with whom the minor is socializing if the gathering is otherwise lawful.
      (4)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (A), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         EMANCIPATED MINOR. A minor who no longer lives with a parent and is
self- supporting.
         MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
         PARENT. Biological parents, a guardian or custodian appointed by the
courts or an adult who has accepted the role of a parent at the request of a
biological parent, guardian or custodian.
(2013 Code, § 21-15)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person
having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 21 years to permit such
minor to violate the provisions of division (A) above.
      (2)   It shall not constitute a defense to this section that such parent,
guardian or other person having the care and custody of a minor did not have
knowledge of the presence of such minor in or upon any streets, alleys, public
places, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in violation of division (A)
above.
(2013 Code, § 21-16)
(Ord. 66, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14394, passed 10-12-1992; Ord. 14709, passed
3-25-2003; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.002 MINORS IN POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any person under 18 years
of age to remain in any pool or billiard room or hall or to take part in any
game known as pool, billiards or pocket billiards, or any variation thereof, if
either beer, wine, spirits, alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage of any kind
is therein sold, served, dispensed or used or if gambling or any other
violation of statute, provision of this code or other city ordinance therein
takes place; but, otherwise, it shall be lawful to have and operate such a pool
and/or billiard room and pocket billiard room as to persons and minors of all
ages, whether the room is at, below or above ground level.
   (B)   In construing this section, a POOL OR BILLIARD HALL OR ROOM shall be
limited to that portion of any building, room or premises actually occupied by
pool or billiard tables and shall not include any part of the building, room or
premises set apart or used exclusively as a barbershop or place for
accommodation of patrons as a soda fountain or candy counter, even though such
separate business or place is conducted within the same building, room or
premises.
(2013 Code, § 21-17) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 9801, passed 4-28-1959;
Ord. 10478, passed 9-24-1963) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.003 SELLING CIGARETTES TO MINORS; MINORS BUYING CIGARETTES.
   It is unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To sell or give any cigarette or cigarette paper to any person under
18 years of age; and/or
   (B)   Under 18 years of age to buy, accept or receive from any merchant,
dealer or place of business any cigarette or cigarette paper.
(2013 Code, § 21-19) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.004 MINORS PRETENDING TO BE OF AGE.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to represent,
pretend or claim that he or she is 18 years of the age of or over, for the
purpose of inducing or procuring any merchant or dealer to sell such person any
cigarette or cigarette paper.
(2013 Code, § 21-20) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.005 EXHIBITING PERSONS.
   (A)   A person shall not exhibit, place on exhibition or cause to be
exhibited any person without the permission of the person exhibited or the
person’s parent or guardian.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of an exhibited person shall not receive
compensation from the exhibition.
(2013 Code, § 21-21) (Ord. 75, passed 8-14-1950) Penalty, see §
133.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C.A. § 727.10
§ 133.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A minor who violates §
133.001(A) of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-15) (Ord. 66, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14394, passed 10-12-1992;
Ord. 14709, passed 3-25-2003; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 134: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
134.001   Purpose, scope and decibel measurement
   
134.002   Definitions
   
134.003   Exceptions to chapter
   
134.004   Noise disturbance prohibited
   
134.005   Maximum permissible sound levels by zoned land use
   
134.006   Noise permits
   
134.007   Motorized vehicles
   
134.008   Powers and duties of noise control office; enforcement
   
134.009   Unlawful use of engine and compression brakes
 
   
134.999   Penalty
§ 134.001 PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DECIBEL MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent excessive sound which is
a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and to the quality of life in
the City of Marshalltown.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to the control of all noise originating
within the limits of the City of Marshalltown.
   (C)   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level
meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards
Institute. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working
order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise
measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper
representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be
positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the
measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required.
The measurement shall be an A-weighted, slow response sound level.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.002 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall
be in conformance with application publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on
a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB
(a) or dBA.
   CALIBRATION CHECK. Operators of a sound level meter may certify the accuracy
of meter by either witnessing the integrity seal on the meter is intact and
that the device has a current certificate of calibration from an outside sound
meter testing lab; or, using a sound calibrator with the meter before
enforcement sampling to verify the device is functioning properly. The sound
calibrator emits a test sound at specific dB level(s) to compare sound level
meter readings.
   DECIBEL (dB). A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in
describing the amplitude of sound.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
infrastructure, or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent danger.
   NOISE. A sound, especially one that is loud or unpleasant or that causes
disturbance.
   NOISE CONTROL OFFICE. The same as the Marshalltown Police Department and
shall have the responsibility of enforcing this chapter.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which endangers the welfare, safety or health
of a human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or
devalues or injures personal or real property by exceeding authorized limits.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or officer
thereof.
   REASONABLE OPERATION. Use of construction, power tools, lawn and garden
equipment with a legitimate, timely purpose that minimizes disruption to nearby
persons; not used to cause annoyance or excessive disruption.
   SOUND. A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector, integrator or time average, output or display meter, and weighting
networks used to measure sound pressure levels in decibels when properly
calibrated or currently certified to be working correctly and the instrument is
of type 2 or better, which complies with American National Standards Institute
Standard 1.4-1971 or its successor.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty (20)
micronewtons per square meter (120 x 10 - 6N/m2). The sound pressure level is
denoted Lp or SPL and is expressed in decibels.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.003 EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency vehicle warning devices. Private audible alarms may
be tested once per day for a maximum duration of 30 seconds between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. False or overly sensitive audible alarms that cause
a noise disturbance are not exempt under provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
   (C)   Activities of temporary duration, permitted by law, and for which a
valid noise permit has been issued by the Noise Control Office.
   (D)   Reasonable operation of construction equipment, domestic power tools,
lawn and garden equipment between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (E)   Nonprofessional athletic contests on school property, school band
practice, and school band performances between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (F)   Funeral or memorial events of limited duration to include, but not
limited to: the playing of trumpets or bagpipes, discharge of blanks during a
gun volley salute, etc.
   (G)   Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
   (H)   The emission of sound in connection with authorized activities
conducted on the County Fairgrounds during the annual Central Iowa Fair.
   (I)   The emission of sound in the performance of authorized law enforcement
or military operations.
   (J)   The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks
displays approved by the City Council or County Board of Supervisors; or when
lawfully allowed by city ordinance.
   (K)   The emission of sound in the reasonable operation of snow removal
equipment and street cleaning equipment regardless of time of day.
   (L)   Organized racing events on the county fairgrounds property in such a
manner that the sound level resulting from such operation exceeds 90 dBA for
any period of time during such operation. Sound levels which exceed the limits
herein described at the real property boundary of the receiving land use shall
be deemed a noise disturbance. Said organized racing events must end by 10:30
p.m. and not start before 10:00 a.m.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.004 NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, except as
permitted, any noise disturbance as defined in this chapter, or any noise in
excess of the limits for such noise established in this chapter.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.005 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY ZONED LAND USE.
   (A)   No person shall engage or participate in the making and creating of an
excessive or unusually loud sound within the city heard and measured in the
manner prescribed in §
134.001(C) of this chapter, and below, except when done under and in compliance
with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership, possession
or control of premises to prevent such premises from the site of activities
producing sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this chapter.
Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this
section.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings
and assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels
in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to
perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section.
   (D)   For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as excessive
or unusually loud, the following test measurement and requirements are to be
applied:
      (1)   The sound shall be measured at the edge of the city street or alley
right-of-way reasonably appearing to be nearest to the source of the sound, or
if in a park zoned area, approximately 50 feet from the source of the sound.
When a complaint is received, a measurement may also be taken at a location on
the property where the complaining party was disturbed.
      (2)   The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated in the "A" slow response weighing scale.
      (3)   A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum permitted
levels according to the following table, is declared to be excessive and
unusually loud and is unlawful:
 
Neighborhood Zoned Characteristics Maximum Permitted
Residential:
   Between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.60
   Between 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.50
Commercial or agricultural         65
Industrial                         80
Park                               65
 
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.006 NOISE PERMITS.
   (A)   Application. Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions
of this chapter may be made to the Noise Control Office, or a duly authorized
representative, pursuant to the following procedure:
      (1)   All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business
hours stating what devices are to be employed, where they are to be employed,
on what date(s) and at what times of day they are to be used, the nature of the
sounds to be produced or amplified and the number of people in attendance, and
the persons responsible for the activity. Sufficient lead time must be given to
the Noise Control Office to research permit application and consult with
neighboring property owners who may be impacted if a noise permit is issued.
      (2)   Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the date
(s), location(s), time(s), nature of the sound, devices permitted, number of
people in attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity. Permits are
not transferable. The permit shall be conspicuously displayed on or near main
sound producing object or main entrance.
      (3)   Permits shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld nor shall
the free expression of ideas or lawful speech be restrained, but sound and
noise producing conduct having no communicative value and serving only to
unreasonably disturb and disrupt the enjoyment of residences and normal
pursuits shall be restrained.
      (4)   The Noise Control Office may prescribe any conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or
the surrounding neighborhood.
      (5)   Approved noise permits may be revoked at any time by Noise Control
Office if permittee or guests fail to comply with permit requirements. Permit
fees are non-refundable in this case.
      (6)   Denied permits may be appealed to the City Administrator or
designee within 14 calendar days of a permit denial.
   (B)   Permit application fees.
      (1)   Permit application fee for 24 hours or less is $25 each.
      (2)   Permit application fee for one day through seven days is $40 each
date.
      (3)   The Noise Control Office has discretion to waive or reduce a permit
fee for a registered charitable or nonprofit organization.
   (C)   Maximum sound levels. 
      (1)   When a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter, the sound
levels listed in the following table shall be the maximum levels permitted:
 
Sound Level Limit in dBA Duration
80                       24 hours
83                       12 hours
86                       6 hours
89                       3 hours
90                       1.5 hours
 
      (2)   The above stated duration for each sound level shall not be
exceeded. The sound level shall be measured in the same manner as set out in §
134.005.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.007 MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an
auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
rating of 10,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than 20 minutes
while such vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of property zoned
and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is standing within
a completely enclosed structure. This section shall not apply to delivery or
pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to unload or load
their vending loads.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner to
cause or permit to be operated within the public right-of-way in this city, any
motor vehicle which emits a noise in excess of the dBA level established in
this section.
      (1)   The maximum allowable noise levels for motor vehicles shall be 75
dBA measured at a distance of 25 feet.
      (2)   This section applies to the total noise from a motor vehicle and
shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or any
other noise abatement devise of a motor vehicle or operate any such vehicle or
devise in this city in a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is
above that emitted by the vehicles as originally manufactured. Muffler cutouts,
bypasses, or other devices which increase sound emitted shall be unlawful.
      (4)   The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated on the "A" slow response weighting scale.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.008 POWERS AND DUTIES OF NOISE CONTROL OFFICE; ENFORCEMENT.
   The Noise Control Program established by this chapter shall be implemented,
administered, and enforced by the Noise Control Office.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.009 UNLAWFUL USE OF ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   The use of any engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or
mechanical exhaust device to brake or slow any motor vehicle that results in
excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, except for the
aversion of imminent danger, is prohibited. Emergency vehicles are exempt from
the application of this section.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
§ 134.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 14999, passed 7-13-2020)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PLANNING
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
152.   HOUSING CODE
      
153.   PLUMBING CODE
      
154.   ELECTRICITY
      
155.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
156.   ZONING
      
157.   LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
       
158.   VACANT PROPERTY CODE
CHAPTER 150: PLANNING
Section
Plan and Zoning Commission
   
150.001   Creation
   
150.002   Membership; qualifications; holding other office
   
150.003   Appointment; terms of office; compensation
   
150.004   Organization
   
150.005   Vacancies
   
150.006   Rules and regulations; general powers
   
150.007   Annual report, budget, appropriations
   
150.008   Authority over subdivisions
   
150.009   Comprehensive Plan; preparation, purpose and adoption
   
150.010   Recommendations on zoning changes and districts
Cross-reference:
   Officers and Organizations, see
Ch. 31
Statutory reference:
   Municipal zoning, see I.C.A. Ch. 414
   Zoning commission, see I.C.A. § 414.6
PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 150.001 CREATION.
   Under the authority granted by state law, a City Plan and Zoning Commission
is created possessing those powers as are provided by law.
(2013 Code, § 22-12) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.002 MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS; HOLDING OTHER OFFICE.
   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven members, who
shall be citizens of the city and shall be qualified by knowledge or experience
to act in matters pertaining to the development of a city plan, and no member
shall hold any elective office in the municipal government.
(2013 Code, § 22-13) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.003 APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The members of the city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City Council. The term of
office of the members of the Commission shall be five years.
(2013 Code, § 22-14)
   (B)   All members of the Plan and Zoning Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 22-15)
(Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-1974)
§ 150.004 ORGANIZATION.
   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall choose annually, at its first
regular meeting, one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice-
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during his or
her absence or disability.
(2013 Code, § 22-16) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.005 VACANCIES.
   Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Plan and Zoning Commission,
for whatever reason, shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor of a
successor for the remainder of the term of the member where the vacancy exists,
and such appointment shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 22-17) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.006 RULES AND REGULATIONS; GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(2013 Code, § 22-18)
   (B)   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall have full power and
authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or
charts of the whole or any portion of the city or of any land outside thereof,
which, in the opinion of the Commission, bears relation to a Comprehensive Plan
and, subject to the approval of the City Council, may publish its studies and
recommendations.
(2013 Code, § 22-21)
(Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-1974)
§ 150.007 ANNUAL REPORT, BUDGET, APPROPRIATIONS.
   The City Council shall annually appropriate a sum of money from the General
Fund for the payment of the expenses of the city’s Plan and Zoning Commission.
(2013 Code, § 22-25) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.008 AUTHORITY OVER SUBDIVISIONS.
   All plans, plats or replats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land
embraced in the city or adjacent thereto laid out in lots or plats with the
streets, alleys or other portions of the subdivision or resubdivision intended
to be dedicated to the public in the city shall first be submitted to the
city’s Plan and Zoning Commission and its recommendations obtained before
approval by the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 22-28) (Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-
1974)
§ 150.009 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; PREPARATION, PURPOSE AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical
development of the city, the city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall make
careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of
the city and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan
shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs
which will, in accordance with the present and future needs, best promote
health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as
well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
(2013 Code, § 22-30)
   (B)   (1)   Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan, as referred to in division
(A) above, or any part of it or any substantial amendment thereof, the city’s
Plan and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon,
notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city not less than ten or more than 20 days before
the date of hearing. The adoption of the plan or part or amendment thereof
shall be by resolution of the Commission carried by the affirmative vote of not
less than two-thirds of the members of the Commission.
      (2)   After adoption of such plan by the Commission, an attested copy
thereof shall be certified to the City Council, and the Council may approve the
plan. When the plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the
approval of the Council, the plan, until subsequently modified or amended as
authorized, shall constitute the official city plan.
(2013 Code, § 22-31)
   (C)   (1)   When the Comprehensive Plan, as provided in this subchapter, has
been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made
without such proposed change first being referred to the Plan and Zoning
Commission for its recommendation.
      (2)   If the Commission disapproves the proposed change, it may be
adopted by the City Council only by the affirmative vote of at least three-
fourths of the members of the Council.
(2013 Code, § 22-32)
(Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-1974)
§ 150.010 RECOMMENDATIONS ON ZONING CHANGES AND DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission may, from time to time,
recommend to the City Council changes in the zoning regulations or districts.
(2013 Code, § 22-33)
   (B)   (1)   The city’s Plan and Zoning Commission shall recommend the
boundaries of the various original zoning districts and appropriate zoning
regulations and restrictions to be enforced therein.
      (2)   In addition, the Commission shall make recommendations for
amendments, supplements, changes and modifications of such regulations,
restrictions and boundaries of districts and shall report to the City Council
as provided by state law.
(2013 Code, § 22-34)
   (C)   When proposed changes in the zoning regulations or districts are
referred to the city’s Plan and Zoning Commission by the City Council, the
Commission shall, within 30 days thereafter, file its recommendations
approving, disapproving or modifying such proposed changes with the Council.
(2013 Code, § 22-35)
(Ord. 10324, passed 11-12-1962; Ord. 12490, passed 6-28-1974)
Statutory reference:
   Zoning commission, see I.C.A. § 414.6
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
   
151.001   Adoption of Building Code
   
151.002   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions  to Building Code
   
151.003   Amendments, modifications, additions, and deletions to Residential
Code
   
151.004   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to Existing
Building Code
   
151.005   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to Mechanical Code
   
151.006   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to Electric Code
   
151.007   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to Uniform
Plumbing Code
   
151.008   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to Energy
Conservation Code
Moving Buildings
   
151.015   Permit required
   
151.016   Permit application
   
151.017   Insurance
   
151.018   Replacement of utility lines; approval
   
151.019   Supervision by Public Works Division
   
151.020   Time limits
   
151.021   Removal of buildings remaining on streets in excess of five days
   
151.022   Disconnection of utilities
   
151.023   Right of city to deny application
   
151.024   Additional provisions
Dangerous Buildings
   
151.035   Purpose and scope
   
151.036   Definition
   
151.037   Procedures and rules
   
151.038   Service of notice and orders of Building Official
   
151.039   Appeal
   
151.040   Posting of signs
   
151.041   Right to abate
   
151.042   Costs
Property Maintenance
   
151.055   Basic standards
   
151.056   Violation
Building Numbering
   
151.070   Baselines for commencement of numbering
   
151.071   Streets running north and south
   
151.072   Streets running east and west
   
151.073   General numbering plan
   
151.074   North, south, east, west prefix designations
   
151.075   Responsibility of owner; specifications for numbers
   
151.076   Assignment of numbers; times for compliance; building permit
   
151.077   Director of Public Works/City Engineer
   
151.078   Complaints and objections
   
151.079   Notice to comply; assessment of costs
 
   
151.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
§ 151.001 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   Unless specifically provided for in other codes or city ordinances, the 2021
Edition of the International Codes, specifically the International Building
Code (IBC), the International Residential Code (IRC), the International
Mechanical Code (IMC), the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), and the
2012 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., the 2021 Uniform Plumbing Code as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, the 2020 Edition of the National Electric Code, as adopted by the
State of Iowa, and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Chapters 54
and 58, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, and except as
modified as to portions thereof as are deleted, substituted, redefined, or
inserted in this subchapter, is adopted by reference, is on file with the City
Clerk and is fully incorporated as the Building Code of Marshalltown. The
provisions of said Building Code shall be controlling for the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion,
demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of
buildings and structures, including installation of mobile, manufactured and
modular homes; to provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees;
and to provide penalties for violations.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)  
151.999
§ 151.002 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS TO THE BUILDING
CODE.
   The following amendments, definitions, substitutions, modifications,
additions, or deletions to the International Building Code (IBC), 2021 Edition
are made.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of
Marshalltown, hereinafter referred to as "this code". Any reference to a
Section number shall mean to this code unless stated otherwise.
   (B)   Section 104.2 Applications and permits is amended to read as follows:
      The Building Official shall receive applications, review construction
documents and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and
structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued, and
enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.
         (1)   To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file:
            (a)   For the contractors required to register with the State of
Iowa as a construction contractor, proof of registration must be presented to
the Building Official or specified intergovernmental agency, if so designated
by the Building Official.
            (b)   All contractors requesting a building permit shall execute
and file with the Marshalltown Building Official or specified intergovernmental
agency if so designated by the Building Official, a certificate of insurance
written by a company authorized to transact business in the State of Iowa.
Limits shall not be less than $500,000 in personal injury or death and
$100,000.00 in property damage.
            (c)   Certificate shall be written on a standard form and carrying
an endorsement naming the City of Marshalltown, Iowa, and its employees, or
specified intergovernmental agency, if so designated by the Building Official,
as additional insured, as its interest may appear and conditioned upon faithful
performance of all duties required of such contractor by any ordinances, rules,
and regulations of the City. It shall be further a condition of said
certificate of insurance, that the obligator will hold the City, or specified
intergovernmental agency, if so designated by the Building Official, harmless
from any and all damages sustained by reason of neglect or incompetence on the
part of such contractor, his/her agents or employees in the performance of the
work done under a license or permit issued upon the filing of said certificate.
            (d)   The certificate of insurance shall be issued by December 31st
of each year and shall be refilled on or before said date each subsequent year
and shall be continuous full force and effect. It is the intent and purpose of
said certificate of insurance to also bind the individuals, company, firm,
association, or partnership, whether it is trade name, corporation, or other
business association or arrangement with which the principal is associated.
            (e)   Homeowners working in their own principal residence shall be
exempt from filing said certificate.
         (2)   Where a person desires to remodel or repair any residential
building or structure of which they are the owner or owner of record:
            (a)   Such work may be done by a member of the household, without
requiring the certificate of insurance otherwise required by this section.
            (b)   Required permits shall be necessary for all remodel or repair
work.
            (c)   No owner or owner of record shall replace, remodel, or repair
any electrical or heating on any property that they are not the owner/occupant.
            (d)   Plumbing in any building is required to be performed by a
licensed plumbing contractor, licensed with the City of Marshalltown.
   (C)   Section 105.2 Work exempt from permits is amended to read as follows:
      Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Permits shall not be required for the following:
      Building:
         (1)   One-story detached accessory structures provided that the floor
area does not exceed 120 square feet; however, site approval shall be obtained
from the zoning department.
         (2)   Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high.
         (3)   Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above
adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below, and not part of any
accessory route.
         (4)   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610
mm) deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L), and are installed
entirely above ground.
         (5)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops,
and similar finish work.
         (6)   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and
scenery.
         (7)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-
and-two-family dwellings.
   (D)   Section 105.6.1 Revocation of permit is added to read:
      It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to schedule the required
inspections and obtain final approvals. Failure to schedule the required
inspections and receive approval of work authorized by the permit before
covering said work or at completion shall result in revocation of the permit
and void any associated approvals granted by the City. This failure shall also
equate to working without a permit in violation of City ordinance and no future
permits shall be issued to any person or company who has outstanding violations
of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Failure to contact
the City for any inspection or follow-up prior to expiration of a permit shall
be deemed a violation of this code section. Failure to contact the City for any
inspection or followup prior to expiration of a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy shall also be deemed a violation of this code. Allowing occupancy of
a structure, for which a person or company holds a building permit, prior to or
without a valid Certificate of Occupancy (temporary or final) shall be deemed a
violation of this code section and no future permits shall be issued to any
person or company who has outstanding violations of this code or any other laws
or ordinances of the City.
   (E)   Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees is amended to read as follows:
      Where a permit is required, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the City of Marshalltown Fee Schedule as adopted.
   (F)   Section 109.3 Building permit valuations is amended to read as
follows:
      The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at
time of application. The building valuation will be derived from the
construction costs for the total work submitted by the contractor or the most
current building valuation data schedule published by the International Code
Council (ICC). Submitted contractor valuation shall not be less than derived
valuation through ICC. Published data is utilized by the Administrative
Official in an effort to maintain consistency and fairness for permit fee
calculations. It is not intended to reflect actual taxable value.
   (G)   Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance is amended to
read as follows:
      Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permit shall be
subject to an investigation fee equal to the amount of the permit fee. The fee
shall be collected whether or not a permit is issued.
   (H)   Section 109.6 Refunds is amended to read as follows:
      The Building Official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid
hereunder, which is erroneously paid or collected. The Building Code Official
shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written
application filed by the original permittee, within one hundred eighty (180)
days from the date of the fee payment.
   (I)   Section 113.3 Qualifications is amended to read as follows:
      The Board of Appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by
experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction
and are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Board shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to approval by the City Council. The Board shall render a
decision within thirty days from the time the matter is submitted to it and
shall render their decision in writing to the Building Official with a
duplicate copy to the appellant. The terms of each member shall be five years
provided, however, that the original appointments to the Board shall be as
follows:
         (1)   One (1) member appointed for an initial one (1) year term.
         (2)   One (1) member appointed for an initial two (2) year term.
         (3)   One (1) member appointed for an initial three (3) year term.
         (4)   One (1) member appointed for an initial four (4) year term.
         (5)   One (1) member appointed for an initial five (5) year term.
      The existing Board shall continue under current appointments.
   (J)   Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment is deleted in its
entirety. Refer to Chapter 151, Building Regulations; Dangerous Buildings of
the City of Marshalltown Code of Ordinances.
   (K)   Section 308.5.4 Five or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling
unit is amended to read as follows:
      Section 308.5.4 Eight or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit.
A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy
or shall comply with the International Residential Code (IRC).
      Exception:
         Daycare facilities that provide custodial care for 16 or fewer persons
for less than 24 hours per day in a single-family dwelling, and where
registered with the State of Iowa Department of Human Services as a child
development home are permitted to comply with the International Residential
Code (IRC).
   (L)   Section 310.4.1 Care facilities within a dwelling is amended to read
as follows:
      Care facilities within a dwelling shall adhere to Section 308.5.4.
   (M)   Section 423.5 Group E occupancy is amended to read as follows:
      In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes is 250 mph in
accordance with Figure 304.2 (1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with a
program occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in
accordance with Chapters 1 through 5 and 8 of ICC 500.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   Group E day care facilities.
         (2)   Group E occupancies accessory to place of religious worship.
         (3)   Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC
500.
         (4)   Accessory structures to existing Group E sites where the
occupancy classification of said structures are classified as Groups A-5 and U.
   (N)   Section 423.5.1 Required occupant load is amended to read as follows:
      The required occupant capacity of the storm shelter shall include all
buildings classified as a Group E occupancy on the campus or site (whichever is
larger) and shall be the greater of the following:
         (1)   The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms, and
offices in the Group E occupancy.
         (2)   The occupant load of any indoor assembly space is associated
with the Group E occupancy.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   Where a new building is being added on an existing Group E site,
and where the new building is not of sufficient size to accommodate the
required occupant capacity of the storm shelter for all of the buildings on-
site, the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the required capacity
for the new building.
         (2)   Where approved by the code official, the required occupant
capacity of the shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant
capacity of any existing storm shelters on the campus or site.
   (O)   Section 423.5.2 Location is amended to read as follows:
      Storm shelters shall be located within buildings they serve, or shall be
located where the maximum distance of travel from not fewer than one (1)
exterior door of each building to a door of the shelter serving that building
does not exceed 1,000 feet. The installation of portable buildings for
utilization on the campus or site for educational purposes is considered new
construction and classified as Group E occupancies.
      Exception:
         Existing schools undergoing alterations, additions, or construction of
new accessory buildings.
   (P)   Section 502.1 Address identification is amended to read as follows:
      New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building
numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position that is
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall be black or white and shall contrast with their background.
Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in
greater dimensions or additional approved locations to facilitate emergency
response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters.
Numbers and letters shall be a minimum height and minimum stroke width as
dictated by Table 502.1. where access is by means of a private road and the
building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or other sign
or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be
maintained.
   (Q)   Table 502.1 Minimum height and stroke width is amended to read as
follows:
 
Distance from the centerline of Minimum height (in) Minimum stroke width (in)
the public way (ft)
Less than 100                   4                   1/2
100-199                         6                   3/4
200-299                         8                   1
For each additional 100         Increase 2          Increase 1/2
 
            (a)   Exterior suite identification, minimum height shall be 4
inches and stroke width 1/2 inch.
            (b)   Interior suite identification, minimum height shall be 2
inches and stroke width shall be 1/4 inch.
   (R)   Section 716.2.6.1 Fire door hardware and closures is amended to read
as follows:
      Fire doors shall be latching and self or automatic-closing in accordance
with this section. UL-listed hinges may only be installed on the dwelling room
entry door.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   Fire doors located in common walls separating sleeping units in
Group R-1 shall be permitted without automatic- or self-closing devices.
         (2)   The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway enclosure
doors at the floor level
         (3)   designated for recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be
permitted to remain open during Phase I emergency recall operation.
   (S)   Section 902.1.1.1 Fire sprinkler riser room is added:
      A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room.
The riser room shall have no electrical panels, devices, or apparatus inside
the room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting, air compressor,
and heater) required for the use of the fire sprinkler system and/or the fire
alarm panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be accessed from the electrical
room, but the electrical room may be accessed from the fire sprinkler riser
room.
   (T)   Section 902.1.5 Temperature sensor is added:
      A low temperature sensor shall be provided in the fire sprinkler riser
room. The low temperature sensor shall be monitored to prevent freezing.
   (U)   Section 903.2.8.5 Group R one- and two-family dwellings is added as
follows:
      An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one-
and two-family dwellings.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   An automatic fire sprinkler system shall not be required where
additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are not already
provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
         (2)   One- and two-family dwellings containing less than eight
thousand (8,000) square feet of floor space, excluding attached garages and
other enclosed areas.
   (V)   Section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements is amended to read as follows:
      Where any portion of a basement is located more than 75 feet (22,860 mm)
from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, the basement shall be equipped
throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   (W)   Section 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems is amended to read as
follows:
      Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies shall be permitted to
be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R where the Group R occupancy
meet all of the following conditions:
         (1)   Four stories or fewer above grade plane.
         (2)   The floor level of the highest story is 35 feet (10,668 mm) or
less above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
         (3)   The floor level of the lowest story is 35 feet (10,668 mm) or
less below the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   (X)   Section 903.4.2 Alarms is amended to read as follows:
      An approved weatherproof audible device suitable for outdoor use with 110
candela visual signal shall be connected to every automatic fire sprinkler
system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water
flow
      equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size
installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the
building in an approved location. Where a fire alarm system is installed,
actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire
alarm system.
   (Y)   Section 915.1 Carbon monoxide general is amended to read as follows:
      Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in new buildings in
accordance with Sections 915.1.1 through 915.6. Carbon monoxide detection shall
be installed in existing buildings in accordance with Chapter 11 of the IFC and
Iowa Administrative Code 661-211.
   (Z)   Section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces is amended to read as follows:
      In the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system
shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
         (1)   Electrical equipment rooms.
         (2)   Fire command centers.
         (3)   Fire pump rooms.
         (4)   Generator rooms.
         (5)   Public restrooms with an area greater than 400 square feet.
         (6)   Meeting and conference rooms with an area greater than 400
square feet.
         (7)   Classrooms in a Group E occupancy with an area greater than 400
square feet.
   (AA)   Section 1009.2 Continuity and components is amended to read as
follows:
      Each required accessible means of egress shall be continuous to a public
way and shall consist of one or more of the following components:
         (1)   Accessible routes comply with Section 1104.
         (2)   Interior exit stairways comply with Sections 1009.3 and 1023.
         (3)   Exit access stairways complying with Sections 1009.3 and 1019.3
or 1019.4.
         (4)   Exterior exit stairways comply with Sections 1009.3 and 1027 and
serving levels other than the level of exit discharge.
         (5)   Elevators complying with Section 1009.4.
         (6)   Platform lifts comply with Section 1009.5.
         (7)   Horizontal exits comply with Section 1026.
         (8)   Ramps complying with Section 1012.
         (9)   Areas of refuge complying with Section 1009.6.
         (10)   Exterior areas for assisted rescue comply with Section 1009.7
serving exits at the level of exit discharge.
         (11)   Components of exterior surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or
other approved hard surfaces.
   (BB)   Section 1010.1.6.1 Landings is added:
      For landings required by Section 1010.1.5 to be at the same elevation on
each side of the door, exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost
protection.
   (CC)   Section 1010.2.2 Hardware is amended to read as follows:
      Door handles, pulls, latches, locks, and other operating devices on doors
required by Chapter 11 shall not require tight grasping, tight pinching, or
twisting of the wrist to operate. Thumb turn locks shall not be allowed.
   (DD)   Section 1013.1.1 Additional exit signs is added:
      Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Administrative
Official to clarify an exit or exit access.
   (EE)   Sections 1013.5, 1013.6, 1013.6.1, 1013.6.2, and 1013.6.3 are
deleted.
   (FF)   Section 1028.5.1 Components of exterior walking surfaces is added:
      Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or
other approved hard surfaces.
   (GG)   Section 1301.1 Scope is amended to read as follows:
      The provisions of the International Energy Code as currently adopted and
amended by the Iowa State Building Code Bureau shall apply to all matters
governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
Administration shall be prescribed in Chapter 1 of the current State adoption
of the IECC and these regulations shall be known as the City of Marshalltown
Energy Code.
   (HH)   Section 1608.2 Ground snow loads is amended to read as follows:
      For the purposes of determining snow loads, the minimum ground snow load
for design purposes shall be 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent increases or
decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided in this code, except that the
minimum allowable flat roof snow load may be reduced to not less than 80
percent of the ground snow load.
   (II)   Section 1609.1.1 Determination of wind loads is amended to read as
follows:
      For the purposes of determining wind loads, the minimum basic wind speed
shall be considered as 115 miles per hour; except when referenced documents are
based on fastest mile wind velocities, Table 1609.3(1) shall be used.
   (JJ)   Section 1807.1 Foundation retaining walls for Group R occupancies is
amended to read as follows:
      Foundation walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Sections 1807.1.1 through 1807.1.6. Foundation walls shall be supported by
foundations designed in accordance with Section 1808.
         (1)   Scope: Notwithstanding other design requirements of Chapters 18,
19, and 21 of the IBC, foundation retaining walls for Group R occupancies of
Type V construction may be constructed in accordance with this section,
provided that the use or building site conditions affecting such walls are
within the limitations specified in this section.
         (2)   Specifications. General specifications for such foundation
retaining walls shall be as follows:
Table 1801.7 - Foundation Walls for Conventional Light Frame Construction
                                                       Reinforcement
Height of                                Reinforcement type and
foundation wall                          type and      placement
(Net measured from Thickness of          placement     within        Type of
top of basement    foundation walls Unit within        foundation    mortar
slab to top of                           foundation    wall**
foundation wall)*                        wall          (maximum 12'
                                                       span between
                                                       comers and
Gross Net          Concrete Masonry      Concrete      Masonry       Masonry
Table 1801.7 - Foundation Walls for Conventional Light Frame Construction
                                                     Reinforcement
Height of                              Reinforcement type and
foundation wall                        type and      placement
(Net measured     Thickness of         placement     within        Type of
from top of       foundation walls     within        foundation    mortar
basement slab to  Unit                 foundation    wall**
top of foundation                      wall          (maximum 12'
wall)*                                               span between
                                                     comers and
Gross Net         Concrete Masonry     Concrete      Masonry       Masonry
                                       1/2"          0.075 square
                                       horizontal    inch bar 8'
                                       bars,         o.c.          Type M or S
                                       placement in  vertically in grout &
                                       the middle,   fully grouted mortar shall
8     7'8"        7 1/2"   8"          and near the  cells. If     meet
                                       top & bottom  block is 12"  provisions
                                       - Y2" bars @  nominal       of Chapter
                                       6' max        thickness,    21 IBC
                                       vertically    maybe
                                                     unreinforced.
                                       1/2" bars 2'
                                       o.c.
9     8'8"        8"       See Chapter horizontally  See Chapter   Same as
                           18 IBC      & 20"         18 IBC        above
                                       vertically
                                       o.c.
                                       5/8" bars 2"
                                       o.c.
10    9'8"        8"       See Chapter horizontally  See Chapter   Same as
                           18 IBC      & 30"         18 IBC        above
                                       vertically
                                       o.c.
•   Concrete floor slabs to be nominal 4". If such floor slab is not provided
prior to backfill, provide 1.) 36" embedded in the footing at maximum 7' o.c.
spacing and/or; 2.) Full depth nominal 2" depth x 4" width keyway in footing.
•   All reinforcement bars shall meet ASTM A6175 grade 40 minimum and deformed.
Placement of the center of wall and meet the provisions of Chapters 18, 19, and
20 of the IBC.
NOTE: Cast in place concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 lbs. at
30 days. Footings shall reinforcement of minimum of 2 - 1/2" diameter rebar
throughout. Placement of reinforcement and requirements of Chapter 19 of the
IBC.
NOTE: Material used for backfilling shall be carefully placed granular soil of
average or high drained with approved drainage system as prescribed in Section
1805.4 of the IBC containing a high percentage of clay, fine silt, or similar
materials of low permeability or expansive soils where backfilled materials are
not drained or an unusually high surcharge is to be placed adjacent to the
designed wall shall be required.
NOTE: Foundation plate of sill anchorage shall be installed in accordance with
the respective codes as applicable.
 
   (KK)   Section 1809 - Table 1809.7 Foundation for stud bearing walls is
amended to read as follows:
 
                                                             Minimum depth of
          Thickness of                                       foundation below
Number of foundation walls Minimum width of Thickness of     natural surface
stories   unit Concrete    footing (inches) footing (inches) of ground and
          masonry                                            finish grade
                                                             (inches)
1         8  8             16               8                42
2         8  8             16               8                42
3         10 10            18               12               42
 
   (LL)   Chapters 27, 28, and 29 are deleted in their entirety.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.003 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO RESIDENTIAL
CODE.
   (A)   Section R101.1 Title is amended to read as follows:
      These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-
family dwellings of the City of Marshalltown, and shall be cited as such and
will be referred to herein as "this code".
   (B)   Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit is amended to read as follows:
      Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to
grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Permits shall not be required for the following:
      Building:
         (1)   One-story detached accessory structures provided that the floor
area does not exceed 120 square feet; however, site plan approval shall be
obtained from the zoning department.
         (2)   Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) tall.
         (3)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops,
and similar finish work.
         (4)   Sidewalks shall be permitted and installed in accordance with
approved site plans for individual lot development.
         (5)   Swings and other playground equipment.
         (6)   Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are
not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, and are not attached
to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.
    (C)   Section R105.6.1 Revocation of Permit is added to read as follows:
      It shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to schedule the required
inspections and obtain final approvals. Failure to schedule the required
inspections and receive approval of work authorized by the permit before
covering said work or at completion shall result in revocation of the permit
and void any associated approvals granted by the City. This failure shall also
equate to working without a permit in violation of City ordinance and no future
permits shall be issued to any person or company who has outstanding violations
of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Failure to contact
the City for any inspection or follow-up prior to expiration of a permit shall
be deemed a violation of this code section. Failure to contact the City for any
inspection or followup prior to expiration of a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy shall also be deemed a violation of this code. Allowing occupancy of
a structure, for which a person or company holds a building permit, prior to or
without a valid Certificate of Occupancy (temporary or final) shall be deemed a
violation of this code section and no future permits shall be issued to any
person or company who has outstanding violations of this code or any other laws
or ordinances of the City.
   (D)   Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees is amended to read as follows:
      Where a permit is required, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the City of Marshalltown Fee Schedule as adopted.
   (E)   Section R108.3 Building permit valuations is amended to read as
follows:
      The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at
time of application. The building valuation will be derived from the
construction costs for the total work submitted by the contractor or the most
current building valuation data schedule published by the International Code
Council (ICC). Submitted contractor valuation shall not be less than derived
valuation through ICC. Published data is utilized by the Administrative
Official in an effort to maintain consistency and fairness for permit fee
calculations. It is not intended to reflect actual taxable value.
      The method for determining the value of the additional listed residential
items will be as follows: The square foot of the listed structure, times the
dwelling - Type V - Wood Frame value, times the multiplier assigned to each
listed item.
         (1)   Open decks - 8%
         (2)   Above-ground pools - 8%
         (3)   Screened porches - 15%
         (4)   In-ground pools - 17%
         (5)   3 season porches - 50%
         (6)   Detached garages - 50%
         (7)   Remodel/Renovation - 30%
         (8)   Post frame buildings - 50%
   (F)   Section R108.5 Fee refunds is amended to read as follows:
      The administrative official may authorize refunding of any fee hereunder
which was erroneously paid or collected.
      The administrative official may authorize refunding of not more than 80
percent of the plan review fee paid when no work has been done under a permit
issued in accordance with this code. The administrative official may authorize
refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
      The administrative official shall not authorize refunding of any fee
except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of fee payment.
   (G)   Section R110.1 Use and change of occupancy is amended to read as
follows:
      A building or structure shall not be used or occupied in whole or in
part, and a change of occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof
shall not be made until the building official has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this
code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances
of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. On all new construction, all necessary
walks, drives, and approaches, and all seeding and sodding are to be installed
before a final certificate of occupancy is issued.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from
permits under Section R105.2.
         (2)   Accessory buildings or structures.
   (H)   Table R301.2 Climatic and geographic design criteria is amended to
read as follows:
 
Ground                                  Seismic                            Winter Ice Barrier  Flood   Air      Mean
Snow   Wind Design                      Design   Subject to Damage From    Design Underlayment Hazards Freezing Annual
Load                                    Category                           Temp   Required             Index    Temp
                         Special Wind-
       Speed Topographic Wind    borne           Weathering Frost Termite
30     MPH   Effects     Region  Debris A                   Depth          0      Yes          Dec.    2,0 00   48. 6
                                 Zone                                                          2007
       115   No          No      No              Severe     42    Moderate
 
   (I)   Section R301.2.1.3 Wind speed conversion is amended to read as
follows:
      Where referenced documents are based on nominal design wind speeds and do
not provide the means for conversion between ultimate design wind speeds and
nominal design wind speeds, the ultimate design wind speeds, Vu1t, of Figure
R301.1(2) shall be converted to nominal design wind speeds, Vasd, using Table
R301.2.1.3. For purposes of determining wind loads, the minimum basic wind
speed shall be considered as 115 miles per hour; except when referenced
documents are based on fastest mile wind velocities, Table R301.2(1) shall be
used.
   (J)   Section R301.2.3 Snow loads is amended to read as follows:
      Wood-framed construction, cold-formed, steel-framed construction and
masonry and concrete construction, and structural insulated panel construction
in regions with ground snow loads 70 pounds per square foot (3.35 kPa) or less,
shall be in accordance with Chapters 5, 6, and 8. Buildings in regions ground
snow loads greater than 70 pounds per square foot (3.35 kPa) shall be designed
in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
      For purposes of determining snow loads, the minimum ground snow load for
design purposes shall be 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent increases or
decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided in this code, except that the
minimum allowable flat roof snow load may be reduced to not less than 80
percent of the ground snow load.
   (K)   Section R302.3 Two-family dwellings is amended to read as follows:
      For the purposes of fire-resistive separation, two-family dwelling units
shall be considered as townhouses and shall be constructed in accordance with
Section R302.
   (L)   Table R302.6 Dwelling-Garage separation is amended to read as follows:
 
Table R302.6 Dwelling – Garage Separation
Separation                              Material
From the residence and attics           Not less than 5/8" gypsum board or
                                        equivalent applied to garage side
From habitable rooms above the garage
and structure(s) supporting floor/      Not less than 5/8" gypsum board or
ceiling assemblies used for separation  equivalent
required by this section
                                        Not less than 5/8" gypsum board or
Garages located less than 5 feet from a equivalent applied to the interior side
dwelling unit on the same lot           of exterior walls and ceilings within
                                        the garage
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
 
   (M)   Section 302.13 Fire protection of floors is deleted.
   (N)   Section R305.1.1 Basements is amended to read as follows:
      Portions of basements that do not contain habitable space or hallways
shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).
      Exception:
         Existing basements not having a height as specified in this section
are allowed to be finished with a ceiling height that is not decreased more
than the minimal measurement created by applying a finished ceiling of gypsum
board or acoustical ceiling tiles.
   (O)   Section R310.2.3 Maximum height from floor is amended to read as
follows:
      Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have the bottom of the clear
opening not greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the floor.
      Exception:
         A landing may be provided to meet the maximum sill height of 44 inches
above the floor or landing provided. The landing shall not be less than 36
inches wide, not less than 12 inches out from the exterior wall, and not more
than 24 inches in height. The landing shall be permanently affixed to the floor
below or the wall under the window it serves.
   (P)   Section R310.6 Dwelling additions is amended to read as follows:
      Where dwelling additions contain sleeping rooms, an emergency escape and
rescue opening shall be provided in each new sleeping room. Where dwelling
additions have basements, an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be
provided in the new basement.
      Exception:
         New habitable spaces created in an existing basement shall be provided
with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section R310.1.
   (Q)   Section R311.3.2 Floor elevations at other exterior doors is amended
to read as follows:
      Doors other than the required egress door shall be provided with landings
or floors not more than 7 3/4 inches (196 mm) below the top of the threshold.
      Exception:
         A top landing is not required where a stairway of not more than four
rises is located on the exterior side of a door, provided the door does not
swing over the stairway.
   (R)   Section 311.7.5.1 Risers is amended to read as follows:
      The riser height shall not be more than 7 3/4 inches (196 mm). The riser
height shall be measured vertically between the leading edges of the adjacent
treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall not exceed
the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Risers shall be vertical or sloped
from the underside of the nosing of the tread above at an angle not more than
30 degrees (0.51 rad) from the vertical. At open risers, openings located more
than 30 inches (762 mm), as measured vertically, to the floor or grade below
shall not permit the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   The opening between adjacent treads is not limited on spiral
stairways.
         (2)   The riser height of spiral stairways shall be in accordance with
Section R311.7.10.1.
         (3)   The dimensions of the top and bottom riser of a stair may vary
up to 1 inch (25.4 mm) from the stairway riser dimension; however, in no case
shall the riser height exceed 7 3/4 inches (196 mm).
   (S)   Section R311.7.8.4 Continuity is amended to read as follows:
      Handrails shall be continuous for the full length of the flight, from a
point directly above the top riser of the flight to a point directly above the
lowest riser of the flight. Handrail ends shall be returned toward a wall,
guard walking surface continuous to itself, or terminates to a post.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   Handrail continuity shall be permitted to be interrupted by a
newel post at a turn in a flight with winders, at a landing, or over the lowest
tread.
         (2)   A volute, turnout, or starting easing shall be allowed to
terminate over the lowest tread and over the top landing.
         (3)   Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving an individual
dwelling unit shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location in a
straight stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge and is offset and
immediately continues.
   (T)   Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems is amended
to read as follows:
      An automatic fire residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in
townhouses.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required where additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do
not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
         (2)   Townhouse structures where the conditioned square footage of the
entire building is less than 18,000 square feet. For purposes of this section,
conditioned space shall be defined as space that can be occupied but shall not
include garages or attics.
         (3)   Townhouse structures that contain eight (8) or less dwelling
units.
   (U)   Section R313.2 One and two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler
systems is amended to read as follows:
      An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one
and two-family dwellings.
      Exceptions:
         (1)   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required where additions or alterations are made to existing buildings that are
not provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
         (2)   One and two-family dwellings containing less than 8,000 square
feet of floor space, excluding attached garages and other unenclosed areas.
   (V)   Section R317.1 Location required is amended to read as follows:
      Protection of wood and wood-based products from decay shall be provided
in the following locations by the use of naturally durable wood or wood that is
preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1.
         (1)   In crawl spaces or unexcavated areas located within the
periphery of the building foundation, wood joists or the bottom of a wood
structural floor were closer than 18 inches (457 mm) to exposed ground, wood
girders were closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to exposed ground, and wood columns
where closer than 8 inches (204 mm) to exposed ground.
         (2)   Wood framing members, including columns, that are in directly on
concrete or masonry exterior foundation walls and are less than 8 inches (203
mm) from the exposed ground.
         (3)   Sills and sleepers on a concrete or masonry slab that is in
direct contact with the ground unless separated from such slab by an impervious
moisture barrier.
         (4)   The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or concrete
walls having clearances of less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) on tops, sides, and
ends.
         (5)   Wood siding, sheathing, and wall framing on the exterior of a
building having a clearance of less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the ground or
less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured vertically from concrete steps, porch
slabs, patio slabs, and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather.
         (6)   Wood furring strips or other wood framing members attached
directly to the interior of exterior masonry walls or concrete walls below
grade except where an approved vapor retarder is applied between the wall and
the furring strips or framing members.
         (7)   Wood structural members supporting moisture-permeable floors or
roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs,
unless separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier.
         (8)   Residential fences shall be chain link, ornamental iron, PVC/
composite, or approved wood. Wood used in fences shall be treated wood or
approved wood of natural resistance to decay.
         (9)   Wood columns in contact with basement floor slabs unless
supported by concrete piers or metal pedestals projecting not less than 1 inch
(25 mm) above the concrete floor and separated from the concrete pier by an
impervious moisture barrier.
   (W)   Table R403.l (1), (2), (3) are replaced with the following:
 
Table R403.1 – Foundations for Stud Bearing Walls
                                                             Minimum depth of
          Thickness of                                       foundation below
Number of foundation walls Minimum width of Thickness of     natural surface
stories   unit Concrete    footing (inches) footing (inches) of ground and
          masonry                                            finish grade
                                                             (inches)
1         8  8             16               8                42
2         8  8             16               8                42
3         10 10            18               12               42
 
   (X)   Section R403.1.4.1 Frost protection is amended to read as follows:
      Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and
other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from
frost by one or more of the following methods:
         (1)   Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.
         (2)   Constructed in accordance with Section R403.3.
         (3)   Constructed in accordance with ASCE 32.
         (4)   Erected on solid rock.
      Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is
permanent.
      Exception:
         (1)   Accessory structures up to 200 square feet may be constructed on
a 4-inch wood deck or 4-inch concrete slab. Protection for detached garages and
other accessory structures 1,024 square feet or less in size, located more than
10 feet from a dwelling, attached garage, or other principle structures, may be
accomplished with a floating slab (monolithic). The floating slab shall include
a thickened slab edge or a minimum of 18 inches thick. 12 inches of the
thickened slab shall be below grade and 6 inches shall be above finished grade.
The bottom portion of the thickened slab area shall be 12 by twelve inches. Two
#4 rebar shall be placed within the thickened edge continuous around the
perimeter of the slab. The floor shall be Portland cement concrete not less
than 4 inches thick. Garage floor areas shall have all sod and/or debris
removed. For detached garages and accessory structures exceeding 1,024 square
feet, a frost protected footing and foundation shall be required.
   (Y)   Section R404.1 Concrete and masonry foundation walls are amended to
read as follows:
      Scope: Notwithstanding other design requirements of Sections R404.1 -
R404.1.5.2 of the IRC, foundation retaining walls for one and two-family
dwelling occupancies of Type V construction may be constructed in accordance
with this section, provided that the use or building site conditions affecting
such walls are within the limitations specified in this section. Concrete
foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accordance with the
provisions of Section R404.l.3. Masonry foundation walls shall be selected and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section R404.1.2. If backfill
prior to a poured in place floor slab is desired, one of the following methods
to provide bottom lateral support shall be completed:
         (1)   A full depth (minimum 1 1/2") nominal 2-inch x 4-inch keyway may
be formed into the footings to secure the bottom of the foundation wall, or
         (2)   36-inch long vertical #4 rebar may be embedded a minimum of 6
inches into the footings not to exceed 7 inches on center spacing.
   (Z)   Section/Table R404.1.3.2.3 Foundation walls for conventional light-
frame construction are added:
                                                       Reinforcement
Height of                                Reinforcement type and
foundation wall                          type and      placement
(net measured from Thickness of          placement     within        Type of
top of basement    foundation walls Unit within        foundation    mortar
slab to top of                           foundation    wall**
foundation wall)*                        wall          (maximum 12'
                                                       span between
                                                       corners and
Gross Net          Concrete Masonry      Concrete      Masonry       Masonry
                                                     Reinforcement
Height of                              Reinforcement type and
foundation wall                        type and      placement
(net measured     Thickness of         placement     within        Type of
from top of       foundation walls     within        foundation    mortar
basement slab to  Unit                 foundation    wall**
top of foundation                      wall          (maximum 12'
wall)*                                               span between
                                                     corners and
Gross Net         Concrete Masonry     Concrete      Masonry       Masonry
                                       1/2"          0.075 square
                                       horizontal    inch bar 8'
                                       bars,         o.c.          Type M or S
                                       placement in  vertically in grout and
                                       the middle,   fully grouted mortar shall
8     7'8"        7 1/2"   8"          and near the  cells. If     meet
                                       top and       block is 12"  provisions
                                       bottom - Y2"  nominal       of Chapter
                                       bars at 6'    thickness,    21 IBC
                                       max           may be
                                       vertically    unreinforced
                                       1/2" bars 2'
                                       o.c.,
9     8'8"        8"       See Chapter horizontally  See Chapter   Same as
                           18 IBC      and 20"       18 IBC        above
                                       vertically
                                       o.c.
                                       5/8" bars 2"
                                       o.c.
10    9'8"        8"       See Chapter horizontally  See Chapter   Same as
                           18 IBC      and 30"       18 IBC        above
                                       vertically
                                       o.c.
•    Concrete floor slabs to be nominal 4". If such floor slab is not provided
prior to backfill, provide 1.) 36" embedded in the footing at maximum 7' o.c.
spacing and/or; 2.) Full depth nominal 2" depth x 4" width keyway in footing.
•   AU reinforcement bars shall meet ASTM A6175 grade 40 minimum and deformed.
Placement of the center of wall and meet the provisions of Chapters 18, 19, and
20 of the IBC.
NOTE: Cast in place concrete shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 lbs. at
30 days. Footings shall reinforcement of minimum of 2 - 1/2" diameter rebar
throughout. Placement of reinforcement and requirements of Chapter 19 of the
IBC.
NOTE: Material used for backfilling shall be carefully placed granular soil of
average or high drained with approved drainage system as prescribed in Section
1805.4 of the IBC containing a high percentage of clay, fine silt, or similar
materials of low permeability or expansive soils where backfilled materials are
not drained or an unusually high surcharge is to be placed adjacent to the
designed wall shall be required.
NOTE: Foundation plate of sill anchorage shall be installed in accordance with
the respective codes as applicable.
 
   (AA)   Chapter 11 Energy efficiency is amended by deleting this chapter and
inserting the following language:
      Provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code as currently
adopted and amended by the Iowa State Building Code Bureau shall apply to all
matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy
efficiency. Administration shall be prescribed in ''this code" and the
regulations shall be known as the Marshalltown Energy Code.
   (BB)   Section R1601.4 Installation is amended to read as follows:
      Duct installation shall comply with Sections M1601.4.1 through M1601.4.11
   (CC)   Section M1601.4.11 Air plenum and duct separation is added to read as
follows:
      Air plenums and ducts located in floor and wall cavities shall be
separated from unconditioned spaces by construction with sufficient insulation
to meet energy code requirements. These areas include but are not limited to
exterior walls, cantilevered floors, and floors above garages.
   (DD)   Section R G2415.5.2 (403.5.2) LP-gas systems are amended to read as
follows:
      Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST). Only CSST with an arc-resistant
jacket or covering system listed in accordance with ANSI LC-1 (optional Section
5.15)/CSA 6.26 - 2016 shall be installed in accordance with the terms of its
approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturer's instructions, and this
code including electrical bonding requirements in Section G2411. CCST shall not
be used for through wall penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas
supply to the inside of the structure. CCST shall not be installed in locations
where subject to physical damage unless protected in an approved manner.
   (EE)   Section G2414.5.4 (403.5.5) Corrugated stainless steel tubing is
added to read as follows:
      Arc-resistant corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed in
accordance with ANSI LC 1 (optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26.
   (FF)   Section P2603.5.1 Sewer depth is amended to read as follows:
      Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall not
be less than 60 inches below the finished grade at the point of septic tank
connection or as approved by Marshall County Environmental Health. Building
sewers shall not be less than 60 inches below grade.
   (GG)   Section R E3704.7 Prohibited locations are added to read as follows:
      Feeders supplying a townhome shall not cross a property line other than
the individual unit served.
      For the purposes of this provision, the term townhome shall mean a
single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached
units in which each unit extends from the foundation to the roof and with a
yard or public way on not less than two sides.
      Exception:
         If a recorded easement is established in a concealed space or attic
within the townhome unit, feeds are allowed within the easement.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.004 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO EXISTING
BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   Section IEBC 108.2 Schedule of permit fees is amended to read as
follows:
      Where a permit is required, a fee for each permit shall be paid as
required, in accordance with the schedule of fees as derived from the City of
Marshalltown Fee Schedule as adopted.
   (B)   Section IEBC 302.6 Fire protection is added as follows:
      Existing buildings containing R-2 occupancies shall be made to comply
with the International Building Code Section 903.2.8 within two years of any of
the following situations:
         (1)   Fire damage to three or more dwelling units, not including smoke
or water damage or other damage from firefighting operations.
         (2)   Issuance of a building permit for a Level III alteration as
identified in Chapter 6 of the International Existing Building Code.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.005 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO INTERNATIONAL
MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   Section IMC 101.1 Title is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of
Marshalltown, hereinafter referred to as "this code." The City of Marshalltown
interprets "NFPA 54 and NFPA 58" as equivalent alternatives for design to meet
the intent of the 2021 International Fuel Gas Code.
   (B)   Section IMC 109.5 Permit fees is amended to read as follows:
      Permit fees will be derived from the City of Marshalltown Fee Schedule as
adopted.
   (C)   Section IMC 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated
structures is amended to read as follows:
      If the tenants of a multiple-tenant building have or are allowed to have,
mechanical facilities on or which penetrate the roof, then roof access ladders
must be provided for use by all such tenants and their agents and contractors
in a manner that does not require accessing space under the control of another
tenant.
   (D)   Section IMC 307.2.4.1 Ductless mini-split system traps is amended to
read as follows:
      Ductless mini-split equipment that produces condensate shall be installed
per the manufacturer's instructions.
   (E)   Section IMC 603.1 General is amended to read as follows:
      An air distribution system shall be designed and installed to supply the
required distribution of air. The installation of an air distribution system
shall not affect the fire protection requirements specified in the
International Building Code. Ducts shall be constructed, braced, reinforced,
and installed to provide structural strength and durability. Air plenums and
ducts located in floor and wall cavities shall be separated from unconditioned
space by construction with insulation to meet energy code requirements. These
areas include, but are not limited to, exterior walls, cantilevered floors, and
floors above garages.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.006 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO ELECTRIC CODE.
   (A)   Section 90.2 Scope is amended by adding the following language:
      90.2(D) Permits required. Permits shall be required for work contained
within the scope of this article. Permit fees shall be derived from the City of
Marshalltown Fee Schedule as adopted.
   (B)   Section 210.8(A) Dwelling units is amended to read as follows:
      All 125-volt receptacles installed in locations specified in 210.8(A)(1)
through 210.8(A)(11) shall be ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for
personnel.
         (1)   Bathrooms
         (2)   Garages and accessory buildings that have floors located at or
below grade level not intended to be habitable rooms and limited to storage
areas, work areas, or similar use
         (3)   Outdoors
            Exception to (3): Receptacles that are not readily accessible and
are supply branch circuits dedicated to electrical snow-melting, deicing, or
pipeline and Bessel heating equipment shall be permitted to be installed in
accordance with 426.28M or 427.22, as applicable
         (4)   Crawl spaces - at or below grade
         (5)   Basements
            Exception to (5): A receptacle supplying only a permanently
installed fire alarm or burglar alarm system shall not be required to have
ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection
            Informational note: See 760.41(B) and 760.121(B) for power supply
requirements for fire alarm systems. Receptacles installed under the exception
to 210.8(A)(5) shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of 210.52(G)
         (6)   Kitchens - Where the receptacles are installed to serve the
countertop surfaces
         (7)   Sinks - Where receptacles are installed within 6 feet (1.8 m)
from the top inside edge of the bowl of the sink
         (8)   Boathouses
         (9)   Bathtubs or shower stalls - Where receptacles are installed
within 6 feet (1.8 m) of the outside edge of the bathtub or shower stall
         (10)   Laundry areas
            Exception to (1) through (3), (5) through (8), and (1): Listed
locking support and mounting receptacles utilized in combination with
compatible attachment fittings installed for the purpose of serving a ceiling
luminaire or ceiling fan shall not be required to be ground-fault circuit-
interrupter protected. If a general-purpose convenience outlet is integral to
the ceiling luminaire or ceiling fan, GFCI protection shall be provided.
         (11)   Indoor damp and wet locations
   (C)   Section 210.8(F) Outdoor outlets are deleted.
   (D)   Section NEC 215.13 Prohibited locations are added to read as follows:
      Feeders supplying a townhome shall not cross a property line other than
the individual unit served.
      For the purposes of this provision, the term townhome shall mean a
single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached
units in which each unit extends from the foundation to the roof and with a
yard or public way on not less than two sides.
      Exception:
         If a recorded easement is established in a concealed space or attic
within the townhome unit, feeds are allowed within the easement.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.007 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO UNIFORM
PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   Section UPC 104.5 Fees is amended to read as follows:
      Permit fees will be derived from the City of Marshalltown Fee Schedule as
adopted.
   (B)   Table UPC 104.5 Plumbing permit fees are deleted.
   (C)   Section UPC 407.3 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature for Public
Lavatories is amended to read as follows:
      Hot water delivered from public-use lavatories shall be limited to a
maximum temperature of 120°F (49°C). The maximum temperature shall be regulated
by one of the following means:
         (1)   A limiting device conforming to either ASSE 1070/ASME A112.1070/
CSA B125.70, or
         (2)   A water heater conforming to ASSE 1084.
      Tempering devices shall be installed at or as close as possible to the
point of use.
   (D)   Section UPC 418.3 Location of floor drains is amended to read as
follows:
      Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas:
         (1)   Toilet rooms containing two or more water closets or a
combination of one water closet and one urinal, except in a dwelling unit.
         (2)   Commercial kitchens and in accordance with Section 704.3.
         (3)   Laundry rooms in commercial buildings and common laundry
facilities in multi-family dwelling buildings.
         (4)   Boiler rooms.
         (5)   Rooms containing a water heater.
   (E)   Section UPC 609.1 Installation is amended to read as follows:
      Water piping shall be adequately supported in accordance with Table
313.3. Burred ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe or tube.
Changes in direction shall be made by the appropriate use of fittings, except
that changes in direction in copper or copper alloy tubing shall be permitted
to be made with bends, provided that such bends are made with bending equipment
that does not deform or create a loss in the cross-sectional area of the
tubing. Changes in direction are allowed with flexible pipe and tubing without
fittings in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Provisions shall
be made for expansion in hot water piping. Piping, equipment, appurtenances,
and devices shall be installed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the
provisions and intent of the code. Building supply yard piping shall be not
less than 12 inches (305 mm) below the average local frost depth. The cover
shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below finish grade. Water service
piping shall have no less than five feet of soil cover.
   (F)   Section UPC 701.2 Drainage Piping is amended to read as follows:
      Materials for drainage piping shall be in accordance with one of the
referenced standards in Table 701.2 except that:
         (1)   No galvanized wrought-iron or galvanized steel pipe shall be
used underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground.
         (2)   ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be installed in
accordance with applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2 and Chapter 14
"Firestop Protection." Except for individual single-family dwelling units,
materials exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame-spread index of
not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 50, where tested
in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Plastic piping installed in plenums
shall be tested in accordance with all requirements of ASTM E84 or UL 723.
Mounting methods, supports, and sample sizes of materials for testing that are
not specified in ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be prohibited.
         (3)   No vitrified clay pipe or fittings shall be used aboveground or
where pressurized by a pump or ejector. They shall be kept not less than 12
inches (305 mm) belowground.
         (4)    Copper or copper alloy tubes for drainage and vent piping shall
have a weight of not less than that of copper or copper alloy drainage tube
type DWV.
         (5)   Stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings shall not be installed
underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground.
         (6)   Cast-iron soil pipe and fittings and the stainless steel
couplings used to join these products shall be listed and tested in accordance
with standards referenced in Table 701.2. Such pipe and fittings shall be
marked with the country of origin, manufacturer's name or registered trademark
as defined in the product standards, the third-party certifier's mark, and the
class of the pipe or fitting
         (7)   The use of SDR 23.5 is an acceptable material for exterior
building sewers.
   (G)   Section UPC 717.1.1 Size of drainage piping is added to read as
follows:
      The main building drain shall be a minimum four-inch diameter.
   (H)   Section UPC 718.3 Protection from Damage is amended to read as
follows:
      No building sewer or other drainage piping or part thereof, which is
constructed of materials other than those approved for use under or within a
building, shall be installed under or within 2 feet (610 mm) of a building or
structure, or part thereof, nor less than 1 foot (305 mm) below the surface of
the ground. The provisions of this subsection include structures such as
porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered; breezeways; roofed porte
cochere; roofed patios; carports; covered walks; covered driveways; and similar
structures or appurtenances. Building sewers less than 42 inches shall be cast
iron pipe or protected with an engineered system to prevent damage from
freezing and frost heave.
   (I)   Section UPC 1014.1 General is amended to read as follows:
      Where it is determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction that waste
pretreatment is required, an approved type of grease interceptor(s) shall
comply with ASME A112.14.3, ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481, PDI G-101, or PDI G-102,
and sized in accordance with Section 1014.2.1 or Section 1014.3.6, shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions to
receive the drainage from fixtures or equipment that produce grease-laden
waste. Grease-laden waste fixtures shall include, but not be limited to, sinks
and drains, such as floor drains, floor sinks, and other fixtures or equipment
in serving establishments, such as restaurants, cafes, lunch counters,
cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels, hospitals, sanitariums, factory or school
kitchens, or other establishments where grease is introduced into the drainage
or sewage system in quantities that can affect line stoppage or hinder sewage
treatment or private sewage disposal systems. A combination of hydromechanical,
gravity grease interceptors, and engineered systems shall be allowed to meet
this code and other applicable requirements of the Authority Having
Jurisdiction where space or existing physical constraints of existing buildings
necessitate such installations. A grease interceptor shall not be required for
individual dwelling units or private living quarters. Water closets, urinals,
and other plumbing fixtures conveying human waste shall not drain into or
through the grease interceptor.
      Notwithstanding provisions of Section 1014.1, regulations of Fat Oil and
Grease (FOG) and sizing FOG removal devices where connected to the Wastewater
Reclamation Authority (WRA) system shall be in accordance with WRA regulations
for the regulation of industrial wastewater and commercial wastewater.
   (J)   Section UPC 1101.12.2.2.2 Combined system is deleted.
   (K)   Section UPC 1208.6.4.5 Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing is amended to
read as follows:
      Only CCST with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering System listed in
accordance with ANSI LC-1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-2016 shall be
installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the condition of
listing, the manufacturer's instructions, and this code including electrical
bonding requirements in Section 1211.2. CCST shall not be used for through wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CCST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 151.008 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND DELETIONS TO ENERGY
CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   The provisions of the IECC as currently adopted and amended by the
Iowa State Building Code Bureau shall apply to all matters governing the design
and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
   (B)   All energy code compliance inspections shall be completed by a third
party certified to do such inspections with a report submitted to the
administrative official showing compliance with the state adopted energy code.
   (C)   Sections C 101.1, 101.2, 103.3.1, 103.3.2, 103.3.3, 103.4, 103.5, and
all of Sections 104, 107, 108, and 109 are deleted.
   (D)   Section C 402.1.1.1 Seasonal structures are added to read as follows:
      The following seasonal-type structures are exempt from meeting the
provisions of this code. (These facilities are allowed to have heating and/or
cooling equipment for the temporary comfort of patrons and employees during
operating hours).
         (1)   Food service buildings that serve patrons at amusement parks,
water parks, and outdoor sporting facilities. The buildings can only be
occupied by employees, must not be able to allow patrons to be served within
the facility, and must have its sole means of servicing customers an operable
exterior serving window.
         (2)   Restroom facilities that serve amusement parks, water parks, and
outdoor sporting facilities.
   (E)   Section C 408.2 Mechanical systems and water-heating systems
commissioning and completion requirements are amended to read as follows:
      Prior to the final mechanical and plumbing inspections, the registered
design professional or approved agency shall provide evidence of mechanical
systems commissioning and completion in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The Commissioning Agent shall be accredited by an industry-recognized
certification program, to be determined by the AHJ.
(Ord. 15071, passed 9-25-2023)
MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 151.015 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to move any building or structure not upon wheels as
part of its original equipment or construction and not subject to licensing by
any public authority into, upon, along or over any street, alley, avenue or
public ground in the city without first having obtained a permit therefor.
(2013 Code, § 7-17) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.016 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a permit for the moving of any building or other
structure, as provided in §
151.015, shall be made by the owner thereof to the Public Works Secretary with
the payment of a fee set by resolution. Application must be made a minimum of
ten business days prior to the move date. Applications are valid for only the
specified move and for no more than 60-days if the initial move date is
postponed for any reason. Notification of change in move date shall be made as
soon as possible.
      (2)   A routing plan should be submitted with the application. The route
approved shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public
convenience and safety. A plan for traffic control and flaggers, if needed,
shall also be submitted.
(2013 Code, § 7-18)
   (B)   As soon as possible after receipt of an application, routing plan, and
traffic control plan for a permit required by §
151.015, the Public Works Secretary shall report the receipt of such to the
Director of Public Works, the Building Official, the Chief of Police, and the
Fire Chief.
(2013 Code, § 7-19)
(Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 14228, passed 4-14-1986; Ord. 15036,
passed 2-14-2022)
§ 151.017 INSURANCE.
   The moving of any building or structure under this subchapter shall be done
and performed by a licensed building mover after presentation to the Public
Works Secretary of a certificate of insurance meeting the requirements set
forth in § 10.009 Minimum Insurance Requirements of the Code of Ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 7-20) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 14286, passed 2-27-
1989; Ord. 15036, passed 2-14-2022)
§ 151.018 REPLACEMENT OF UTILITY LINES; APPROVAL.
   The licensed building mover shall be responsible for the removal and
replacement of any telephone, internet, cable, or electric light or power
lines, and such licensed building mover or the applicant granted a permit shall
pay all costs connected therewith. He or she shall also obtain the necessary or
required permission from the state and/or county for moving such building or
structure upon, across or along any primary road or highway.
(2013 Code, § 7-21) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 15036, passed 2-14-
2022)
§ 151.019 SUPERVISION BY PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION.
   The moving of any building or structure, as is provided in this subchapter,
shall be under the Public Works Division, who is empowered to require the
planking or other means of protecting any street paving, sidewalk or other
public or private property from damage in connection with the moving of any
such building or structure.
(2013 Code, § 7-22) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 15036, passed 2-14-
2022)
§ 151.020 TIME LIMITS.
   Any permit issued under this subchapter shall limit the time for the moving
of any building or structure over the city streets and avenues, and the failure
to accomplish such moving within the time limit provided in such permit shall
be deemed a violation of this subchapter, and each additional day shall be
considered a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. No building
or similar structure shall be moved on a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday.
Applicable building or similar structure moves shall take place between 30
minutes after sunrise and 30 minutes before sunset.
(2013 Code, § 7-23) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 15036, passed 2-14-
2022)
§ 151.021 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS REMAINING ON STREETS IN EXCESS OF FIVE DAYS.
   If the building mover willfully or unnecessarily allows any building to
remain upon any street or alley for a period of time in excess of five days,
the city shall remove the building, either with its own facilities or by a
hired house mover, and any and all expense thereof shall be charged to the
applicant and the house mover engaged by him or her and be collectible against
the house mover.
(2013 Code, § 7-24) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965)
§ 151.022 DISCONNECTION OF UTILITIES.
   The owner of any lot or parcel of ground from which a building or structure
is being moved, if served with utilities at its old location, shall disconnect
such utilities in accordance with the requirements set forth by each utility.
(2013 Code, § 7-25) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965)
§ 151.023 RIGHT OF CITY TO DENY APPLICATION.
   The Public Works Director may deny an applicant the right to move any
building or structure when it appears that there is no feasible route available
for such moving or that the possible damage to the public streets or abutting
city or private property will be substantially damaged or irreparable. If the
license is denied, the applicant may appeal to the City Council by the
procedure provided in §
110.003 of this Code of Ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 7-26) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965; Ord. 15036, passed 2-14-
2022)
§ 151.024 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter shall be in addition to the provisions of the Building Code
and of Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances with the regard to the moving of any
building or structure within the city.
(2013 Code, § 7-27) (Ord. 10838, passed 12-17-1965)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 151.035 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   It is the purpose of the provisions of this subchapter to provide a just,
equitable, and practicable method whereby buildings and structures may be
required to be repaired, removed, vacated, or demolished when the buildings or
structures, from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property,
safety, or welfare of the general public or the occupants of the buildings. The
provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as
defined in this subchapter, which are in existence or which may be constructed
in this city. All buildings or structures, which are required to be repaired
under the provisions of this subchapter, shall be subject to the provisions of
the Building Code.
(2013 Code, § 7-30) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018)
§ 151.036 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
following conditions or defects; provided that, such conditions or defects
exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or
its occupants are endangered whenever:
      (1)   Any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail or
to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property;
      (2)   Any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such
an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
      (3)   The building or structure or any portion thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting such building or portion thereof; the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundations beyond repair; or any other cause, is likely to
partially or completely collapse;
      (4)   For any reason, the building or structure or any portion thereof is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
      (5)   The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle more than two degrees or to an extent that upon inspection it is
determined that the exterior walls or other vertical structural members are
beyond repair or create an unsafe condition;
      (6)   The building or structure or any portion thereof has been so
damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or any other cause, or has become so
dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance; to become a
harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts; or to create a
haven for rodents, snakes and/or other vermin;
      (7)   A building or structure or portion thereof, used or intended to be
used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities or otherwise is determined by the health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease;
      (8)   Any building or structure or portion thereof, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections, heating apparatus or any other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal to be a fire hazard;
      (9)   Any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or any building or
structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public;
      (10)   Any door, aisle, passageway, corridor, stairway, or other means of
egress in is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe so it would not
provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic;
      (11)   Any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind,
flood, or by any other cause, to an extent that the structural strength or
stability thereof is materially less than it was before the catastrophe;
      (12)   Any building, structure, or portion thereof is in violation of
this chapter so as to constitute such building, structure or portion thereof an
unsafe condition; and
      (13)   Any building or structure is in a condition as to constitute a
public nuisance or hazard.
(2013 Code, § 7-31) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018)
§ 151.037 PROCEDURES AND RULES.
   (A)   The Building Official or his or her designee is authorized to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Building Official or his or her designee are authorized to make
such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this subchapter or whenever the Building Official or his or her
designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or
upon unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous conditions, the Building Official or his
or her designee, upon presentation of proper credentials to the property owner
and/or occupant, may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the building or premises or perform any duty imposed upon the Building
Official or his or her designee by this code of ordinances. The Building
Official or his or her designee may apply for an administrative search warrant
to the Iowa District Court for Marshall County, pursuant to I.A.C. § 808.14. No
owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official or his or
her designee for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this
subchapter. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction.
      (2)   All buildings, structures, or portions thereof which are determined
after inspection by the Building Official or his or her designee to be
dangerous as defined in this subchapter are declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.
   (D)   The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and,
if such is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this subchapter, the
Building Official shall give to the owner of such building or structure written
notice stating the defects thereof and ordering the abatement of such defects
(“Notice of Dangerous Building and Order to Abate”). This notice may require
the owner or person in charge of the building or premises, within a reasonable
time as the circumstances require, as determined by the Building Official in
his or her discretion, to commence the required repairs or improvements or
demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof, and
all such work shall be completed within the time provided in the notice. If
necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion
thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs
and/or improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the Building
Official. Said notice shall also advise the property owner of the right to
request a hearing before the Board of Appeals by filing a written request for
hearing within ten days of the service of the notice and that failure to appeal
will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and
determination of the matter.
   (E)   In an emergency, the city may abate a dangerous building without prior
notice and assess the costs as provided in §
151.042 of this subchapter after notice to the property owner and hearing.
(2013 Code, § 7-32) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. §§ 364.12(3)(c) and 384.12(3)(h)
§ 151.038 SERVICE OF NOTICE AND ORDERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The notice in §
151.037 of this subchapter shall be served by certified mail or personal
delivery to the property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of any other
manner of service allowable under the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure.
(2013 Code, § 7-33) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018) Penalty, see §
151.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 151.039 APPEAL.
   Any person entitled to service under §
151.037 of this subchapter may appeal from any notice and order or any action
of the Building Official or his or her designee under this subchapter by filing
a notice of appeal at the office of the Building Official on the form supplied
for the filing purposes. The appeal shall be filed within ten days from the
date of service of the order or action of the Building Official or his or her
designee. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the
Building Official or his or her designee shall present it to the Board of
Appeals.
   (A)   As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Board
of Appeals shall fix a date, time and place of hearing. Said hearing shall be
not less than five days nor more than 20 days from the date the written notice
of appeal is filed.
   (B)   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter shall constitute a waiver of rights to an
administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion
thereof.
   (C)   Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant
shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (D)   After hearing all testimony, the Board of Appeals shall have 15 days
to issue a decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements
to be complied with. The decision shall be served on the appellant by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(2013 Code, § 7-34) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018)
§ 151.040 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The Building Official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to a
dangerous building a notice reading:
 
DANGEROUS BUILDING DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor infraction to occupy this building, or to remove or deface
this notice.
Building Official
City of Marshalltown
 
   (B)   Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition
or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed or defaced until the
repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building Official have been
completed, and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of
making the required repairs or of demolishing the dangerous building.
   (C)   Failure to comply with this section shall be a municipal infraction,
with each day the violation continues a separate offense.
(2013 Code, § 7-35) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.041 RIGHT TO ABATE.
   If the property owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice
to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the city may perform the required action.
(2013 Code, § 7-36) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 151.042 COSTS.
   Any and all costs incurred pursuant to this subchapter, for the removal,
repair, demolition, or dismantling of a dangerous building or structure from
private property may be certified to the County Treasurer for property
assessment and collection as taxes and/or the city may obtain a personal
judgment against the property owner.
(2013 Code, § 7-37) (Ord. 14067, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 14978, passed 9-10-
2018)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 151.055 BASIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure that all
buildings regardless of use maintain basic minimum property maintenance
standards creating a safe and healthy property and community.
   (B)   Building maintenance. Every building shall be maintained to be
weather- and water-tight, and free from excessively peeling paint or other
conditions suggestive of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. Exterior
surfaces shall not have any holes or broken glass; loose, cracked or damaged
shingles or siding; or other defects in the exterior finish, which admit rain,
cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin.
   (C)   Exterior finishes. Materials and practices used on exterior surfaces
shall be of standard quality and appearance. Polystyrene board, tyvek and
insulation board are not acceptable permanent surfaces.
   (D)   Ground cover. All non-farm property shall establish a permanent cover
of perennial grasses or ornamental ground cover as soon as practical after any
construction, and to thereafter maintain same in such condition as to
substantially bind the surface of the soil and prevent erosion, whether by
sheet or gullying, or by wind or water. Acceptable ground cover shall also
include permanent paving and structures as approved by city codes.
   (E)   Fences and retaining walls. All fences and retaining walls shall be
structurally sound and free of leaning or loose elements or portions that may
be considered deteriorating.
   (F)   Piles. Mud, dirt, gravel or other debris or matter, whether organic or
inorganic, deposited in a quantity judged by an enforcement officer to be a
threat to public safety or to cause pollution, obstruction or siltation of
drainage systems or to violate solid waste disposal regulations shall be
prohibited.
   (G)   Roofs and drainage. Roofing construction must be of standard permanent
materials. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects
that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof water
shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
   (H)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (I)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming
units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
(2013 Code, § 21-100) (Ord. 14793, passed 1-8-2007)
§ 151.056 VIOLATION.
   (A)   The primary goal of the city is compliance. In an effort to get
compliance with any of the requirements listed in this subchapter, the
following is the procedure for enforcement actions undertaken pursuant to this
subchapter.
      (1)   Notice of violation will be sent either by regular mail, certified
mail or personal delivery to the title property owner listed by the County
Assessor.
      (2)   A reasonable amount of time, to be determined by the authorized
city representative, will be given to correct the violation.
      (3)   The title property owner may request an appeal to the notice of
violation in accordance with provisions and procedures of §
95.006(B) and (C) of this code of ordinances, related to general nuisances.
   (B)   If the violation is not corrected in the specified time frame and the
title property owner has not requested a written extension of time which
extension has been granted by the city or has not filed a timely appeal as
provided in division (A)(3) above, the city may pursue further or additional
legal actions or remedies, including, but not limited to, those found in this
code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-102) (Ord. 14793, passed 1-8-2007; Ord. 14920, passed 6-24-
2013; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017) Penalty, see §
151.999
BUILDING NUMBERING
§ 151.070 BASELINES FOR COMMENCEMENT OF NUMBERING.
   Main Street and Center Street shall constitute the baselines from which the
numbering of buildings from either side thereof shall commence.
(2013 Code, § 26-67) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.071 STREETS RUNNING NORTH AND SOUTH.
   (A)   North of Main Street, on all streets running north and south, the odd
numbers shall be on the east side and the even numbers on the west side of such
streets.
   (B)   South of Main Street, on all streets running north and south, the odd
numbers shall be on the west side and the even numbers on the east side of such
streets.
(2013 Code, § 26-68) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.072 STREETS RUNNING EAST AND WEST.
   (A)   East of Center Street, on all streets running east and west, the odd
numbers shall be on the south side and the even numbers on the north side of
such streets.
   (B)   West of Center Street, on all streets running east and west, the odd
numbers shall be on the north side and the even numbers on the south side of
such streets.
(2013 Code, § 26-69) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.073 GENERAL NUMBERING PLAN.
   (A)   The building numbers shall run, so far as practical, 100 to each block
or the distance between two street intersections on the same street where this
distance conforms substantially to the length of the average block. In a
business district, the numbers shall be for each 20 feet. In a residence
district, the numbers shall be for each unit of distance equal to the minimum
frontage allowed in each respective zoning classification.
   (B)   The National Emergency Number Association’s Addressing Systems, A
Training Guide For 9-1-1 shall be used as guide for establishing building
numbers.
   (C)   New one-half numbers shall be not be issued.
(2013 Code, § 26-70) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.074 NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, WEST PREFIX DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   North and south. The portions of all streets running north and south
on the north side of Main Street shall be designated with the prefix “north”,
and the portions of all streets running north and south on the south side of
Main Street shall be designated with the prefix “south”.
   (B)   East and west. The portions of all streets running east and west on
the east side of Center Street shall be designated with the prefix “east”, and
the portions of all streets running east and west on the west side of Center
Street shall be designated with the prefix “west”.
(2013 Code, § 26-71) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.075 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER; SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMBERS.
   (A)   The owner and lessee of every building within the city, fronting on
any public street, avenue or highway, shall cause the building to be numbered
as provided in this section.
   (B)   New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that
is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches
(102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm). From 100
to 199 feet from the street, the number shall be a minimum of six inches high
with a minimum stroke of one-half inch. From 200 to 299 feet from the street,
the number shall be a minimum of eight inches high with a minimum stroke of
one-half inch. For each additional 100 feet from the street, the number shall
increase by an additional two inches in height. Measurements to determine the
minimum number size shall be measured from the approved address location to the
centerline of the street for which the premises is addressed.
(2013 Code, § 26-72) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950; Ord. 14805, passed 4-9-2007)
§ 151.076 ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; TIMES FOR COMPLIANCE; BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   Each property owner or lessee shall apply to the Director of Public
Works/City Engineer and receive from him or her the number of the building of
such person. When the Director of Public Works/City Engineer has assigned a
number to a building, the owner or lessee thereof shall, within ten days, have
such number fixed and displayed thereon as provided in this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 26-73)
   (B)   Upon application for a building permit, the applicant shall ascertain
from the Director of Public Works/City Engineer the correct number for the
building for which the permit is to be issued and shall, within ten days after
such building has been completed for use or occupancy, place the proper number
upon the building.
(2013 Code, § 26-74)
(Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.077 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS/CITY ENGINEER.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer to see
that the provisions of this subchapter are enforced and to designate the number
to be assigned to each building. When he or she shall deem it desirable or
necessary to change the number used for or assigned to any building, he or she
shall designate and assign a new number therefor and shall mail or deliver to
the owner or lessee of such building a notice thereof, and within ten days
thereafter the number on such building shall be changed and displayed
accordingly.
(2013 Code, § 26-75) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.078 COMPLAINTS AND OBJECTIONS.
   If the owner or lessee of any building has any objection or complaint to the
number assigned to any building or to the changing of any number under this
subchapter, he or she shall file his or her complaint or objections in the
office of the City Clerk within ten days after the number is assigned or within
ten days after the notice is mailed or delivered as provided in this
subchapter; otherwise, the action of the Director of Public Works/City Engineer
shall be final, and if such complaint or objection is so filed the Council by
resolution shall determine the complaint.
(2013 Code, § 26-76) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.079 NOTICE TO COMPLY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   If the owner or lessee of any building shall fail, refuse or neglect to
number or to renumber the building, the Director of Public Works/City Engineer
may cause a notice to be given to comply with this subchapter within ten days,
which notice may be given by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city or by personal service of a written notice on the owner
or lessee. If any building shall not have been properly numbered or renumbered
within ten days after such publication or service, the Director of Public
Works/City Engineer shall cause the numbering to be done, and the cost and
expense of such numbering or renumbering shall be assessed against the property
or premises numbered or renumbered and certified and collected in the manner
provided for other special taxes.
(2013 Code, § 26-77) (Ord. 20, passed 8-14-1950)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or cooperation violating any of the provisions of the
Building Code, as adopted in §
151.001 of this chapter, as amended, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
Violation of §
151.001 of this chapter shall also be a municipal infraction and punished
subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 7-1)
   (C)   A violation of the City Property Maintenance Code under §§
151.055 and
151.056 of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction, as defined in
I.C.A. § 364.22(2), subject to the penalties prescribed therein, as amended,
and be punished by a civil penalty as provided in §
10.999(C) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 21-102)
(Ord. 12392, passed 1-31-1974; Ord. 12416, passed 2-27-1974; Ord. 13312, passed
4-10-1978; Ord. 13933, passed 3-23-1981; Ord. 14183, passed 5-15-1984; Ord.
14230, passed 5-27-1986; Ord. 14374, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 14534, passed 4-8-
1996; Ord. 14648, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 14793, passed 1-8-2007; Ord. 14803,
passed 3-12-2007; Ord. 14920, passed 6-24-2013; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 152: HOUSING CODE
Section
   
152.001   Citation of chapter
   
152.002   Adoption of housing standards
   
152.003   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions
   
152.004   Application; certificate of compliance; yearly registration; fees;
inspections; denial or revocation
   
152.005   Appeals
   
152.006   Violations
§ 152.001 CITATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “Marshalltown Housing Code”.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 152.002 ADOPTION OF HOUSING STANDARDS.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in full except for such portions
as may hereinafter be deleted, modified or amended.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 152.003 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.
   The following amendments, modifications, additions and deletions to the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition, are hereby made:
   (A)   Amend Section 101.1 Title. Insert: [Marshalltown].
   (B)   Amend Section 101.2 Scope. Delete language and insert in lieu of the
following: The provisions of this code shall apply to all renter-occupied
residential structures and all existing renter-occupied residential premises,
except for those located within a designated mobile home park, and constitute
minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and
facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, a reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and for
a reasonable level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an
owner’s authorized agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing
structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
   (C)   Amend Section 103.1 Creation of Agency. Insert: [Housing and Community
Development].
   (D)   Amend Section 107.1 General. Insert the following sentence at the end
of the section. The city Building Board of Appeals shall serve as the official
board of appeals.
   (E)   Amend Section 202 General Definitions.
      RENTER-OCCUPIED. A dwelling-unit that is occupied by a person or group of
persons who are not the owner or immediate family member of the owner. FAMILY
MEMBER includes a parent, child, grand-parent, grand-child or sibling.
   (F)   Amend Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: [ten inches] and amend the final
sentence as follows. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers, gardens or storm water retention and/or detention
areas approved by the city.
   (G)   Amend Section 303.2 Enclosures. Delete language and insert in lieu of
the following. A swimming pool shall comply with the Marshalltown Code of
Ordinances Ch. 155: Swimming Pools.
   (H)   Amend Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert: [April 15] to [October
15].
   (I)   Amend Section 308.2.1 Rubbish Storage Facilities. Delete language and
insert in lieu of the following. The owner of every occupied premises
consisting of three or more dwelling units shall supply approved covered
containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish. The owner or occupant of a single-family attached,
single-family detached and two-family dwelling unit shall supply approved
covered containers for rubbish and be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (J)   Add new Section 602.2.1 Supplemental Heat Supply. Portable unvented
fuel-burning space heaters and electric space heaters which are not listed and
labeled (UL 1278) are prohibited from use in a residential occupancy. Electric
space heaters which are listed and labeled (UL 1278) must have an auto shutoff,
shall not be plugged into an extension cord, and shall not be operated within
three feet of any combustible material.
   (K)   Amend Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert: [September 15] to [May 15].
   (L)   Amend Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Insert: [September 15] to
[May 15].
   (M)   Amend Section 605.2 Receptacles. Insert new sentence prior to last
sentence of paragraph in Section 605.2 with the following language. Any
accessible receptacle within six feet of a water source shall be provided with
ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
   (N)   Amend Section 705.1 General. Insert the following language to the end
of the paragraph. In addition, carbon monoxide alarms and detectors shall be
installed in accordance with I.C.A. § 661— Ch. 211.
   (O)   Add new Section 705.3 Installation Locations. Installation locations
shall be in conformance with the International Fire Code, the International
Residential Code, Iowa Code, and at the location closest to the hazard of an
attached garage or fuel-fired appliance.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022; Ord. 15058, passed 2-27-2023)
§ 152.004 APPLICATION; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE; YEARLY REGISTRATION; FEES;
INSPECTIONS; DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Application. A completed application and applicable fee shall be
submitted prior to occupancy of any dwelling unit.
   (B)   Issuance of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance
shall be issued by the city for a dwelling unit following a passing inspection.
The certificate of compliance shall remain in effect until the next scheduled
inspection unless sooner revoked by the city due to violations of the Housing
Code. A single certificate of compliance may be issued for a multiple dwelling
units at the same location if all dwelling units have passed inspection.
   (C)   Yearly registration. The city shall require a yearly registration of
all dwelling units. The owner shall register all dwelling units and pay any
applicable fees. Failure to register a dwelling unit may result in the
revocation of the certificate of compliance.
   (D)   Fees. The City Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of
fees associated with the administration and enforcement of the Housing Code.
   (E)   Inspections. The city shall establish an inspection schedule for
registered dwelling units. Failure to comply with the established inspection
schedule may result in the revocation of the certificate of compliance.
   (F)   Denial or revocation. The owner shall be notified by the city if a
dwelling unit is not in compliance and shall be given 30 days to bring the
dwelling unit into compliance or vacate the dwelling unit before the
certificate of compliance is denied or revoked.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 152.005 APPEALS.
   Appeals must be filed in writing to the Housing and Community Development
Department within 30 days of the code official’s decision. Appeals are heard by
the Building Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 152.006 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute municipal
infractions punishable as provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances including but not limited to the imposition
of civil penalties and/or requests for injunctive relief. After written notice
of such violation, each day a violation is permitted to exist beyond the
expiration of the time designated on said notice shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 15054, passed 12-12-2022)
CHAPTER 153: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
153.001   Plumbing Code adopted
   
153.002   Amendments, modifications, additions and deletions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Plumbers and plumbing, see
Ch. 115
§ 153.001 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International
Conference of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 2009 edition, is adopted in
full as the Plumbing Code of the city, except portions that are deleted,
modified or amended herein, hereinafter referred to as the “Plumbing Code”.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
Plumbing Code, as amended, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
   (C)   Violations of the Plumbing Code, as amended, shall also constitute a
municipal infraction.
(2013 Code, § 14-76) (Ord. 14375, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 14536, passed 4-8-
1996; Ord. 14647, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 14900, passed 6-11-2012) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.002 AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS.
   (A)   Plumbing fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   The 2009 edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code is hereby amended to the
extent described herein.
      (1)   2009 UPC Chapter 1, Table 1-1, Plumbing and Gas Fee Schedule, is
established by resolution by the City Council.
      (2)   2009 UPC Chapter 4, Amendments. 402.3 Urinals, is amended by
deleting subsection 402.3.1, Non-Water Urinals.
      (3)   2009 Chapter 7 amendments.
         (a)   703.1 , is amended by adding the minimum size building drain in
one- and two-family dwellings shall be four inches.
         (b)   717.0 , is amended by adding to the end of the section: “The
minimum diameter for a building sewer shall be four (4) inches.”
      (4)   2009 UPC Chapter 8 amendments. 807.4 is amended by substituting the
following:
No domestic dishwashing machine shall be directly connected to a drainage
system or food waste disposer without the use of an approved dishwasher air gap
fitting on the discharge side of the dishwashing machine, or by looping the
discharge line of the dishwasher as high as possible near the flood level rim
of the kitchen sink. Listed air gap fittings shall be installed with the flood
level (FL) marking at or above the flood level rim of the sink or drain-board,
whichever is higher.
      (5)   2009 UPC Chapter 9 amendments.
         (a)   906.7, the first sentence, is amended to read:
Vent termination shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter, but in no
event smaller than the required vent size.
         (b)   908.0 is amended by deleting the word “vertical” in the
following subsections: 908.1.1 and 908.1.2.
         (c)   908.2 is deleted in its entirety.
      (6)   2009 Chapter 12 amendments.
         (a)   1209.5.2.3 is amended by deleting the word “copper” from this
section.
         (b)   1209.5.3 is amended by deleting the term “seamless copper”.
         (c)   1209.5.3.1 is deleted in its entirety.
         (d)   1209.5.3.2 is amended by deleting the word “copper” from this
section.
         (e)   1209.5.8.4 is amended by deleting the word “copper” from
subsection 3.
         (f)   1211.2.1, is amended by adding the following:
Fuel piping from the gas meter into the building shall be hard piped.
Corrugated Stainless Steel piping shall not be used.
         (g)   1211.2 is amended by adding a subsection (3):
(3) Stainless Steel Corrugated piping shall be concealed in the walls or
ceiling, there shall be a transition to hard pipe from the wall or ceiling to
the appliance.
         (h)   1212.1.3 Subsection 3 is amended to read:
Appliance connectors shall, at no time, have a diameter less than that of the
inlet of the appliance as provided by the manufacturer. All other appliances
unless, specifically designed by the manufacturer, and not designed to be
readily moved, shall be rigidly connected to the gas piping with materials as
provided in Section 1210.0.
         (i)   1212.1.4 is deleted.
         (j)   1212.1.6 is substituted to read:
Gas fired food service (commercial cooking) appliances shall either be hard
piped or be connected with listed quick disconnect devices as section 1212.6
describes.
         (k)   1214.1.1 is amended by adding the following sentence:
Screwed gas piping shall be pressure tested with a pressure of ten pounds
(10#s)of air for at least fifteen (15) minutes and welded piping shall be
pressure tested with a minimum pressure of sixty (60#s) pounds of air for
thirty (30) minutes.
   (C)   Section 1003A,* Cross Connection Control-Containment Provisions, is
added to read as follows:
a.)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply only to section 1003A.
For the purpose of this section, these definitions supersede definitions given
elsewhere in this Code.
   1)   Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment. A backflow
prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met
the requirements of ANSI-AWWA Standard C510-89, Double Check valve Backflow
Prevention Assemblies,” or ANSI-AWWA Standard C511-89, “Reduced-Pressure
Principle Backflow- Prevention Assemblies,” for containment. The listing shall
include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow
prevention assembly must also be listed by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
   2)   Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in a fire
protection system. A backflow prevention assembly to be used in a fire
protection system which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research
Corporation (FM) and Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. (UL), and the requirement
of the fire code and the building code of the City of Marshalltown, in addition
to the requirements of paragraph (1)a. Devices sized smaller than 2 1/2 inches
which have not been listed by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc. (UL), and tested
by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if they meet the
requirements of the fire code and the building code of the city.
   3)   Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the water purveyor’s approved public water supply such as
but not limited to a private well, pond, or river.
   4)   Containment. A method of backflow prevention that requires the
installation of a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance.
   5)   Cross connection. Any actual or potential connection or arrangement,
physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing
fixture or tank, receptacle, equipment, or device, through which it may be
possible for non-potable, used, unclean, polluted, and contaminated water, or
other substance, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any
condition.
   6)   Customer. The owner, operator, or occupant of a building or property
that has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator
of a private water system which has a water service from a public water system.
   7)   Degree of hazard. The rating of a cross connection or water service
that indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution.
   8)   Double check valve backflow prevention assembly. A backflow prevention
device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded check valves,
four properly located test cocks, and two isolation valves.
   9)   High hazard cross connection. A high hazard cross connection is a cross
connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by
creating an actual hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through
the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste.
   10)   Isolation. A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow
prevention assembly is located at the cross connection rather than at the water
service entrance.
   11)   Low hazard cross connection. A low hazard cross connection is a cross
connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a
degree which does not create a hazard to the public health, but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable
waters for domestic use.
   12)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. A backflow
prevention device consisting of two independently acting internally loaded
check valves, a different pressure relief valve, four properly located test
cocks, and two isolation valves.
   13)   Registered backflow prevention assembly technician. A person who is
registered by law to test or repair backflow prevention assemblies and report
on the condition of those assemblies.
   14)   Thermal expansion. Volumetric increase of water due to heating
resulting in increased pressure in a closed system.
   15)   Water service. Depending on the context, water service is the physical
connection between a public water system and a customer’s building, property,
or private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer.
b.)   Administrative authority.
   1)   For the purposes of section 1003A only, the administrative authority is
the City Council acting through the Marshalltown Water Works Board of Trustees.
   2)   The administrative authority and its agents shall have the right to
enter, with the consent of the customer or upon the basis of a suitable warrant
issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for
possible cross connections.
   3)   The administrative authority may approve training programs for backflow
prevention assembly technicians and register backflow prevention assembly
technicians who successfully complete an approved training program.
   4)   The administrative authority through its agent, the Marshalltown Water
Works, may collect fees for the administration of this program. The annual
renewal fee shall be $10.00 per year.
   5)   The administrative authority shall maintain records of cross connection
hazard surveys, and the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow
prevention assemblies installed for containment purposes.
   6)   The city shall provide necessary legal assistance for enforcement of
this section.
c.)   New water services.
   1)   Plans shall be submitted to the administrative authority for review on
all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard.   
   2)   The administrative authority shall determine the type of backflow
prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
   3)   The administrative authority shall require the installation of the
appropriate backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation
of water service.
d.)   Existing water services.
   1)   Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water
services for the purpose of section 1003A.
   2)   Within six months after adoption of this section, the administrative
authority shall publish and make available to each customer a copy of the
standards used to determine the degree of hazard.
   3)   Within 30 days after written notice from the administrative authority
and after publication of the standards, customers whose premises are classified
as single-family residential shall complete and return to the administrative
authority a cross connection hazard survey to be used to determine the type of
containment device.
   4)   Within 30 days after written notice from the administrative authority
and after publication of the standards, the following customers shall complete
and return to the administrative authority a cross connection hazard survey to
be used to determine the type of containment device:
   5)   Customers whose premises are not classified as single-family
residential.
   6)   Customers whose premises are classified as single-family residential
and the premises contain an irrigation or fire protection system.
   7)   The administrative authority shall, on the basis of information
received from customers or gathered through on-premises investigations or
surveys, determine the type of backflow prevention assembly required for
containment based on the degree of hazard.
   8)   Within the timeframe specified in writing by the administrative
authority, the customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for
containment required by the administrative authority.
   9)   For existing water services, the administrative authority may inspect
the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross
connections are found, the administrative authority shall, at its sole
discretion:
   10)   Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow; or
      i.   Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly for
containment required by the administrative authority has been installed.
      ii.   Failure of the administrative authority to notify a customer that
they are believed to have a high hazard cross connection and that they shall
install backflow prevention assemblies for containment in no way relieves a
customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this section.
e.)   Customer.
   1)   The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross
connections exist without approved backflow protection within his or her
premises starting at the point of service from the public potable water system.
   2)   The customer shall, at his or her own expense, cause installation,
operation, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies
required by the administrative authority.
   3)   The customer shall ensure the administrative authority is provided with
copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the
backflow prevention assembly within 15 days after testing and/or repairs are
completed.
   4)   In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately
notify the Marshalltown Water Works of the incident and take steps to confine
the contamination or pollution.
f.)   Required backflow prevention assemblies for containment-Water services.
   1)   An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly is required for water services having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority classifies as high hazard.
   2)   An approved double check valve assembly is required for water services
having no high hazard cross connections but having one or more cross
connections which the administrative authority has classified as low hazard.
g.)   Required backflow prevention assemblies for containment-Fire protection
systems.
   1)   A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on all new and existing fire protection systems that the
administrative authority determines to have any of the following:
      i.   Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary water
supply on or available to the premises for pumper connection.
      ii.   Interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as reservoirs,
rivers, ponds, wells, mills, or other industrial water systems.
      iii.   Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection
system.
      iv.   Combined industrial or domestic with high hazard and fire
protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without
gravity storage or pump suction tanks.
      v.   Any other facility, connection, or condition that may cause
contamination.
   2)   A double check valve assembly will be required for all other fire
protection systems. The double check valve shall be required on all new systems
at the time of installation and on existing systems at the time that they are
upgraded.
   3)   Submittal of proposed backflow prevention devices to the administrative
authority does not relieve the designer or sprinkler contractor of the
responsibility of submitting plans, including backflow prevention devices, to
the fire marshal for approval.
h.)   Registration of backflow prevention assembly technician. A backflow
prevention assembly technician registered by the State of Iowa shall include
his or her registration number on all correspondence and forms required by or
associated with this section.
i.)   Registered backflow prevention assembly technician non-compliance.
   1)   The registration of a technician may be revoked or suspended for a
period of up to two years for non- compliance with this section.
   2)   Any of the following conditions constitute non-compliance:
      i.   Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
      ii.   Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to
backflow prevention assemblies.
      iii.   Failure to meet registration requirements.
      iv.   Related unethical practices.
j.)   Installation of backflow prevention assemblies.
   1)   The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be
installed in horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as close to
that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case,
it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point
does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water
supply system from containment or pollution between the backflow prevention
assembly and the water main.
      i.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed so as to be protected from flooding.
      ii.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not
be installed in underground vaults or pits.
      iii.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from
freezing. Those devices used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of
being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and
tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician prior to service
being reactivated.
      iv.   If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion
shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for
containment.
      v.   Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain.
      vi.   No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a place
where it would create a safety hazard, such as but not limited to over an
electrical panel, or above ceiling level.
      vii.   If interruption of water service during testing and repair of
backflow prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable to the customer,
another backflow prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow
need during the time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping.
      viii.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that
they are accessible for testing as stated in section 1003.
      ix.   All shutoff valves shall conform to the current edition of the
Manual of Cross Connection Control (University of Southern California)
requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of
installation. Ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two
inches and smaller and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in
piping larger than two inches.
k.)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies.
   1)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by a
registered backflow prevention assembly technician. The costs of tests required
in the following paragraph b shall be borne by the customer.
   2)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and
tested and inspected at least annually.
   3)   Backflow prevention assemblies that are in place, but have been out of
operation for more than three months, shall be tested before being put back
into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications
shall be tested before being put into operation each season.
   4)   Any backflow prevention assembly that fails a periodic test shall be
repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for non-
compliance, the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced
prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies shall
be retested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician immediately
after repair or replacement.
   5)   The administrative authority may require backflow prevention assemblies
to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement.
   6)   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report in
writing the successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer
and to the administrative authority within 15 days of the test.
   7)   The administrative authority may require, at its own cost, additional
tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem necessary
to verify test procedures and results.
l.)   Repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
   1)   All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by
registered backflow prevention assembly technicians.
   2)   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change
the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention
assembly during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer
replacement parts.
   3)   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report in
writing the repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the
administrative authority within 15 days of the repair. The report shall include
the list of materials or replacement parts used.
   4)   Any time fire services are discontinued for a period of time longer
than necessary to test the device, the tester is required to notify the fire
marshal’s office that the fire services are shut off for repairs.
m.)   Customer non-compliance.
   1)   The water service may be discontinued in the case of non-compliance
with section 1003A. Non- compliance includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      i.   Refusal to allow the administrative authority access to the property
to inspect for cross connections.
      ii.   Removal of a backflow prevention assembly that has been required by
the administrative authority.
      iii.   Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly that has been required
by the administrative authority.
      iv.   Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross connections
exist.
      v.   Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly that has been
required by the administrative authority.
      vi.   Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention
assembly as required by the administrative authority.
      vii.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
n.)   In addition to any other remedy provided, a violation of this section is
a municipal infraction, punishable by a fine of $100.00 for the first offense
and $200.00 for each offense thereafter, or the city may seek other appropriate
relief to abate the violation.
(2013 Code, § 14-77) (Ord. 14375, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 14515, passed 2-27-
1995; Ord. 14536, passed 4-8-1996; Ord. 14647, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 14900,
passed 6-11-2012)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
153.001 and
153.002 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a penalty as
provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. In addition, a violation of §§
153.001 and
153.002 of this chapter is a municipal infraction. In addition to the
foregoing, the city’s Plumbing and Gas Inspector may order the removal,
correction or disconnection of any gas or plumbing installation that does not
meet code specifications and shall have the authority to disconnect the
installation when it is found that it endangers life and health.
(2013 Code, § 14-78) (Ord. 14375, passed 3-23-1992; Ord. 14536, passed 4-8-
1996; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-2017)
CHAPTER 154: ELECTRICITY
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Short title
   
154.002   Purpose and scope
   
154.003   Activities exempt from chapter
Electrical Appeal Board
   
154.015   Creation; composition and appointment
   
154.016   Qualifications of members
   
154.017   Terms of members
   
154.018   Compensation
   
154.019   (Reserved)
   
154.020   Council to provide space for meetings and hearings; equipment and
facilities
   
154.021   Meetings; quorum; election of officers
   
154.022   Who may appeal; procedure
   
154.023   Decision of Board; variances from governing provisions
Electrical Code
   
154.035   Electrical Code adopted
   Permits
   
154.050   Required; issued for work meeting requirements
   
154.051   Persons to whom permit may be issued
   
154.052   Restricted permit
   
154.053   Permit application
   
154.054   Period of permit validity; extension
   
154.055   Inspector may request plans and specifications; amendments;
adjustments of fee; supplementary permit
   
154.056   Annual permit for repair and maintenance; application
   
154.057   Emergency work
   
154.058   Inspections; fee; procedure
   
154.059   Inspector; right of entry; general authority
   
154.060   Advance approval of certain materials; list
Electricians
   
154.075   Short title
   
154.076   Purpose
   
154.077   Definitions
   
154.078   Persons exempted
   
154.079   License required; exemptions
   
154.080   Licenses classified
   
154.081   License to be displayed
   
154.082   Restricted electricians; apprentices and helpers
   
154.083   Work done by homeowner
   
154.084   (Reserved)
   
154.085   Applications for examination; fees
   
154.086   Emergency permit without examination
   
154.087   Reexamination after failure
   
154.088   License expiration, renewal; fees
   
154.089   Accounting; fees
   
154.090   Recognition of licenses from other cities
   
154.091   License revocation, suspension
   
154.092   Appeals from Electrical Inspector action
   
154.093   License not transferrable
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Marshalltown Electrical
Ordinance”, and may be so cited.
(2013 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to adopt the edition of the National
Electrical Code set out in §
154.035 of this chapter, including provisions for the inspection and regulation
of electrical installations, issuance of permits and collection of fees and to
provide penalties for violations of this chapter in order to protect public
safety, health and welfare.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern the supply of
electricity and all installations, alterations, repairs, removals, renewals,
replacements, disturbances, connections, disconnections and maintenance of all
electrical equipment. For the purpose of this chapter, the term ELECTRICAL
EQUIPMENT means all materials, wiring, conductors, fittings, devices,
appliances, fixtures, signs and apparatus, or parts thereof.
(2013 Code, § 11-2) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.003 ACTIVITIES EXEMPT FROM CHAPTER.
   The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Any work involved in the manufacturing or testing of electrical
equipment or apparatus, but not including supply wire to such equipment;
   (B)   Any work associated with:
      (1)   Minor repair work or minor installations the estimated cost of
which does not exceed $40, or replacement of lamps, or the connection of
portable electrical equipment suitable to permanent installed receptacles;
provided, however, the following shall not be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
         (a)   Replacement of part of any electrical service;
         (b)   Any electrical wiring done as a part of any construction or
remodeling that requires a building permit;
         (c)   New installations of central air conditioning;
         (d)   New installations of permanently wired electric heat; and
         (e)   Any installation covered by Art. 680 of the National Electrical
Code (Swimming Pools and Spas).
      (2)   Permanently connected electrical appliances or devices that have
been electrically and mechanically disconnected and separated from all sources
of electrical supply by a licensed electrician. The opening of switches or the
blowing or removal of fuses shall not be considered an electrical or mechanical
disconnection or separation.
   (C)   The installation or replacement of approved fuses; and
   (D)   The installation or replacement of pin-type lamps or plug-connected
portable appliances.
(2013 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
ELECTRICAL APPEAL BOARD
§ 154.015 CREATION; COMPOSITION AND APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created an Electrical Appeal Board consisting of three
members, to be appointed by the City Council.
(2013 Code, § 11-61) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.016 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   All members of the Electrical Appeal Board shall be residents of the
city.
   (B)   One member shall be a representative of the public, one a journeyman
electrician and one a licensed electrical contractor.
(2013 Code, § 11-62) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.017 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   The terms of each member of the Electrical Appeal Board shall be six years;
provided, however, that, the original appointments to the Board shall be made
as follows: one member shall be appointed to serve for a period of two years:
one member for four years; and one member for six years.
(2013 Code, § 11-63) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.018 COMPENSATION.
   Necessary and actual expenses shall be allowed to members of the Electrical
Appeal Board, but no other compensation shall be paid to them.
(2013 Code, § 11-64) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.019 (RESERVED)
§ 154.020 COUNCIL TO PROVIDE SPACE FOR MEETINGS AND HEARINGS, EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES.
   The City Council shall provide suitable space in which the Electrical Appeal
Board may hold meetings and conduct hearings and shall provide the Board
necessary equipment and facilities and pay for these expenses.
(2013 Code, § 11-66) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.021 MEETINGS; QUORUM; ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The Electrical Appeal Board shall hold its first meeting not more than 30
days after 7-24-1978. Thereafter, the Board shall meet as often as may be
necessary for the proper performance of its duties, but in any case not less
than twice a year. A quorum of the Board shall consist of all its members. The
board shall elect a Chairperson and a Secretary annually.
(2013 Code, § 11-67) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.022 WHO MAY APPEAL; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any ruling, decision, interpretation or order
of the Electrical Inspector shall have the right to appeal to the Electrical
Appeal Board by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days from the date of the ruling, decision, interpretation or order
being appealed.
   (B)   If such notice is filed, the Appeal Board shall set a time and place
for a hearing, and notify the party that has filed the appeal. The date of the
hearing shall be not more than 15 days after the date of the notice of appeal
was filed. The notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail. The
hearing shall be open to the public.
   (C)   All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
(2013 Code, § 11-68) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.023 DECISION OF BOARD; VARIANCES FROM GOVERNING PROVISIONS.
   The Electrical Appeal Board by majority vote shall affirm, modify or reverse
any appealed ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the Electrical
Inspector. The Board may permit variance from the strict terms and provisions
of this subchapter, if such variance can be made without increasing the hazards
to health or safety of persons or property. Mere inconvenience to the appellant
shall not be grounds for the granting of such variance.
(2013 Code, § 11-69) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 154.035 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
    The 2020 National Electrical Code, as recommended by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted in full, by reference, specifically
the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy MA 02169-7471.
(2013 Code, § 11-4) (Ord. 14754, passed 12-27-2004; Ord. 14819, passed 12-17-
2007; Ord. 14895, passed 1-23-2012; Ord. 14936, passed 1-26-2015; Ord. 14972,
passed 5-14-2018; Ord. 15010, passed 2-22-2021)
PERMITS
§ 154.050 REQUIRED; ISSUED FOR WORK MEETING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No electrical work, as defined in §
154.002 of this chapter, shall be done unless a permit authorizing the work has
been issued by the Electrical Inspector.
   (B)   A permit shall be issued if the electrical work, as proposed in the
application for a permit, meets all the requirements of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 11-37) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.051 PERSONS TO WHOM PERMIT MAY BE ISSUED.
   Permits shall be issued only to electrical contractors licensed by the city
or by the State of Iowa, except as provided in §
154.052 of this chapter. However, any permit required by this subchapter may be
issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling or mobile home used exclusively
for living purposes, to do any work regulated by this chapter; provided that,
the dwelling will be occupied by the owner, the owner appears before the
Electrical Inspector and shows himself or herself competent to do the specific
work for which he or she desires a permit, and the owner purchases all
materials and performs all labor in connection with the work. All work done in
accordance with this exception must meet all the requirements of this
subchapter and shall be inspected like other work.
(2013 Code, § 11-38) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.052 RESTRICTED PERMIT.
   (A)   Any restricted electrician doing service, repair, control work and
making connection from power panel to the type of appliances or equipment which
he or she or his or her employer sells or services shall procure from the
Electrical Inspector a restricted permit, and pay the fee for inspection set
out in §
154.058(A) of this chapter or, if said work or service be not covered by §
154.058(A) of this chapter, said inspection fee shall set by resolution.
   (B)   Said restricted permit shall only entitle the permittee to perform
maintenance, repair and installation of the work or services therein
designated, all subject to inspection by the city’s Electrical Inspector.
(2013 Code, § 11-39) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.053 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for permits shall be made to the Electrical Inspector, on
forms provided by the City Clerk, prior to the beginning of the work for which
a permit is required, emergency work excepted.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee according
to the schedule set out in §
154.085(B) of this chapter and shall state the name and business address of the
person or association proposing to do the work for which a permit is required
and shall provide the following additional information:
      (1)   A description of the property where the work is to be done;
      (2)   The name of the owner or occupant of the property; and
      (3)   A general description of the materials to be used.
   (C)   In addition to the foregoing, the application shall specify the
particular parts of the work which will require inspection.
(2013 Code, § 11-40) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.054 PERIOD OF PERMIT VALIDITY; EXTENSION.
   Permits issued under provisions of this subchapter shall be valid for one
year from its date of issue and may be extended for good cause shown.
(2013 Code, § 11-41) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.055 INSPECTOR MAY REQUEST PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; AMENDMENTS;
ADJUSTMENTS OF FEE; SUPPLEMENTARY PERMIT.
   (A)   Plans and specifications showing the proposed work in the necessary
detail shall be submitted if requested by the Electrical Inspector. If a permit
is denied, the applicant may submit the revised plans and specifications
without payment of any additional fee.
   (B)   If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any
change from the plans and specifications on which a permit was issued, amended
plans and specifications shall be submitted.
   (C)   Fees shall be adjusted compensatory with the change.
   (D)   A supplementary permit, subject to the same conditions applicable to
the original permit, shall be issued to cover the change.
(2013 Code, § 11-42) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.056 ANNUAL PERMIT FOR REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE; APPLICATION.
   (A)   In lieu of individual permits, an annual permit shall be issued after
application to any person, firm, corporation or other association, regularly
employing a journeyman electrician, for the repair, installation and
maintenance of electrical equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or
occupied by the applicant for the permit.
   (B)   An application for an annual permit shall be in writing, shall be
accompanied by the requisite fee, which shall be set by resolution, and shall
contain a description of the premises on which the work is to be done.
   (C)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right to inspect the premises
of the permit holder at any reasonable time.
(2013 Code, § 11-45) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.057 EMERGENCY WORK.
   (A)   In emergency situations work may be initiated and completed by
licensed electricians without first obtaining a permit.
   (B)   However, a permit must be obtained within a reasonable time after the
passage of the critical period. With this one exception, all emergency work
must be done in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and shall be
inspected by the Electrical Inspector for full compliance.
(2013 Code, § 11-44) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.058 INSPECTIONS; FEE; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Fees for inspections shall be set by resolution.
(2013 Code, § 11-45)
   (B)   (1)   Upon the completion of electrical work that has been done under
a permit other than annual permit, the person, firm, corporation or other
association doing the work shall notify the Electrical Inspector.
      (2)   The Inspector shall make such inspection within 24 hours, exclusive
of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, after receipt of notice, or as soon
thereafter as practicable.
      (3)   If the Inspector finds the work to be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue to the person or association
that has done the work a certificate of approval. This certificate shall
authorize the use of the work and its connection to the supply of electricity.
The Inspector shall deliver to the agency supplying the electricity a
certificate of authorization.
      (4)   A certificate of approval may be issued authorizing the connection
and use of a temporary installation. Such certificate shall be issued to expire
at a stated time and may be revoked by the inspector for any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   No person having charge of the construction, alteration or repair
of any building or any other person, shall cover or conceal or cause to be
covered or concealed any wire or electrical apparatus for which permit has been
issued or for which permit is required before said wiring or apparatus has been
inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector.
      (6)   The Electrical Inspector shall have authority to remove or cause
the removal of lath, plaster, boarding or other covering which may prevent the
proper inspection of any electrical apparatus or wiring. The city assumes no
responsibility to replace same.
(2013 Code, § 11-46)
(Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.059 INSPECTOR; RIGHT OF ENTRY; GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the right, during reasonable hours
and after showing proper identification, to enter any building or premises in
the discharge of his official duties to make any inspection, re-inspection or
test of electrical equipment that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(2013 Code, § 11-47)
   (B)   If the Electrical Inspector finds that any electrical equipment or
installation is defective or that it has been installed in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall notify the person or association
responsible for the electrical equipment or installation by certified mail of
his or her findings and order. If the necessary changes or repairs are not
completed within 15 days or such longer period as may be specified in the
notice, the Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or order the
discontinuation of electrical service to the equipment or installation in
question. In emergency, if necessary for safety to persons or property, or if
electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the Fire Department, the
Inspector shall have the authority to disconnect or cause the disconnection
immediately of any such electrical equipment. If fires have damaged the wiring
of any building or structure, re-connection to electrical supply shall not be
made until authorized in writing by the Inspector.
(2013 Code, § 11-48)
(Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.060 ADVANCE APPROVAL OF CERTAIN MATERIALS; LIST.
   The Electrical Inspector may approve in advance electrical materials
inspected and approved by the Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc., and other
materials of equal or higher quality. The Inspector shall keep on file a list
of such approved materials, which list shall be accessible for public reference
during regular office hours.
(2013 Code, § 11-49) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
ELECTRICIANS
§ 154.075 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of Marshalltown, Iowa,
Electricians’ Licensing Ordinance” and may be so cited.
(2013 Code, § 11-81) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.076 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the examination and
licensing of electrical contractors, journeyman electricians and restricted
electricians in order to protect the public from hazards to life and property
that might arise from improper installation of electrical systems.
(2013 Code, § 11-82) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.077 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRENTICE. A person who, while learning the electrician’s trade, is
assisting in the installation, alteration or repair of electrical work and
while engaged in such work is in the presence of and under direct supervision
of a licensed journeyman electrician.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm, corporation, association or
combination thereof, who undertakes or offers to undertake to plan for, lay
out, supervise and do electrical work for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage
or other compensation.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. All electrical material, wiring, conductors, fittings,
devices, appliances, fixtures, signs and apparatus or parts thereof.
   ELECTRICAL WORK. Installations, alterations, repairs, removals, renewals,
replacements, distributions, connections, disconnections and maintenance of all
electrical equipment.
   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN. A person who has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience and technical knowledge to do electrical work in
accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing such work.
   LICENSED. Licensed under this subchapter unless otherwise specified.
   RESTRICTED ELECTRICIAN. A person that has the necessary qualifications,
training, experience and technical knowledge, to do electrical work in
accordance with the standard rules and regulations governing such work, but is
only permitted to do service, repair, control work and make electrical
connections from power panel to the type of appliances or equipment which he or
she or his or her employer sells or services.
   SHALL. If the word “shall” is used, the meaning is that the act to be
performed is mandatory.
(2013 Code, § 11-83) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.078 PERSONS EXEMPTED.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any of the following:
regular employees of a public utility who do electrical work for such public
utility only; employees who do electrical work for a telephone or telegraph
company, and persons, firms or corporations that perform electrical work for
such a company, if such electrical work is an integral part of the plant used
by such telephone or telegraph company in rendering its duly authorized service
to the public; and regular employees of any railroad who do electrical work
only as a part of that employment.
(2013 Code, § 11-84) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.079 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, association or combination thereof shall
engage in the business of installing, maintaining, altering or repairing any
electrical equipment within the scope of this subchapter unless such person,
firm, corporation, association or combination thereof shall have obtained from
the city an electrical contractor’s license, nor shall any electrical
contractor employ any but licensed electrical journeymen; except that, the
holder of existing electrical licenses granted by the city may be issued
renewals of their licenses without taking the examination herein provided for;
and also with the exception that no license shall be required in order to
execute or perform any electrical work exempted by the provisions of this
subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 11-85)
   (B)   No license is required for the following described work:
      (1)   Replacement of lamps and fuses, or the connection of portable
electrical equipment to permanently installed receptacles;
      (2)   The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment
installed by, or for, any electrical supply agency in the generation,
transmission, distribution or metering of electricity;
      (3)   Work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering or
repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus; except that, this exemption
shall not include any permanent wiring;
      (4)   Work involved in the erection, installation, repairing, remodeling
or maintenance of elevators, dumbwaiters or escalators, not including
electrical equipment for supplying current to the control panel of elevators,
dumbwaiters or escalators; and
      (5)   The assembly, erection and connection of electrical equipment by
the manufacturer of such equipment, but not including any electrical equipment
other than that involved in making electrical connections on the equipment
itself, or between two or more units of said equipment.
(2013 Code, § 11-86)
(Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.080 LICENSES CLASSIFIED.
   (A)   Classes established. Three classes of licenses may be issued by the
city which are designated as:
      (1)   Class I: electrical contractor’s license;
      (2)   Class II: electrical journeyman’s license; and
      (3)   Class III: electrical restricted license.
   (B)   Scope of classes.
      (1)   Class I electrical contractor’s license. No person, firm,
corporation, association or combination thereof shall engage in business as an
electrical contractor within the city unless such person, firm, corporation,
association or combination thereof has obtained from the city an electrical
contractor’s license. Such a license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage
in the business of, and to secure permits for the installation, alteration and
repairs of any electrical devices, appliances or equipment.
      (2)   Class II electrical journeyman’s license. Such a license shall
entitle the holder thereof to perform any work of installing, maintaining,
altering or repairing electrical equipment as an electrical journeyman under
the direction of the holder of an electrical contractor’s license by whom he or
she is employed. Or, any person regularly employed by an individual,
corporation, firm, association or combination thereof to supervise the
maintenance and repair of electrical equipment in a manufacturing, industrial
or commercial establishment shall be licensed as a journeyman electrician if
the Board of Electrical Examiners finds him or her to be qualified. Such a
license shall entitle the holder thereof to undertake the work of, and secure
an annual permit for maintaining and repairing electrical devices, appliances
and equipment provided that the holder of such license regularly employs, as
supervisor, one or more persons certified by the Board of Electrical Examiners
as being qualified for such work; and, provided that, such work shall be
confined to the premises owned or occupied by the holder of said license, the
location of which shall be described in the license.
      (3)   Class III electrical restricted license. Any person regularly
employed by an individual, corporation, firm, association or combination
thereof to supervise or perform the maintenance or repair of the appliances or
equipment which he or his employer sells or services shall be licensed as a
restricted electrician.
(2013 Code, § 11-87) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.081 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every holder of a license shall keep his, her or their license displayed in
a conspicuous place in his, her or their place of business at all times.
(2013 Code, § 11-88) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.082 RESTRICTED ELECTRICIANS; APPRENTICES AND HELPERS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation regularly employed as an appliance
dealer or installer or his or her employee performing such service shall be
licensed as a restricted electrician. Any person so licensed shall work only on
the type of appliance or equipment which he or she or his or her employer sells
or services.
(2013 Code, § 11-89)
   (B)   Apprentices and helpers employed to assist a licensed electrician need
not be licensed; provided, however, that, such apprentices and helpers perform
their work directly under the supervision of a licensed electrician, and shall
register with city’s Electrical Inspection Department and pay a $10 annual fee.
(2013 Code, § 11-91)
   (C)   Before the electrical contractors’ or restricted electricians’ license
is issued, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a liability insurance
policy, certificate of insurance or executed copy thereof, providing coverage
for the certificate holder in a sum of not less than $300,000 for personal
injury or death, and not less than $100,000 for property damage. The insurance
aforesaid shall cover the period of the certificate or any renewal thereof and
provide that the city will be notified in the event of termination.
(2013 Code, § 11-92)
(Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 15024, passed 10-11-2021)
§ 154.083 WORK DONE BY HOMEOWNER.
   The owner or owners of a single-family dwelling or mobile home, including
the usual accessory buildings and quarters used exclusively for living
purposes, may do electrical work without a license if he or she demonstrates
his or her capability to do such work to the satisfaction of the Electrical
Inspector; provided, however, that, the dwelling or mobile home will be
occupied by the owner or owners and that a permit is issued as provided in §§
154.050 through
154.060 of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 11-93) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.084 (RESERVED)
§ 154.085 APPLICATIONS FOR EXAMINATION; FEES.
   (A)   Any person who does not hold a valid electrical contractor or
electrician license issued by the State of Iowa, and who desires to be licensed
as an electrical contractor, a journeyman electrician or a restricted
electrician in the City of Marshalltown shall make application to the
Electrical Inspector for an examination. The Inspector shall provide
application forms for this purpose. The completed forms shall include the name
of the applicant, his or her home address, his or her business address and a
brief resume of his or her training and experience. In addition, an electrical
contractor applicant shall have served at least four years as a licensed
journeyman electrician. Proof of electrical trade school education may waive up
to two years of this requirement.
(2013 Code, § 11-99)
   (B)   Every person who takes a local examination or re-examination for
journeyman electricians’ license or restricted electricians’ license shall
first pay an application fee of $25, plus the annual license fee. Electrical
contractor license applicants shall first pay an application fee of $25, plus
the annual license fee. Examination fees shall be paid to the City Clerk, and a
receipt therefor shall be attached to each application for a license or permit.
The first year license fee is included in the application fee. Examination fees
shall not be refunded. A $150 expediting fee shall be assessed to any applicant
seeking approval of an application, except at a regularly scheduled exam
meeting.
(2013 Code, § 11-100)
   (C)   (1)   An electrical journeyman or restricted electrician applicant
shall be entitled to an examination written 45 days after filing an application
therefore. The examination shall be practical, written or oral, or a
combination thereof, and shall be of such a nature as to test the capabilities
of all applicants for the same type of license uniformly. The applicant shall
clearly demonstrate to the Electrical Inspector his or her qualifications for
the particular license in which he or she has applied, and show satisfactory
knowledge of the methods and standards for doing work under the National
Electrical Code and other provisions of the chapter and ordinances of the city.
      (2)   A license for electrical contractor work shall be obtained by
successfully passing an exam approved by the Electrical Inspector. Procedures
for testing and application forms shall be available at the office of the
Electrical Inspector during normal business hours.
(2013 Code, § 11-101)
(Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 14716, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 14737, passed
5-24-2004; Ord. 15024, passed 10-11-2021)
§ 154.086 EMERGENCY PERMIT WITHOUT EXAMINATION.
   An emergency permit may be granted by the Inspector without examination, if
he or she deems the permittee qualified to do emergency work; and, provided
that, it be shown that said permit will prevent financial loss or hardship to
said holder or the establishment for which he or she works, said emergency
permit shall expire within 30 days from its issuance.
(2013 Code, § 11-102) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.087 REEXAMINATION AFTER FAILURE.
   If an applicant fails to pass an examination, he or she may reapply for re-
examination after the expiration of 30 days and upon payment of another
examination fee. Applications shall be limited to no more than two per year.
(2013 Code, § 11-103) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.088 LICENSE EXPIRATION, RENEWAL; FEES.
   All licenses shall expire on December 31 and shall be renewed annually upon
application of the licensee and payment of the fee to the City Clerk. Any
license not renewed prior to December 31 shall expire on December 31 and may
not be renewed without examination.
 
Electrical contractor license  Annual fee $75
Journeyman electrician license Annual fee $20
Restricted electrician license Annual fee $75
 
(2013 Code, § 11-104) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 14716, passed 7-14-
2003)
§ 154.089 ACCOUNTING; FEES.
   Examination and license fees shall be turned over to the City Clerk and from
such fund shall be paid the costs of examination, issuance of licenses, permits
and enforcement of this subchapter.
(2013 Code, § 11-105) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
§ 154.090 RECOGNITION OF LICENSES FROM OTHER CITIES.
   Any electrical contractor or journeyman electrician who comes to the city
from another city or town that has similar licensing standards and who produces
credentials showing proper accreditation as an electrical contractor or
journeyman electrician shall be excused from the examination required under
this subchapter, and a license shall be issued to him or her upon payment of
the required license fee, if the Electrical Inspector approves his or her
credentials.
(2013 Code, § 11-106) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 15024, passed 10-11-
2021)
§ 154.091 LICENSE REVOCATION, SUSPENSION.
   The Electrical Inspector may revoke or suspend the license of any holder
issued under provisions of this subchapter if the holder has substantially
violated the provisions of this chapter. The holder shall surrender such
license upon receipt by certified mail of written notice of revocation or
suspension. A person whose license has been revoked shall not be permitted to
apply for another license within one year from the date of revocation.
(2013 Code, § 11-107) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 15024, passed 10-11-
2021)
§ 154.092 APPEALS FROM ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR ACTION.
   In the event any person shall feel aggrieved by any action of the Electrical
Inspector, he or she may appeal from such action to the City Council by filing
written notice of his or her appeal within ten days from the date of such
action. The Council shall give the appealing party and the Electrical Inspector
five days written notice by certified mail of the date, time and place of
hearing. All interested persons shall be given opportunity to be heard at such
hearing and the Council shall affirm, modify or overrule the action of the
Electrical Inspector.
(2013 Code, § 11-108) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992; Ord. 15024, passed 10-11-
2021)
§ 154.093 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any license holder to transfer his or her license
or allow it to be used, directly or indirectly by any other person.
(2013 Code, § 11-109) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Anyone who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances. In addition thereto, violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction.
(2013 Code, § 11-110) (Ord. 14392, passed 8-14-1992)
CHAPTER 155: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
155.001   Definition
   
155.002   Fence required
   
155.003   Openings in fence
   
155.004   Depth of water when fence required
 
   
155.999   Penalty
§ 155.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any artificially created body of water, permanent or
temporary, enclosed in non-porous material designed to prevent the
unintentional escape, that is 18 inches or more in depth at any point and is
designed or used for swimming, wading or bathing purposes, other than
municipally owned pools.
(2013 Code, § 26.5-1) (Ord. 13031, passed 12-13-1976)
§ 155.002 FENCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person in possession of land upon which is situated a swimming
pool shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is
located and completely surrounding such pool, lot or premises a fence or other
structure not less than five feet in height with no openings therein, other
than doors or gates, larger than six inches in any dimension; provided,
however, that, if a picket or similar fence is erected or maintained, the
vertical or horizontal dimension of the openings, other than the gates or
doors, shall not exceed six inches.
   (B)   The design and structural stability shall be in accordance with the
Building Code.
(2013 Code, § 26.5-2) (Ord. 13031, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 14135, passed 7-12-
1982)
§ 155.003 OPENINGS IN FENCE.
   All gates or doors opening through the enclosure required in §
155.002 of this chapter shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices designed to keep and capable of keeping such gate or door securely
closed and latched at all times when not in actual use. Such self-latching
device shall be located not less than four feet above the underlying ground
surface or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. Any
dwelling or other building on the premises may be incorporated in and
considered as constituting a portion of the required barrier. Doors or other
openings from any occupied dwelling, as distinguished from a garage, into the
required enclosure need not be equipped with self-closing or self-latching
devices. The provisions of this section shall not apply to service gates that
are permanently locked, except when in actual use.
(2013 Code, § 26.5-3) (Ord. 13031, passed 12-13-1976)
§ 155.004 DEPTH OF WATER WHEN FENCE REQUIRED.
   All fencing must be in place with gates when the pool is filled with water
to a depth of 18 inches or more at any point.
(2013 Code, § 26.5-4) (Ord. 13031, passed 12-13-1976)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a penalty as provided in §
10.999(A) of this code of ordinances.
(2013 Code, § 26.5-5) (Ord. 13031, passed 12-13-1976; Ord. 14970, passed 11-27-
2017)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
Article A - General Provisions
   
156.A.001   Title
   
156.A.002   Purposes
   
156.A.003   Authority
   
156.A.004   Applicability
   
156.A.005   Jurisdiction
   
156.A.006   Abrogation, conflict, and private restrictions
   
156.A.007   Minimum requirements
   
156.A.008   Severability
   
156.A.009   Effective date and repeal
   
156.A.010   Transitional provisions
Article B - District Development Standards
   
156.B.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.B.002   Zoning districts established
   
156.B.003   Official Zoning Map
   
156.B.004   Residential district development standards
   
156.B.005   Nonresidential and mixed-use district development standards
   
156.B.006   Development types
   
156.B.007   Civic and open space types
   
156.B.008   Measurements and allowances
Article C - Use Standards
   
156.C.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.C.002   Use table legend
   
156.C.003   Use table
   
156.C.004   Limited use standards
   
156.C.005   Special use permit standards
   
156.C.006   Flood hazard districts standards
   
156.C.007   Accessory uses and structures
   
156.C.008   Temporary uses and structures
   
156.C.009   Wireless communications facilities
   
156.C.010   New and unlisted uses
   
156.C.011   Performance standards
Article D - Building and Site Design Standards
   
156.D.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.D.002   General requirements
   
156.D.003   Single-family and duplex
   
156.D.004   Multiplex
   
156.D.005   Townhouse
   
156.D.006   Apartment
   
156.D.007   Urban core and mixed-use
   
156.D.008   Urban core historic district overlay
   
156.D.009   Nonresidential
Article E - Parking, Loading, and Stacking
   
156.E.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.E.002   General requirements
   
156.E.003   Parking design
   
156.E.004   Required off-street parking
   
156.E.005   Required accessible parking
   
156.E.006   Parking credits and reductions
   
156.E.007   Off-street loading
   
156.E.008   Off-street stacking
Article F - Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening
   
156.F.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.F.002   General requirements
   
156.F.003   Development landscaping
   
156.F.004   Buffering
   
156.F.005   Screening
   
156.F.006   Installation and maintenance
Article G - Signs
   
156.G.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.G.002   General requirements
   
156.G.003   Prohibited signs
   
156.G.004   Permanent signs
   
156.G.005   Sign illumination
   
156.G.006   Temporary signs
   
156.G.007   Installation, maintenance, and removal
Article H - Outdoor Lighting
   
156.H.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.H.002   General requirements
   
156.H.003   Light sources
   
156.H.004   Lighting placement and height
Article I - Development Review Bodies
   
156.I.001   City Council
   
156.I.002   Plan and Zoning Commission
   
156.I.003   Board of Adjustment
   
156.I.004   Zoning Administrator
   
156.I.005   Floodplain Administrator
   
156.I.006   Building Official
Article J - Development Review Procedures
   
156.J.001   Purpose and application
   
156.J.002   Common review procedures
   
156.J.003   Legislative review procedures
   
156.J.004   Administrative review procedures
   
156.J.005   Quasi-judicial review procedures
Article K - Nonconformities
   
156.K.001   Purpose and applicability
   
156.K.002   Nonconforming uses
   
156.K.003   Nonconforming structures
   
156.K.004   Nonconforming lots
   
156.K.005   Nonconforming signs
   
156.K.006   Nonconforming site improvements
   
156.K.007   Conversion of nonconformities
Article L - Enforcement and Remedies
   
156.L.001      Penalties
Article M - Word Usage
   
156.M.001   Rules of construction
   
156.M.002   Acronyms and abbreviations
   
156.M.003   Definitions
ARTICLE A - GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.A.001 TITLE.
   (A)   Title. This document is known, and may be cited as, the City of
Marshalltown, Iowa, Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Short title. References to "this Ordinance", "this Code", or "this
Chapter" are interpreted as references to this Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.002 PURPOSES.
   The City Council adopts this Zoning Ordinance to protect the public health
and safety, quality of life, economic development, and fiscal and functional
health of the city and its present and future inhabitants in accordance with
the goals of the Comprehensive Plan. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
are specifically intended to:
   (A)   Public health and safety. Protect public health and safety and
environmental quality by:
      (1)   Open space. Ensuring the provision of adequate public and private
open space for light, air, environmental protection, recreation, and fire
safety;
      (2)   Density and intensity. Preventing both the overcrowding of land and
urban sprawl by regulating the density and intensity of development;
      (3)   Screening and buffering. Establishing reasonable screening and
buffering of residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use areas from incompatible
uses; and
   (B)   Quality of life. Protect the quality of life of city residents,
business owners, employees, and visitors by:
      (1)   Character. Protecting and enhancing the character and property
values of all parts of the city;
      (2)   Environmental assets. Preserving and protecting existing trees and
vegetation, woodlands, floodplains, stream and riparian corridors, scenic
views, and other areas of scenic and environmental significance from adverse
impacts of land development; and
      (3)   Appearance. Improving the city’s appearance through the regulation
of design, where such regulations are appropriate.
   (C)   Economic development.
      (1)   Commercial and industrial districts. Encourage a diverse and stable
economy with employment opportunities, particularly those that have meaningful
multiplier effects in the local economy, by promoting the vitality and
development of commercial and industrial districts;
      (2)   Entrepreneurship. Enable and encourage entrepreneurship and local
business growth; and
      (3)   Business retention and expansion. Enable retention and sensitive
expansion of local businesses.
   (D)   Fiscal and functional health. Protect the fiscal and functional health
of the city by:
      (1)   Compatibility. Encouraging the most appropriate, efficient, and
compatible use of land, buildings, and other structures throughout the city;
      (2)   Efficiency. Securing economy in government-private sector
expenditures by promoting efficiency in development review;
      (3)   Housing stock. Promoting a diverse housing stock in new
developments and maintaining such diversity where it currently exists;
      (4)   Promote equitable, affordable housing. Encourage location-efficient
housing options to increase mobility and lower the combined cost of housing and
transportation;
      (5)   Reinvestment, redevelopment, and infill. Protecting property
against blight and depreciation by facilitating reinvestment, redevelopment,
and infill development; and
      (6)   Supply of land. Promoting a balanced supply of residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, and mixed land uses for conservation and
development.
   (E)   Encourage contextually sensitive development and redevelopment.
      (1)   Redevelopment and infill. Promote contextually compatible
redevelopment and infill development of vacant or underutilized properties;
      (2)   Mixed-use. Enable and encourage efficient development patterns,
including by-right mixed-use development; and
      (3)   Historic character. Facilitate orderly and harmonious development
with the visual and historical character of Marshalltown.
   (F)   Clear regulations and processes. Establish transparent regulations and
review procedures for development, the duties and powers of responsible
administrative bodies, and reasonable penalties and enforcement mechanisms for
violations of this Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.003 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council adopts this Zoning Ordinance pursuant to:
   (A)   Constitutional authority. The powers granted and limitations imposed
by the U.S. and the Iowa Constitutions;
   (B)   Iowa Code. The authority granted by the Iowa Code including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Chapter 364, Powers and Duties of Cities;
      (2)   Chapter 368, City Development;
      (3)   Chapter 372, Organization of City Government;
      (4)   Chapter 380, City Legislation;
      (5)   Chapter 414, City Zoning;
      (6)   Chapter 18B, Land Use - Smart Planning; and
      (7)   Such additional authority as may be conferred by the Iowa Code.
   (C)   City Charter and Code of Ordinances. The city's Charter and the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations set forth in the city's Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.004 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. No person may use, occupy, subdivide, or develop land, or
use, occupy, erect or modify buildings, signs, or other structures, except in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. The "use"
or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to anything and everything that is
done to, on, or in that building or land.
   (B)   Specific exceptions. Specific exceptions to the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance may be set out in individual sections.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.005 JURISDICTION.
   All provisions of this Zoning Ordinance apply within the corporate limits of
the City of Marshalltown, as may be expanded, contracted, or modified from time
to time.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.006 ABROGATION, CONFLICT, AND PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Abrogation. It is not intended by this Zoning Ordinance to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Conflict.
      (1)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance conflict with those of the state or federal government,
the more restrictive provision, as determined by the Zoning Administrator,
controls, to the extent permitted by law.
      (2)   Conflict with other city regulations. If the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with
provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance control.
      (3)   Conflicts within this Zoning Ordinance. Where the text of this
Zoning Ordinance conflicts with its tables or illustrative material, the text
controls. Where a table of this Zoning Ordinance conflicts with an
illustration, the table controls.
   (C)   Private restrictions. The city does not interpret or enforce private
restrictions, including, but not limited to, deed restrictions, covenants, or
easements.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.007 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Compliance. No structure or land shall be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without the impacted
area being brought into full compliance with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable regulations that apply to uses and structures within the
jurisdiction of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements
and shall be literally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not
be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.008 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any article,
section, subsection, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter as
unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Zoning Ordinance shall not
be affected.
   (B)   As-applied. If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any application
of a provision of this chapter to a particular structure, land, or water to be
invalid or unconstitutional "as-applied", such judgment shall not be applicable
to any other structure, land, or water not specifically included in the
judgment.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.009 EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL.
   (A)   Effective date. This Zoning Ordinance is effective on April 11, 2022,
unless otherwise expressly indicated.
   (B)   Repeal. The Zoning Ordinance existing prior to adoption of this Zoning
Ordinance is deemed repealed and replaced upon the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.A.010 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Generally. It is the intent of the City Council to respect the
property rights of applicants with existing or pending development approvals.
   (B)   Effect on existing ordinances. The city's ordinances in effect prior
to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, unless expressly repealed or
amended by this Zoning Ordinance, or by some other Council action, remain in
effect. Where this Zoning Ordinance is more restrictive or where it includes
additional provisions (including those that are inconsistent or in conflict
with existing ordinances) the city shall enforce this Zoning Ordinance as set
out in § 156.A.006, Abrogation, Conflict, and Private Restrictions.
   (C)   Pending applications.
      (1)   Generally. Each development review application shall be evaluated
only in light of the adopted ordinances and technical regulations in effect at
the time that each complete application is submitted.
      (2)   Inactive applications. Pending development review applications that
are not pursued with due diligence may expire pursuant to §
156.J.002, Common Review Procedures.
   (D)   Development approvals that precede this Zoning Ordinance. Development
approved prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance may be carried
out within the scope of the development approval, including applicable
standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that the approval is
valid and has not expired.
   (E)   Duration of approvals. Development approvals that are valid on the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance are valid until their expiration date;
or, if no expiration date is specified in the approval documents or prior
regulations, pursuant to Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary
Table.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE B - DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 156.B.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish zoning districts
and the Official Zoning Map, set out the development standards for each
district, establish development and civic and open space types, and provide
explanations and by-right permitted modifications for such development
standards.
   (B)   Applicability. No structure may be erected, altered, or moved and
placed on a property other than as provided in this article.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.B.002 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   This section divides the city into the districts set forth in
Table 156.B.002-1, Zoning Districts, below. In addition, the table shows the
planned future land use category from the Marshalltown Comprehensive Plan 2030
that each zoning district implements, provides the available development types
as further articulated in §
156.B.006, Development Types, and establishes purpose statements for each
district and development type combination.
Table 156.B.002-1
Zoning Districts
                                                 Purpose: The
Planned Future                                   purpose of this Former Zoning
Land Use       Zoning District Development Type1 zoning district District2
Category                                         is to provide
                                                 for:
Table 156.B.002-1
Zoning Districts
                                               Purpose: The
Planned Future                  Development    purpose of this  Former Zoning
Land Use        Zoning District Type1          zoning district  District2
Category                                       is to provide
                                               for:
Residential Districts
                                               Preservation of
                                               land suitable
                                               for eventual
                                               development
Agricultural    AG,             Conventional   until such time  A-1
                Agricultural                   as the necessary
                                               facilities and
                                               services are
                                               provided to such
                                               areas.
                                               Existing
                                               residential or
                                               future
                                               residential
Rural           RR, Rural                      areas in areas
Residential     Residential     Conventional   of difficult     R-1
                                               topography that
                                               will develop at
                                               a density of 2-
                                               3 units per
                                               acre.
                                Conventional   Single-family
                                               and duplex homes
                                               at a density of
                                               4-8 units per
                                               acre. A
                                               conventional
                                               development is
                                               characterized by
                                               private open
                                               space on each
                                               lot while a
                                               cluster
                                               development has
                                               smaller lots
                                               with a required
                                               percentage of
Low-Density     RL, Low-Density                common open
Residential     Residential     Cluster        space. Common    R-2, R-2A
                                               open space may
                                               be used for
                                               parks, trails,
                                               or natural
                                               areas, to
                                               preserve
                                               environmental
                                               resources,
                                               provide for
                                               recreational
                                               amenities,
                                               provide for use
                                               compatibility,
                                               or provide
                                               natural drainage
                                               features.

                                Conventional   Single-family
                                               and duplex
                                               homes,
                                               townhomes, or
                                               small multiple-
                                               family
                                               developments at
                                               a density of 6-
                                               18 units per
                RM, Medium                     acre. The infill
Medium-Density  Density                        option promotes  R-3, R-4
Residential     Residential     Infill         efficient use of
                                               land,
                                               infrastructure,
                                               and other
                                               resources and
                                               allows for
                                               additional
                                               density and land
                                               uses compared to
                                               conventional.

Mixed-Use Districts
Mixed-Use                                      Mixed office,
                                               retail, and
                                               residential uses
                                               in neighborhood
Commercial      MU, Mixed-Use                  centers or in    TN, NC
                                               close proximity
                                               to residential
                                               areas.
                                Mixed-Use
                                               Mixed office,
                                               retail, medical,
                                               institutional,
Downtown Mixed-                                and residential  CBD, OP (in
Use             UC, Urban Core                 uses in the more Downtown areas)
                                               intense setting
                                               of the urban
                                               core, including
                                               downtown.
Nonresidential Districts
                                               General
                                               commercial and
                                               businesses such
                                               as restaurants,
                                               retail, office,
                                               hotels, banks,   GC, PC, CC, RC,
Commercial      GC, General     Nonresidential and other        OP (properties
                Commercial                     mixture of uses  outside of
                                               in areas along   Downtown )
                                               major road
                                               corridors and
                                               further from
                                               residential
                                               areas.
Light
Industrial                                     Manufacturing,
                                               processing,
                                               storage, and
                                               distribution
                                               activities
                                               generally
                                               incompatible
                                               with
                                               residential,
                                               civic, and other
                                               public uses.
                                               Certain
                                               industrial uses
                GI, General                    that produce
Heavy           Industrial      Nonresidential off-site noise,  M1, M2
Industrial                                     odor, dust and/
                                               or other visible
                                               and sensory
                                               impacts are
                                               permitted only
                                               after public
                                               hearings and
                                               review to assure
                                               protection of
                                               surrounding
                                               property,
                                               persons, and the
                                               general public
                                               interest.

Special Purpose
                                               The unified and
                                               coordinated
                                               development of
                                               parcels or
                                               tracts of land.
                                               Certain freedom
                                               of choice as to
                                               intended land
                                               uses shall be
                                               permitted,
                                               provided that
                PUD, Planned                   the essential
Multiple        Unit                           site development PUD
                Development                    regulations are
                                               complied with
                                               and that the
                                               intended uses
                                               are not in
                                               conflict with
                                               the general
                                Mixed-Use      purpose and
                                               intent of either
                                               this Zoning
                                               Ordinance or the
                                               Comprehensive
                                               Plan.
Public/
Semi-Public                                    Primarily
                                               religious,       ED, OP (Medical
                PI, Public and                 medical          properties
                Institutional                  governmental,    outside of
Medical                                        institutional,   Downtown)
                                               or education
                                               facilities.

                                               Areas of public
                                               or private
Cemetery        REC,                           ownership that   Multiple
                Recreational                   will remain
                                               undeveloped as
                                               open space or
Parks/Open                                     developed as     Multiple
Space                                          parks (including
                                               trails) or golf
                                               courses with
                REC,                           varying
Golf Course     Recreational                   facilities       Multiple
                                               depending on the
                                               need and
                                               location.

Overlay Districts
                                               Protecting
                                               specific
                                               characteristics
                                               of the historic
                                               core of the
                UC-HD, Urban                   downtown area
Downtown Mixed- Core-Historic   Mixed-Use      while            CBD
Use             District                       facilitating new
                                               construction
                                               designed to
                                               harmonize with
                                               the district's
                                               visual
                                               character.
Table Notes:
1.   Refer to §
156.B.006, Development Types, for more details.
2.   The former zoning districts are from the Marshalltown Zoning Ordinance of
2010 (Ord. 14871, adopted April 12, 2010) which is repealed on the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance.
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.B.003 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Generally. The zoning districts set out in §
156.B.002, Zoning Districts Establishment, are shown on the Official Zoning
Map, which is a part of this Zoning Ordinance as fully as if it were written
out in detail. The Official Zoning Map is on file in the office of the
Engineering Department and is available for inspection during regular business
hours.
   (B)   Force and effect. The Official Zoning Map and all notations,
references, and other information shown on it have the same force and effect as
the text of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Status of the Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map on file controls in
the event of a conflict between the map on file and any other paper or digital
reproduction of the map.
   (D)   Omitted or annexed land. Any area not shown as being included in a
zoning district or annexed to the City of Marshalltown shall be deemed to be in
the RL, Low-Density Residential zoning district unless the City Council changes
the zoning district.
   (E)   Boundaries. Where there is uncertainty as to the boundaries of the
districts as shown on the District Map of the city, the Zoning Administrator
shall make a determination using the following criteria:
      (1)   Rights-of-way or easements. Where boundaries appear to follow
existing streets, alleys, railroad tracks, utility lines, or similar features,
the Zoning Administrator shall construe the zoning boundary to follow the
center line of the rights-of-way or easement. Where the location of these
features on the ground differs from that shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
features on the ground control are shown approximately following street and
alley lines, such street and alley lines shall be interpreted to be the
boundaries.
      (2)   City limits. Where district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following city limits, the Zoning Administrator shall consider
the city limits as the district boundaries.
      (3)   Property lines. Where boundaries are indicated so that they
approximately follow lot lines and are not more than 15 feet distant therefrom,
such lot lines shall be interpreted to be the boundaries.
      (4)   Unsubdivided property. In unsubdivided property where a district
boundary divides a parcel of land, the boundary shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
      (5)   Watercourses. The Zoning Administrator shall construe boundaries
shown as following, or approximately following, the centerline of drainageways,
streams, water bodies, or other watercourses, as following the centerline. In
the event of a natural change in the location of such streams or other
watercourses, the Zoning Administrator shall construe the zoning district
boundary as moving with the centerline.
      (6)   Vacation or abandonment. Whenever any street, alley, or other
public way is vacated by the action of the City Council, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be extended
automatically to the center of such vacated area.
      (7)   Ownership. When a lot held in one ownership is divided by a
district boundary line, the entire lot will be construed to be within the
district in which the majority of the lot is located.
   (F)   Conflicts resolved. In case of a conflict between the district
boundaries on the Official Zoning Map and the zoning of property provided by an
adopted ordinance, the ordinance controls. In case of doubt or dispute, the
Board of Adjustment shall determine the boundary lines upon receiving an appeal
from a ruling of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.B.004 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. 
Table 156.B.004-1, Residential District Lot and Building Standards, establishes
the dimensional standards for the various housing/building and development
types in the residential zoning districts. Except as provided in §
156.B.008, Measurements and Allowances, and §
156.B.006, Development Types, no lot shall be reduced in size so that its area,
width, setback requirements, gross density, or other requirements of
Table 156.B.004-1 are not maintained.
   (B)   Setbacks related to driveways and garages. A minimum setback of 20
feet shall apply where a driveway provides access on a residential property
from a street, other than an alley. This maintains an adequately sized parking
space on the driveway between the structure and the street and helps to avoid
encroachment into public sidewalks, despite lower minimum setback standards in
Table 156.B.004-1 for the remainder of the building. See §
156.D.003(C) for specific requirements for garage orientation and placement.
   (C)   Measurements and allowances reference. Refer to §
156.B.008, Measurements and Allowances, for explanations of, and special
provisions related to, the measurements and standards in
Table 156.B.004-1.
Table 156.B.004-1
Residential District Lot and Building Standards
(See Figures 156.B.004-1 through -6, below)
Housing/
Building          Common    Minimum Lot3 Maximum  Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
Type1    Maximum  Civic or               Building
         Gross    Open      Area Width   Height   Front Side Street Side 4 Rear
         Density  Space/
Graphic  (Units/  Landscape
Legend   Acre)    Surface
         A        Area           B       C        D     E           F      G
                  Ratio2
Table 156.B.004-1
Residential District Lot and Building Standards
(See Figures 156.B.004-1 through -6, below)
Housing/               Common    Minimum     Maximum  Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
Building Type1 Maximum Civic or  Lot3        Building
               Gross   Open      Area  Width Height   Front Side   Side  Rear
               Density Space/                               Street 4
Graphic Legend (Units/ Landscape
               Acre)   Surface         B     C        D     E      F     G
                       Area
                       Ratio2
AG - Agricultural Residential Conventional Development Type
Single-Family  0.04    N/A       25    120   35 ft.   50    20 ft. 15    50 ft.
Detached5                        Acres                ft.          ft.
Permitted                        25                   50           15
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       Acres 120   35 ft.   ft.   20 ft. ft.   50 ft.
Uses7
RR - Rural Residential Conventional Development Type
Single-Family                    14,37 85             35
Detached       2.82    N/A       5     ft.   35 ft.   ft.   10 ft. 8 ft. 35 ft.
                                 s.f.
Permitted                        14,37 85             35
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       5     ft.   35 ft.   ft.   10 ft. 8 ft. 35 ft.
Uses7                            s.f.
RL - Low Density Residential Conventional Development Type
Single-Family  4.40    N/A       9,000 75    35 ft.   30    8 ft.  7 ft. 35 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  4.90    N/A       8,000 60    35 ft.   30    8 ft.  7 ft. 35 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Duplex         5.64    N/A       7,000 60    35 ft.   30    8 ft.  8 ft. 35 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Permitted                        9,000 75             30           10
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   35 ft.   ft.   15 ft. ft.   35 ft.
Uses7
RL - Low Density Residential Cluster Development Type
Single-Family  5.58    15%       6,500 60    35 ft.   15    7 ft.  7 ft. 25 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  5.64    15%       6,000 50    35 ft.   15    7 ft.  7 ft. 20 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Duplex         5.98    20%       5,250 50    35 ft.   20    8 ft.  8 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Permitted                        6,500 60             15
Nonresidential N/A     20%       s.f.  ft.   35 ft.   ft.   7 ft.  7 ft. 25 ft.
Uses7
RM - Medium Residential Density Conventional Development Type
Single-Family  7.15    N/A       5,000 60    35 ft.   30    10 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  8.56    N/A       4,500 50    35 ft.   20    10 ft. 5 ft. 25 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Duplex         10.47   N/A       4,000 50    35 ft.   20    8 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Townhouse      11.44   N/A       3,500 25    45 ft.   20    8 ft   5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Multiplex      11.54   N/A       3,500 75    45 ft.   20    8 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Apartment      18.513  N/A       2,000 60 ft 45 ft.6  10    5 ft.  5 ft. 25 ft.
                                 s.f.                 ft.
Manufactured   Refer to §
Home Park      156.C.005(D)(1), Manufactured Home Park
Permitted                        5,000 75             20           10
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   35 ft.   ft.   10 ft. ft.   25 ft.
Uses7
RM - Medium Residential Density Infill Development Type
Single-Family  11.40   N/A       3,250 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  11.66   N/A       3,250 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Duplex         11.91   N/A       3,000 30    35 ft.   10    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Townhouse      11.44   N/A       3,500 25    45 ft.   10    5 ft.  5 ft. 25 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Multiplex      13.33   N/A       3,000 75    45 ft.   10    5 ft.  5 ft. 25 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Apartment      23.21   N/A       1,600 60 ft 45 ft.6  10    5 ft.  5 ft. 25 ft.
                                 s.f.                 ft.
Manufactured   Refer to §
Home Park      156.C.005(D)(1), Manufactured Home Park
Permitted                        5,000 75             20           10
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   35 ft.   ft.   10 ft. ft.   25 ft.
Uses7
RM - Medium Residential Density Tiny House or Cottage Development Type
Cottage Court  9.48    30%       2,000 45    20 ft.   20    8 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Tiny House     14.5    30%       1,000 40    20 ft.   20    8 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
RH - High Density Residential Conventional Development Type
Single-Family  13.46   N/A       2,750 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  13.78   N/A       2,750 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Townhouse      18.18   N/A       2,000 20    45 ft.   10    10 ft. 5 ft. 15 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Multiplex      21.50   N/A       2,000 45    45 ft.   10    10 ft. 10    25 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.          ft.
Apartment      30.66   N/A       1,200 60    45 ft.6  10 ft 5 ft.  5 ft. 10 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.
All Permitted                    7,500 50             10           10
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   40 ft.   ft.   10 ft. ft.   25 ft.
Uses7
RH - High Density Residential Infill Development Type
Single-Family  14.81   N/A       2,500 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Detached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Single-Family  15.16   N/A       2,500 40    35 ft.   20    5 ft.  5 ft. 20 ft.
Attached                         s.f.  ft.            ft.
Multiplex      21.39   N/A       1,875 45    45 ft.   10    8 ft.  5 ft. 25 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.            ft.
Townhouse      21.87   N/A       1,600 18    45 ft.   5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft. 15 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.
Apartment      30.66   N/A       1,200 60    45 ft.6  5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft. 10 ft.
                                 s.f.  ft.
All Permitted                                         10           10
Nonresidential N/A     N/A       N/A   N/A   40 ft.   ft.   10 ft. ft.   25 ft.
Uses7
Notes:
1.   Refer to §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards, and §
156.C.005, Special Use Standards, for additional standards that may apply to a
given housing type.
2.   Minimum common civic or open space is calculated based on a percentage of
the overall subdivision and applies to residential and mixed-use districts.
Landscape surface area ratio is calculated based on a percentage of the lot and
applies to nonresidential developments.
3.   Minimum lot area is calculated on a "per dwelling unit" basis. Minimum lot
width is calculated for the entire lot.
4.   Zero feet is the side setback for the shared party wall between single-
family attached units and between townhouse units.
5.   Including a manufactured or modular home on its own lot (applies to all
districts).
6.   The maximum height of an apartment building may be increased by special
use permit as set forth in §
156.C.005, Special Use Permit Standards.
7.   Refer to
Table 156.C.003-1 for list of uses.
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-1
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Single-Family Detached or Manufactured Home on its Own Lot
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2607.png]
 
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-2
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Single-Family Attached
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2609.png]
 
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-3
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Duplex
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2611.png]
 
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-4
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Townhouses
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2613.png]
 
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-5
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Multiplex
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2615.png]
 
 
 
Figure 156.B.004-6
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Apartment
Minimum Lot        C = Maximum     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
A = Area B = Width Building Height D = Front E = Street Side F = Side G = Rear
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2617.png]
 
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15095, passed 11-11-2024)
§ 156.B.005 NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED-USE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. 
Table 156.B.005-1, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Lot and Building
Standards, establishes the dimensional standards for the various housing/
building types in the nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts. Except as
provided in §
156.B.008, Measurements and Allowances, and §
156.B.006, Development Types, no lot shall be reduced in size so that its area,
width, setback requirements, gross density, or other requirements of
Table 156.B.005-1 are not maintained.
   (B)   Setbacks related to driveways and garages. A minimum setback of 20
feet shall apply where a driveway provides access on a residential property
from a street, other than an alley. This maintains an adequately sized parking
space on the driveway between the structure and the street and helps to avoid
encroachment into public sidewalks, despite lower minimum setback standards in
Table 156.B.005-1 for the remainder of the building.
   (C)   Measurements and allowances reference. Refer to §
156.B.008, Measurements and Allowances, for explanations of, and special
provisions related to, the measurements and standards in
Table 156.B.005-1.
Table 156.B.005-1
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Lot and Building Standards
(See Figures 156.B.005-1 and -2, below)
Housing/         Common    Minimum    Maximum
Building         Civic or  Lot3       Building        Minimum/Maximum Setbacks4
Type1    Maximum Open
         Gross   Space/                      Frontage       Side   Side5,
         Density Landscape Area Width Height Build    Front Street 6      Rear6
Graphic  (Units/ Surface                     Out
Legend   Acre)   Area
         A       Ratio2         B     C      D        E     F      G      H
Table 156.B.005-1
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Lot and Building Standards
(See Figures 156.B.005-1 and -2, below)
Housing/               Common    Minimum     Maximum         Minimum/Maximum Setbacks4
Building Type1 Maximum Civic or  Lot3        Building
               Gross   Open                         Frontage       Side   Side5,
               Density Space/    Area  Width Height Build    Front Street 6      Rear6
Graphic Legend (Units/ Landscape                    Out
               Acre)   Surface
               A       Area            B     C      D        E     F      G      H
                       Ratio2
GC - General Commercial
Permitted                                                    40                  10
Nonresidential N/A     15%       N/A   N/A   50 ft. N/A      ft.   30 ft. 10 ft. ft.
Uses
Multiplex      21.50   N/A       1,500 45    45 ft. N/A      30    30 ft. 10 ft. 10
                                 s.f.  ft.                   ft.                 ft.
Townhouse      18.18   N/A       2,000 20    45 ft. N/A      30    30 ft. 5 ft.  10
                                 s.f.  ft.                   ft.                 ft.
Apartment      30.66   15%       1,120 60    50     N/A      30    30 ft. 5 ft.  10
                                 s.f.  ft.   ft.8            ft.                 ft.
MU - Mixed Use
Single-Family  14.30   N/A       2,500 25    35 ft. 90%      10    10 ft. 5 ft.  15
Detached                         s.f.  ft.                   ft.                 ft.
Single-Family  20.77   N/A       1,250 25    35 ft. 90%      10    10 ft. 5 ft.  15
Attached                         s.f.  ft.                   ft.                 ft.
Townhouse      21.87   N/A       1,600 18    45 ft. 90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft.  15
                                 s.f.  ft.                                       ft.
Multiplex      22.34   N/A       1,250 40    45 ft. 90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft.  15
                                 s.f.  ft.                                       ft.
Apartment      30.66   15%       1,120 60    50     90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft.  15
                                 s.f.  ft.   ft.7                                ft.
Mixed-Use      45.00   10%       N/A   N/A   75     90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
Building                                     ft.7
Commercial     N/A     15%       N/A   N/A   50     90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
Building                                     ft.7
Other          N/A     15%       N/A   N/A   75     90%      5 ft. 5 ft.  5 ft.  0 ft.
Permitted Uses                               ft.7
UC - Urban Core
Single-Family                    1,250 25                    0 ft. 0 ft.         10
Attached       N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   35 ft. 90%      / 10  / 10   0 ft.  ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
                                 2,500 25                    0 ft. 0 ft.         10
Duplex         N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   35 ft. 90%      / 10  / 10   0 ft.  ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
                                 2,000 20                    0 ft. 0 ft.
Townhouse      N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   45 ft. 100%     / 10  / 10   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
                                 1,600 40                    0 ft. 0 ft.
Multiplex      N/A     N/A       s.f.  ft.   45 ft. 100%     / 10  / 10   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
                                 1,600 60    50              0 ft. 0 ft.
Apartment      N/A     5%        s.f.  ft.   ft.7   100%     / 10  / 10   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
Mixed-Use                                    75              0 ft. 0 ft.
Building       N/A     5%        N/A   N/A   ft.7   100%     / 10  / 10   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
Commercial                                   50              0 ft. 0 ft.
Building       N/A     N/A       N/A   N/A   ft.7   100%     / 15  / 30   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
Other                                        125             0 ft. 0 ft.
Permitted Uses N/A     5%        N/A   N/A   ft.    100%     / 10  / 10   0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.   ft.
UC-HD - Urban Core Historic District Overlay
                                 1,600 60    50              0 ft.
Apartment      21.87   5%        s.f.  ft.   ft.7   100%     / 5   0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.
Mixed-Use                                    75              0 ft.
Building       45.00   5%        N/A   N/A   ft.7   100%     / 5   0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.
Commercia l                                  50              0 ft.
Building       N/A     N/A       N/A   N/A   ft.7   100%     / 5   0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.
Other                                        125             0 ft.
Permitted Uses N/A     5%        N/A   N/A   ft.    100%     / 5   0 ft.  0 ft.  0 ft.
                                                             ft.
GI - General Industrial
Permitted Use  N/A     10%       N/A   N/A   75 ft. N/A      30    15 ft. 10 ft. 10
                                                             ft.                 ft.
PI - Public and Institutional
All Other                        6,000 60                    30                  25
Group Living   21.5    N/A       s.f.  ft.   45 ft. N/A      ft.   10 ft  5 ft.  ft.
Uses
Permitted                        6,000 60    75              25                  10
Nonresidential N/A     15%       s.f.  ft.   ft.8   100%     ft.8  8 ft.8 7 ft.8 ft.8
Uses
Notes:
1.   Refer to §§
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards, and
156.C.005, Special Use Permit Standards, for additional standards that may apply to a
given housing type.
2.   Minimum common civic or open space is calculated based on a percentage of the
overall subdivision and applies to residential and mixed-use districts. Landscape
surface area ratio is calculated based on a percentage of the lot and applies to
nonresidential developments.
3.   Minimum lot area is calculated on a "per dwelling unit" basis. Minimum lot width
is calculated for the entire lot.
4.   Where "##/##" is shown, the first number (including zero) is the minimum setback
and the second number is the maximum. If only one number is shown, then maximum
setback does not apply.
5.   Zero feet is the side setback for the shared party wall between townhouse units.
6.   For nonresidential uses, applies if adjacent to a residential use or zoning
district. 0' for nonresidential uses if adjacent to any other use or zoning district.
7.   The maximum number of stories and/or height of an apartment, commercial, or
mixed-use buildings may be increased by Special Use Permit as set forth in §
156.C.005, Special Use Permit Standards.
8.   These maximums and minimums are set generally for the PI District. Based upon the
use that is proposed to be developed, the Zoning Administrator may recommend an
adjustment to the requirements to the Plan and Zoning Commission and Zoning Board of
Adjustments for a variance that allows development as needed to best benefit the
community, protect the use of surrounding properties, prevent nuisances, and to
minimize any negative impacts of the proposed use.
 
 
Figure 156.B.005-1
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Commercial Building
Minimum Lot        Maximum Building     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
                              D =                 F = Street
A = Area B = Width C = Height Frontage  E = Front Side       G = Side H = Rear
                              Build Out
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2619.png]
 
 
Figure 156.B.005-2
Housing and Building Type Illustrations
Mixed Use Building
Minimum Lot        Maximum Building     Minimum/Maximum Setbacks
                              D =                 F = Street
A = Area B = Width C = Height Frontage  E = Front Side       G = Side H = Rear
                              Build Out
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2621.png]
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15097, passed 12-20-2024)
§ 156.B.006 DEVELOPMENT TYPES.
   (A)   Development types. New developments that are primarily residential or
mixed-use are classified into conventional, cluster, and infill. Development of
any development type permitted in the zoning district is at the option of the
applicant. Where more than one development type is permitted in a zoning
district, no development type is mandatory. Refer to §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards, for lot density and
dimension standards related to each permitted development and housing type
combination.
   (B)   Permitted residential districts. 
Table 156.B.006-1, Permitted Development Types by Residential District,
establishes the development types that are permitted in each residential zoning
district.
 
Table 156.B.006-1
Permitted Development Types by Residential District
Development Types           AG RR RL RM RH
                            "P" = Permitted | "--" = Not Permitted
Conventional                P  P  P  P  P
Cluster                     -- -- P  -- --
Infill                      -- -- -- P  P
Tiny House or Cottage Court -- -- -- P  --
 
   (C)   Applicability. This section established standards that are specific or
unique to the various permitted development types.
   (D)   Development types.
      (1)   Conventional.
         (a)   Description. The conventional development type, as depicted in
Figure 156.B.006-1, is a pattern that allows primarily residential uses and
that provides the majority of residential property owners with private open
space on their own property. A conventional development type consists of
varying housing types depending on the zoning district and minimum lot size is
a primary factor in the character built environment of the development.
         (b)   Standards. All the requirements of this article shall apply to
conventional development types unless otherwise specified.
 
Figure 156.B.006-1
Conventional Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2623.png]
 
 
      (2)   Cluster.
         (a)   Description. A cluster development type, as depicted in
Figure 156.B.006-2, consists of smaller lots than conventional development that
are clustered together in order to provide for common civic and open spaces.
The common open space may be set-aside for resource features such as private
parks, recreation areas, woodlands, creeks, streams, and their riparian areas,
floodplains, and similar features. Cluster development may be used to preserve
environmental resources by clustering lots on the buildable portions of the
property.
         (b)   Housing types. At least two permitted housing types as listed in
Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table, shall be provided and no one lot size/
configuration dwelling type may exceed a total of 70% of all the residential
units in the development.
         (c)   Minimum site area. The minimum site area required for a cluster
development is five acres.
         (d)   Common civic and open space requirements.
            1.   Regardless of whether common open space is on privately or
publicly owned property, the space shall be open to the public at the same
hours as a comparable city park.
            2.   A minimum of 75% of the required civic and open space shall
consist of the natural area open space type per §
156.B.006, Civic and Open Space Types. Open space shall be integrated into the
development design so as to bring access to significant open space to the
maximum number of properties; provided, however, that physical access may be
limited if such limitation would materially enhance natural resource
management.
            3.   Land area within the cluster development dedicated to
permitted public and institutional, office, and retail, sales, and service use
categories shall not exceed 10% of the total land area of the development. In
addition, such uses may be counted toward 10% of the common open space
requirement established in §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards. For example, a 20-acre
cluster development with single-family attached and detached dwellings requires
three acres (15% of the development) of civic and common open space. The
development may have up to two acres of nonresidential uses and 13,068 square
feet of the nonresidential development counts toward the civic and open space
requirement.
         (e)   Minimum lot area adjacent to other development. Where adjacent
to existing conventional single-family development, cluster development lots on
the perimeter shall be:
            1.   Equal to or greater than the lot area and width of the
adjacent lots;
            2.   Separated from adjacent lots by a Type A bufferyard; or
            3.   The dwelling units on the perimeter cluster lots shall be set
back from the boundary of the cluster development a minimum of the following
distances based on the number of cluster lots being developed:
               A.   One to ten lots: 30 feet;
               B.   Eleven to 30 lots: 40 feet; and
               C.   Thirty-one or more lots: 50 feet.
         (f)   Distance from residential lots. All required common open space
types shall be located a minimum of 1,200 feet from any residential lot within
the cluster development, measured along a sidewalk or trail from the nearest
property line of the lot to the nearest property line of the open space.
         (g)   Buffering requirements. A bufferyard along the perimeter of the
cluster development may count toward the required common open space. However,
no more than 25% of the total required open space may be within the perimeter
buffer yard.
         (h)   Shoulders and drainage swales. Improved shoulders and drainage
swales, designed in accordance with design standards approved by the City
Engineer, may be utilized rather than curbs.
 
Figure 156.B.006-2
Cluster Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2625.png]
 
      (3)   Infill.
         (a)   Description. An infill development type, as depicted in Figure
156.B.006-3, consists of smaller lots and greater densities than conventional
or cluster developments that make efficient use of land and infrastructure on
vacant or underutilized lots in already developed areas.
 
Figure 156.B.006-3
Infill Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2627.png]
 
 
         (b)   Eligibility for infill. An infill development type may be
located on any parcel:
            1.   Vacant or unoccupied. That is surrounded by existing developed
properties and has been vacant or unoccupied for more than one year;
            2.   Utility easements. Where adjacent properties abutting at least
50% of the non-street perimeter of the subject property are utility easements
that create a substantial break in development or redevelopment potential;
            3.   Environmental constraints. Where adjacent properties abutting
at least 50% of the non-street perimeter of the subject property are encumbered
by environmentally sensitive or constrained areas such as floodplains; or
            4.   Existing development. Where adjacent properties abutting at
least 50% of the non-street perimeter of the subject property are developed
with single-family dwellings of higher density or intensity uses.
         (c)   Appearance. Infill development shall be constructed to be
generally compatible in appearance with other existing structures in the
context, as established in division (D)(3)(j), Context, below, that comply with
this Zoning Ordinance.
         (d)   Alternative standards. In place of the standards in §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards, and other standards of
this Zoning Ordinance, the applicant may utilize the following alternative
standards.
         (e)   Lot area and width. The minimum lot area may be that of the
smallest lot in the context of the development, as defined in division (D)(3)
(j), Context, below. The minimum lot width may be that of the narrowest lot in
the context of the development. Refer to
Chapter 157, Land Subdivision Regulations, for requirements related to
replatting existing lots.
         (f)   Maximum building height. The maximum building height may be that
of the tallest building in the context, plus 15% of the height.
         (g)   Minimum/maximum setbacks.
            1.   The minimum front or street side setback may be that of 80% of
the average front or street side setbacks in the context of the development.
            2.   The maximum front and street side setback, where applicable,
may be that of the average of the front and street side setbacks of the context
of the development, plus 10%.
            3.   The minimum side and rear setbacks may be that of 80% of the
average side or rear setbacks in the context of the development.
         (h)   Buffering. Except as required for specific uses in Article C,
Use Standards, where a buffer is required along a street or parking area, or
between zoning districts, the buffer width and planting materials per 100 feet
may be reduced by 50%.
         (i)   Parking. The development may take advantage of the parking
credits and reductions in §
156.E.006, Parking Credits and Reductions.
         (j)   Context. This division identifies various contexts that inform
the allowances provided in division (D)(3)(d), Alternative Standards, above,
and as depicted in Figure 156.B.006-4, Context Illustrations.
            1.   Alley lot. If the infill site is an alley lot (shown in blue),
then the context consists of other adjacent alley lots and the surrounding lots
within the block that includes the infill site (shown in green).
            2.   Corner lot. If the infill site is a corner lot, then the
context consists of both block faces that include the infill site and the lots
directly across the street from the infill site.
            3.   Interior lot. If the infill site is an interior lot, then the
context consists of the block face that includes the infill site and the lots
directly across the street from the infill site.
            4.   Lots in unimproved block face. If the infill site is within a
block face that does not include other lots improved with buildings, then the
context consists of the opposing block faces (being immediately opposite the
same street as the project site) and the remaining lots on the block of the
infill site.
            5.   Lots in unimproved block. If the infill site is within a block
that does not include other lots improved with buildings, and the block face
opposite the given project site does not include other lots improved with
buildings, then the context consists of the block faces surrounding the block
that includes the infill site.
 
Figure 156.B.006-4
Context Illustrations
Alley Lot                                 Corner Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2629.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2631.png]
Interior Lot                              Lots in Unimproved Block Face
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2633.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2635.png]
Lots in Unimproved Block
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/
0-0-0-2637.png]
 
      (4)   Tiny house neighborhood or cottage court.
         (a)   Description. A tiny house neighborhood or cottage court
development type, as depicted in Figure 156.B.006-5, broadens the diversity of
housing options available in the community to provide accessible, adequate, and
affordable housing. This development type contains single-family detached
housing units typically arranged in a cluster of four to 12 dwelling units
around a common open space, and may include a common building as an amenity
(e.g., a common kitchen or meeting area) and accessory building. Vehicular
access may be provided by a shared parking lot.
         (b)   Building requirements.
            1.   Tiny house.
               A.   General standards. Tiny houses shall comply with the
building requirements established in Appendix Q of the ICC International
Residential Code, as updated.
               B.   Maximum floor area. Tiny houses shall include a total
maximum floor area of 400 square feet, excluding any loft space.
               C.   Permanent foundations. Tiny houses that are part of a tiny
house neighborhood shall be constructed on a permanent foundation. Tiny houses
on wheels or other non-permanent foundations are regulated as recreational
vehicles and are prohibited from being part of a tiny house neighborhood.
               D.   Prefabricated tiny houses. A prefabricated tiny house is
required to be skirted.
               E.   Tiny houses on wheels. Tiny houses on wheels sited as a
component of a tiny house neighborhood that built upon a mobile chassis where
the suspension/axle components remain are considered semi-permanent and the
chassis shall be attached on an approved foundation system.
            2.   Cottage court.
               A.   Maximum floor area. Cottage court units shall include a
total maximum floor area of 1,200 square feet.
         (c)   Minimum site area. The minimum site area for the development of
a tiny house neighborhood or cottage court development type shall be one-half
acre. The maximum site area shall be no greater than five acres.
         (d)   Common areas. The following shall apply to both tiny house
neighborhood and cottage court development types:
            1.   Common open space shall be a minimum of 30% of the overall
site and shall include a central green, lawn or garden area, playground, or
plaza as a central focal point of all dwellings.
            2.   Common improvements of common area shall include pedestrian
walkways connecting each dwelling unit to a community-wide sidewalk network,
shared parking areas or garages, and a Type A bufferyard around the perimeter
of the site that preserves existing vegetation and incorporates landscape
materials, earthen berm, or a wall or fence to provide a visual buffer from
adjacent development. See §
156.F.004, Buffering.
            3.   If a common building is permitted as accessory to a tiny house
neighborhood and may serve all residents. Its gross floor area shall be no
greater than 10% of the site area. A common building may include a kitchen and
meeting and/or indoor recreation facilities (but no bedrooms).
         (e)   Bufferyard requirements. Where located adjacent to a separate
property in an AG, RR, RL, or mixed use district, a Type B bufferyard in
accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering, shall be planted around the outer perimeter of the
community.
         (f)   Required vehicular access to tiny house neighborhood or cottage
court development types. A tiny house neighborhood or cottage court development
types require direct access from a local, minor, or collector street type.
         (g)   Garages. The following garage structure requirements shall apply
to both tiny house neighborhood and cottage court development types:
            1.   If provided, detached garages serving more than one dwelling
unit shall be accessed via a private drive or alley.
            2.   Garage doors are prohibited from facing public streets rights-
of-way unless screened by a Type B bufferyard.
            3.   A garage shall not exceed four car bays.
            4.   Garage buildings shall be consistent in architecture,
materials, and color to the principal dwellings.
 
Figure 156.B.006-5,
Tiny House Neighborhood or Cottage Court Development Type
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2639.png]
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.B.007 CIVIC AND OPEN SPACE TYPES.
   (A)   Generally. In order to ensure that a variety of functional, well-
designed civic and open spaces are distributed throughout the city, cluster
developments shall have a civic and open space component as required in §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards, and §
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards.
   (B)   Function. Open space may be integrated into the on-site stormwater
management system to maximize the usable portion of a property. Low-impact
development improvements may be used and count toward the open space
requirements of the development. Such improvements include, but are not limited
to, bioretention, enhanced detention, and infiltration basins, such as inverted
vegetated islands within parking lots, rain gardens, reduced impervious areas,
vegetated swales, rain barrels and cisterns, and pervious pavements.
   (C)   Location. Civic and open space shall be readily accessible to and
visible from the street and connected to a public sidewalk.
   (D)   Perimeter access. A minimum of 25% of the perimeter of required open
space shall abut a street.
   (E)   Accessibility. The civic and open space shall be designed in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.
   (F)   Availability. If the open space permits general public access, the
space shall include signage posting the hours available for public usage. The
signage shall not count against total signage permitted as set forth in Article
G, Signs.
   (G)   Exclusions. The following areas shall not be counted as open space:
      (1)   Yards. Private yards on individual lots;
      (2)   Driveways and landscaping. Driveways, parking areas, and required
landscape islands;
      (3)   Stormwater management. Stormwater management areas that do not
count as stormwater best management practices according to the requirements of
Statewide Urban Design and Specifications (SUDAS) requirements and the water
quality management provisions of Iowa Stormwater Management Manual, Chapter 2;
      (4)   Structures. Land covered by structures not designated for active or
passive recreational uses; and
      (5)   Outdoor display and storage. Designated outdoor display and storage
areas, as permitted.
   (H)   Open space categories. Permitted public civic and open spaces include
any open space in
Table 156.B.007-1, Public Civic and Open Space Standards. Permitted private
open space includes such amenities as forecourts, courtyards, or other
amenities acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
Table 156.B.007-1
Public Civic and Open Space Standards
Type Standard
Table 156.B.007-1
Public Civic and Open Space Standards
Type                                      Standard
                                          General Character
                                             Formal open space
                                             Defined seating areas
                                             Balance of hardscape and plantings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           Spatially defined by building entries
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ Location and Size
IMAGES/0-0-0-2641.png]                       Minimum area: 900 square feet
                                             Maximum area: 22,000 square feet
                                             Minimum width: 30 feet
                                             Minimum pervious cover: 25%
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC, GC, PI
                                          General Character
                                             Formal open space
                                             Spatially defined by buildings or streets
                                             Open shelters, paths, lawns, and trees
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           Walkways and plantings at all edges
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/    Abundant seating opportunities
IMAGES/0-0-0-2643.png]                    Location and Size
                                             Minimum area 2,500 square feet
                                             Maximum area: 10,000 square feet
                                             Minimum width: 60 feet
                                             Minimum pervious cover: 60%
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC, GC
                                          General Character
                                             Small semi-urban open space responding to specific user groups and space
                                          available
                                             Range of character can be for intense use or aesthetic enjoyment
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Location and Size
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/    Minimum area 5,000 square feet
IMAGES/0-0-0-2645.png]                       Maximum area: 2 acres
                                             Minimum pervious cover: 75%; the remainder may consist of amenities, crushed
                                          stone, pavers, or other materials and features acceptable to the Zoning
                                          Administrator
                                             Within a ¼ mile of all residences
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC, GC, PI
                                          General Character
                                             Linear shaded public open space
                                             Allow for social and commercial activity to spill into the public realm
                                             Consist of a hardscape pathway with permeable and/or impermeable pavers and
                                          surfaces, and activated by building entries that face onto it
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           Landscaped, and activated with seating areas, patios, sidewalks, fountains,
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ and similar amenities
IMAGES/0-0-0-2647.png]                    Location and Size
                                             Minimum width: 16 feet
                                             Maximum width: 30 feet
                                             Minimum pedestrian passage width: 8 feet
                                             Minimum pervious cover: 20%
                                             Located to provide inter-block connections from one street to another
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC, GC
                                          General Character
                                             Vegetated space on top of a flat or gently-sloped roof
                                             Space is usable by the general public, residents, employees, or customers
                                          Location and Size
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           Roof load: A registered professional engineer shall certify that the roof can
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ support any proposed new loads and whether any additional steps are required to
IMAGES/0-0-0-2649.png]                    keep new roof components in place when subjected to a wind speed of more than 90
                                          mph.
                                             Roof edge protection: To avoid loose material from falling, a perimeter opaque
                                          barrier shall be established on the perimeter of the garden with a minimum height
                                          of 42 inches.
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC, GC
                                          General Character
                                             Sidewalk extension that provides seating, plantings, and other amenities.
                                             Typically installed in parallel, on-street parking spaces
                                             Extend out from the sidewalk at the level of the sidewalk to the width of the
                                          parking space(s)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        Location and Size
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/    Minimum area: 180 square feet
IMAGES/0-0-0-2651.png]                       Maximum area: 360 square feet
                                             Minimum planted area: 25%
                                             Encroachment: Temporary or permanent right-of-way permit required
                                             Protection: A perimeter barrier shall be established with a minimum height of
                                          36 inches and a maximum height of 42 inches.
                                             Permitted zoning districts: MU, UC
                                          General Character
                                             Consists of permitted uses for the district in the government facilities,
                                          office, and retail repair, sales, and service use categories
                                             Serves as a focal point in the development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           In a cluster development may only consist of 10% of the site area and may only
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ count toward a maximum of 10% of required open space
IMAGES/0-0-0-2653.png]                    Location and Size
                                             Minimum area: Minimum lot size for the district
                                             Maximum area: 7,500 square feet
                                             Minimum landscaped area: 25%
                                             Permitted zoning districts: RL, MU, UC, GC, PI
                                          General Character
                                             Informal natural space and/or green infrastructure for stormwater treatment
                                          purposes
                                             Spatially defined by natural features
                                             Paths, meadows, and wooded areas are designed to reflect the natural and
                                          cultural heritage of the site
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/           Potential to interconnect with other natural areas
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ Location and Size
IMAGES/0-0-0-2655.png]                       Minimum area: 1 acre
                                             Minimum width: 25 feet at its narrowest point
                                             Located in areas of sensitive environmental resources, including but not
                                          limited to woodlands, waterways and riparian buffers, steep slopes, and
                                          floodplains
                                             Permitted zoning districts: RL (Must comprise 75% of open space in a cluster
                                          development), RM
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.B.008 MEASUREMENTS AND ALLOWANCES.
Subsection 156.B.008.a Measurements
Table 156.B.008.a-1, Measurements, below, provides the method of measurement
for the developmental standards in this Zoning Ordinance.
Table 156.B.008.a-1
Measurements
Measurement Methodology Illustration
Table 156.B.008.a-1
Measurements
Measurement       Methodology         Illustration
                  The number of
                  dwelling units
                  divided by gross    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Gross Density     acres. With gross   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  acres being the     IMAGES/0-0-0-2657.png]
                  site area minus the
                  area of open space.
                  The total area of
                  all the floors of a
                  building, including
                  inter-mediately
                  floored tiers,      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Gross Floor Area  mezzanines, etc.,   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  as measured from    IMAGES/0-0-0-2659.png]
                  the exterior
                  surfaces of the
                  outside walls of
                  the building.
                  Buildings: The vertical distance from the grade level of that
                  portion of a parcel covered by the building to the highest
                  point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a
                  mansard roof, or to the average height between eaves and the
                  ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                  2661.png]
Height            Walls or Fences:
                  The height of a
                  wall or fence is
                  measured from the   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  lowest grade level  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  within three feet   IMAGES/0-0-0-2663.png]
                  of either side of
                  the wall or fence
                  to the top of the
                  wall or fence.
                  The total           [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lot Area          horizontal area     bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  included within     IMAGES/0-0-0-2665.png]
                  property lines.
                  The horizontal
                  distance between    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lot Width         the side property   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  lines, measured at  IMAGES/0-0-0-2667.png]
                  the minimum front
                  setback line.
                  Alley Lot. A lot
                  abutting an alley
                  right-of-way and
                  that does not abut
                  any other street at
                  any point.
                  Corner Lot. A lot
                  abutting two
                  streets at their
                  intersection.
                  Through or Double-
                  Frontage Lot. An
                  interior lot that
                  fronts on two
                  streets that do not
                  intersect at the
                  boundaries of such  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lot Types         a lot. The required bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  front yard setback  IMAGES/0-0-0-2669.png]
                  shall be provided
                  on both street
                  frontages.
                  Interior Lot. A lot
                  whose side lot
                  lines abut alley
                  rights-of- way or
                  other lots instead
                  of non-alley public
                  or private rights-
                  of-way.
                  Triple-/
                  Multifrontage Lot.
                  A lot abutting more
                  than two non-alley
                  street rights-of-
                  way.
                  The horizontal
                  distance of a
                  required open space
                  at grade between
                  the outer wall of a
                  building or
                  structure and the
                  adjoining property
                  lines, unoccupied
                  and unobstructed by
                  any portion of a
                  structure from the
                  ground upward. The
                  front and rear      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Setback, Required setback lines span  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  the entire width or IMAGES/0-0-0-2671.png]
                  length of the
                  property. The side
                  and side street
                  setback lines
                  extend from the
                  required front
                  setback line to the
                  required rear
                  setback line.
                  Setbacks are
                  defined in TABLE
                  156.B.004-1 and
                  TABLE 156.B.005-1.
                  A triangular area
                  that includes that
                  portion of public
                  right-of-way and
                  any private
                  property within a
                  triangle formed by
                  a diagonal line
                  extending through
Visibility        points on the two   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Triangle          property lines 20   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  feet from the       IMAGES/0-0-0-2673.png]
                  street corner
                  intersection of the
                  property lines. The
                  vertical dimensions
                  of this triangle
                  are two feet to six
                  and one-half feet
                  above finished
                  grade.
                  The minimum
                  percentage of the
                  lot width that must
                  be occupied by
                  building facade (B)
                  within the minimum
                  and maxi- mum
                  setback (A). For
                  example, a property
                  which is 100 feet
                  wide with a
                  Frontage Build- out
                  of 60% would
                  require that at
                  least 60 feet of
                  facade length be    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Frontage Buildout maintained within   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  the minimum and     IMAGES/0-0-0-2675.png]
                  maxi-mum setback.
                  Any add-itional
                  length of front
                  facade would be
                  allowed to step
                  back further from
                  the set-back range,
                  if desired.
                  The intent of this
                  requirement is to
                  encourage
                  development to
                  maximize its front
                  facade exposure
                  along the street.
                  Frame or Cabinet Signs: Where a sign is enclosed in a frame
                  or cabinet, the area of the entire surface of the sign face
                  within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme
                  limits of the sign and not passing through or between any
                  adjacent elements of the sign. That perimeter does not
                  include any structural or framing elements lying outside the
                  limits of the sign face unless such elements consist of a
                  corporate logo that is part of the face, frame, or cabinet of
                  the sign.
                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                  2677.png]
                  Channel Letters: Where a sign consists of individual letters,
                  words or symbols attached to a surface, the area of the
                  smallest rectangle that completely encompasses all such
Sign Area         letters, words or symbols and any accompanying background of
                  a color different than the color of the wall or sign face.
                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                  2679.png]
                  Multi-Sided Signs: For projecting or double-faced signs, only
                  one display face is measured in computing sign area when the
                  sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed
                  by the faces is 30 degrees or less, provided that the signs
                  are mounted on the same structure. If the sign faces are not
                  parallel or within 30 degrees of parallel, each sign face is
                  counted as a separate sign. If the two faces of a double-
                  faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be
                  taken as the area of the larger face.
                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-0-0-
                  2681.png]
                  The distance from
                  the topmost point
                  of the sign to the
                  lowest grade level
Sign Height       adjacent to the
                  sign (A). The base  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                  and sign supports   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                  are included as     IMAGES/0-0-0-2683.png]
                  part of the sign
                  height.
                  The distance from a
Sign Setback      property line (C)
                  to the nearest part
                  of the sign (B).
 
Subsection 156.B.008.b Allowances
   (A)   Generally. The provisions of this section set forth any special cases
that warrant flexibility in the developmental standards in this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (B)   Lot width and area. At the option of the applicant, the minimum lot
area and width dimensions in §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards, may be considered
averages for an individual conventional development in each zoning district or
cluster development in the RL district. Lot averaging may only be applied where
both of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The average lot area and average lot width of the development are
equal to or greater than the lot area and lot width specified in §
156.B.004.
      (2)   No lot shall have a lot area or lot width that is less than 90% of
the minimum lot area or lot width specified in §
156.B.004 (see Figure 156.B.008.b-1, Lot Averaging).
 
Figure 156.B.008.b-1
Lot Averaging
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2685.png]
Figure Notes:
A = Narrow Lot | B = Normal Lot | C = Wide Lot
 
   (C)   Height requirements.
      (1)   Exemptions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height
regulations in this Zoning Ordinance do not apply to penthouse or roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or
similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or
parapet walls, skylights, towers attached to a building, steeples, flagpoles
attached to a building, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, silos, grain
elevators, or similar structures.
      (2)   Floor space calculation. No penthouse, roof structure, or any space
above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional
floor space.
      (3)   Setback plane. As depicted in Figure 156.B.008.b-2, Setback Plane,
where a multi-family, nonresidential, or mixed-use building adjoins a property
with a single-family detached or attached dwelling, the building height may be
increased beyond the maximum permitted if the setback nearest the adjoining
residence is increased one foot for each one foot of height above the maximum
permitted height.
 
Figure 156.B.008.b-2
Setback Plane
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2687.png]
Figure Notes:
A = Single-Family or Duplex | B = Zoning District and Property Line | C =
Multi-family, Nonresidential, or Mixed Use | D = Total Setback is the Minimum
Setback Plus 1 Foot for Every 1 Foot the Structure Exceeds the Maximum Height
of the District
 
   (D)   Yard requirements. The yard requirements in this Zoning Ordinance do
not apply to the following projections into required yards:
      (1)   Fire escapes, stairs, and balconies. Unenclosed fire escapes,
stairways, and/or balconies, covered or uncovered, shall extend not more than
four feet into the required front or rear yard.
      (2)   Architectural features. Cornices, eaves, canopies, sunshades,
gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, headers, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, box windows, or other similar architectural features that
do not bear on the foundation shall project not more than two feet into any
required yard.
      (3)   Bay windows and chimneys. Within any residential district, bay
windows (with a gross floor area of less than or equal to 12 square feet) shall
extend not more than two feet into any required yard.
      (4)   Cul-de-sacs. For lots fronting on cul-de-sacs, the minimum front
yard shall be five feet.
      (5)   Garages. Front-loaded garages shall have a minimum setback of 20
feet, regardless of the required minimum setback for the remainder of the
building.
   (E)   Lots. Regardless of the lot area or width, all lots in the RM and RH
districts that existed prior to April 12, 2010, are deemed "conforming" with
respect to lot area and lot width if they contain an existing, permanent,
permitted residential dwelling. The lot width and area requirements of §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards, apply only in the event
of a replatting of the property.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE C - USE STANDARDS
§ 156.C.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish the allowable
land uses in each base zoning district and to provide standards for principal,
accessory, and temporary uses.
   (B)   Applicability. No building shall be erected, or structurally altered,
nor shall any building or land be used, except for a use permitted in the
district in which the building or land is located.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.C.002 USE TABLE LEGEND.
   (A)   Using the Use Table. Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table, lists land uses in
rows, organized by use category. The base zoning districts are arranged in
columns. Where rows and columns intersect, a letter indicates if the use is
permitted, permitted with limitations, special, or prohibited in the district.
   (B)   Use categories. Uses are grouped in Table 156.C.003-1 by use category.
Use categories are defined, and specific uses that make up a use category are
listed, in § 156.M.003, Definitions.
   (C)   Abbreviations. Table 156.C.003-1 uses the following abbreviations:
      (1)   "P" means that the land use is permitted by right, subject to the
standards that apply to all permitted uses.
      (2)   "L" means that the land use is permitted with limitations, in the
same manner as a permitted use, but is also subject to §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards.
      (3)   "S" means that the use is allowed as a special use, which may be
approved following a public hearing by the Plan and Zoning Commission and the
Board of Adjustment, subject to:
         (a)   Section
156.C.005, Special Use Permit Standards; and
         (b)   The procedures set forth in §
156.J.003, Legislative Review Procedures.
      (4)   "--" means that the use is a prohibited use in the specified
district.
      (5)   "Cv" means the conventional development type.
      (6)   "Cl" means the cluster development type.
      (7)   "In" means the infill development type.
   (D)   Special and limited uses. Where a specific use is a special use in a
given district and permitted with limitations in another district then the
standards for the use are located in §
156.C.005.
   (E)   Standards. The "standards" column provides a reference to associated
standards for uses permitted with limitations and for special uses. Where "N/A"
is in the column, there is no associated standard because the use is permitted
by right or there is no specific special use standard.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 156.C.003 USE TABLE.
   Permitted uses for all base zoning districts are identified in
Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table, below.
Table 156.C.003-1,
Use Table
                  Cv =         Residential             Mixed- Nonresidential
Use      Specific Conventional                         Use                   Standards
Category Use1     Cl = Cluster AS RR RL    RM    RH    MU UC  GC PI REC GI
                  In = Infill        Cv Cl Cv In Cv In
Table 156.C.003-1,
Use Table
                        Cv =         Residential             Mixed- Nonresidential
Use Category   Specific Conventional                         Use                   Standards
               Use1     Cl = Cluster AS RR RL    RM    RH    MU UC  GC PI REC GI
                        In = Infill        Cv Cl Cv In Cv In
Agriculture
               Community Garden      P  L  L  L  L  L  L  L  L  L   L  L  L   --   156.C.004
               Kennel                -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  L  -- --  P    156.C.004
               Plant Nursery,
Agriculture    Greenhouse, and       P  P  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- L   P    156.C.004
and Animal-    Landscaping Business
Related        Veterinary Clinic     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  -- --  --   N/A
Services       Veterinary Hospital   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S   P  -- --  P    N/A
               All Other Agriculture
               and Animal-Related    L  L  -- L  -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  P    156.C.004
               Services
   Residential
               Dwelling, Accessory   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   -- -- --  --   156.C.007
                                                                                   (F)
               Dwelling, Apartment   -- -- -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P   P  -- --  --   N/A
               Dwelling, Single-     -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   -- -- --  --   N/A
               Family Attached
               Dwelling, Single-     P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  --  -- -- --  --   N/A
Household      Family Detached
Living         Dwelling, Duplex      -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  -- --  --   N/A
               Dwelling, Townhouse   -- -- -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P   P  -- --  --   N/A
               Dwelling, Multiplex   -- -- -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P   P  -- --  --   N/A
               Manufactured Home     -- -- -- -- S  S  -- -- -- --  -- -- --  --   156.C.005
               Park
               Upper-Story           -- -- -- -- -- -- L  L  P  P   L  -- --  --   156.C.004
               Residential
               Boarding or Rooming   -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
               House
               Group Home            P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P                  N/A
               Halfway Houses and
Group Living   Ex- Offender          -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
               Rehabilitation
               Services
               All Other Group       -- -- P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  --  --   156.C.005
               Living Uses
Self-Service   Mini-Warehouse        -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  S  -- --  P    156.C.005
Storage                                                                            (F)(3)
   Public and Institutional
Day Care       All Day Care Uses     -- S  S  S  S  L  L  L  P  P   L  L  --  --   156.C.004
               College or University -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P  P  P   P  P  --  P    N/A
Educational    Training Facility or  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  P  --  P    N/A
Facilities     Vocational School
               All Other Education   L  L  L  L  L  L  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    156.C.004
               Facilities
Government     All Government        P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    N/A
Facilities     Facilities
Medical        Hospital              -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  -- --  -- P  --  P    156.C.005
Facilities     All Other Medical     -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P   P  P  --  P    156.C.005
               Facilities
               Cemetery,
               Columbarium,          P  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  -- --  -- -- P   --   156.C.005
Parks and Open Mausoleum, or
Areas          Memorial Park
               Golf Course           P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  -- --  -- -- P   --   N/A
               All Other Parks and   P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    N/A
               Open Areas
Passenger      Airport or Heliport   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
Terminal       All Other Passenger   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  S  --  P    156.C.005
               Terminal Uses
Public         All Public Assembly   L  L  L  L  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    156.C.004
Assembly       Uses
               Correctional Facility -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
Social Service All Other Social      -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P   P  P  --  P    156.C.005
               Service Uses
               Solar Panel Arrays    S  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.004
               (Principal Use)                                                     156.C.005
               Ground-Mounted Solar
               Panel Arrays          S  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- S  --  S    156.C.007
               (Accessory Use)
               Roof-Mounted Solar
Utilities      Panel Arrays          P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    156.C.007
               (Accessory Use)
               Utilities, Minor      P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P  P   P    N/A
               Wireless              Refer to Table 156.C.009-1, Permitted
               Telecommunications    Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by     N/A
               Facilities            District
               All Other Utilities,  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S   S  S  S   S    156.C.005
               Major
   Commercial and Office
Adult Business Adult Entertainment   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
               Business
               Archery/Firearms      -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
Entertainment, Range (Indoor)
Indoor         Convention Center     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  P  --  --   156.C.005
               All Indoor            -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  P  P   P    N/A
               Entertainment Uses
               Farmers Market        -- -- -- -- L  -- L  -- L  P   L  L  L   --   156.C.004
Entertainment, Recreational Vehicle  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  L  -- P   --   156.C.004
Outdoor        Park
               All Other Outdoor     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   L  P  P   --   156.C.004
               Entertainment Uses
               Bank or Credit Union  -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P   P  P  --  P    156.C.005
Office         Radio or Television   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  P  --  P    N/A
               Station or Studio
               All Other Offices     -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P   P  P  --  P    156.C.005
Overnight      All Overnight         -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P  P  P   P  P  --  --   156.C.005
Accommodations Accommodations Uses
Parking,       All Commercial        -- -- -- -- S  S  S  S  L  L   L  L  L   P    156.C.004,
Commercial     Parking                                                             156.C.005
               Restaurant, Drive-In  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  -- --  P    N/A
Restaurant     or Drive- Through
               All Other Restaurant  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  -- --  P    N/A
               Uses
Retail Repair, Repair-Oriented Uses  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
Sales, and     Sales-Oriented Uses   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  P   P  -- --  P    N/A
Service        Service-Oriented Uses -- -- -- -- -- -- S  S  P  P   P  -- --  P    156.C.005
               Boat or Recreational
Self-Service   Vehicle Outdoor       -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  P    N/A
Storage        Storage
               Mini-Warehouse        -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  P    N/A
               Car Wash              -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
               Heavy Vehicular
Vehicle Sales  Equipment Sales,      -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  S  -- --  P    156.C.005
and Service    Service, and Repair
               Vehicle Fuel Station  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- P  S2  P  -- --  P    N/A
               Vehicle Repair, Major -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
               Vehicle Service,      -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
Vehicle Sales  Minor
and Service    All Other Vehicle     -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  P  -- --  P    N/A
               Sales and Service
   Industrial
Heavy          All Heavy Industrial  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
Industrial     Uses
               Building or
               Development           -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  L  -- --  P    156.C.004
               Contractor
Light          Micro-Manufacturing   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  L  -- --  P    156.C.004
Industrial     Research and
               Development           -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- L  L   L  -- --  P    156.C.004
               Laboratory
               All Other Light       -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  L  -- --  P    156.C.004
               Industrial Uses
Warehousing    All Warehousing and
and Freight    Freight Movement Uses -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  S  -- --  P    156.C.005
Movement
Waste-Related  Recycling Facility    -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  P    N/A
Service        All Other Waste-      -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- -- --  S    156.C.005
               Related Service Uses
Wholesale      All Wholesale Trade   -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  S  -- --  P    156.C.005
Trade
TABLE NOTES:
"Cv" = Conventional Development Type Option; "Cl = Cluster Development Type Option; "In" =
Infill Development Type Option
1Specific uses and use categories are defined in §
156.M.002, Definitions.
2Vehicle fuel stations shall be prohibited (--) in portions of the Urban Core (UC) Zoning
District encompassed by the Historic District Overlay (UC-HD).
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024; Ord. 15097, passed
12-20-2024; Ord. 15103, passed 6-23-2025; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.C.004 LIMITED USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote compatibility among
land uses in the city by establishing specific standards for the establishment
of limited uses which are indicated in the use tables in §
156.C.003, Use Table.
   (B)   Application. Limited uses may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator, or designee, for uses shown as limited "L" and only if they meet
the standards of this section and other applicable standards and requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Timing of compliance. The standards of this section apply at the time
a limited use is requested to be established in an existing or new structure,
or when an existing limited use is proposed to be expanded by more than 10% of
the existing square footage currently devoted to the use. This section applies
to an expansion of use whether it is to or within an existing building, in an
outdoor area devoted to the use, or a combination of these characteristics.
   (D)   Standards for all limited uses. An application for limited use permit
may be approved if, in addition to the specific standards of this section that
apply to the use, it is demonstrated that:
      (1)   The proposed limited use in its proposed location shall not
conflict with the implementation of current adopted plans of the city; and
      (2)   The limited use is compatible with surrounding land uses and
natural environment, and shall not materially detract from the character of the
immediate area or negatively affect the anticipated development or
redevelopment trajectory (for example, by creating a critical mass of similar
limited uses that is likely to discourage permitted uses by making the vicinity
less desirable for them).
   (E)   Specific standards for limited uses.
      (1)   Community garden.
         (a)   No sale of items grown or any other items may take place on-
site.
         (b)   Storage of equipment and materials shall be inside a structure
or screened.
         (c)   Compost storage, if utilized, shall have a setback of a minimum
of 30 feet from the front and ten feet from any side or rear property line.
Compost storage shall be used only to support onsite operations.
         (d)   Community gardens that have ceased permanent operation or been
abandoned, shall be cleared, all associated structures removed, and the area
re-vegetated no more than 30 days after the date of discontinued operations,
unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator, not to exceed 90 days.
      (2)   Kennel. Outdoor runs shall be prohibited.
      (3)   Plant nursery, greenhouse, and landscaping business. Outdoor
storage areas shall be enclosed with a fence or wall that is in compliance with
§
156.F.005, Screening.
      (4)   All other agriculture and animal-related services. The use shall
not include activity which may be considered a public nuisance which is
offensive to adjacent properties due to increased noise, traffic or odors.
      (5)   Upper-story residential.
         (a)   The use shall comply with the development standards of a mixed-
use building.
         (b)   The minimum floor area of the use shall be 300 square feet.
         (c)   The maximum density of the district shall not apply.
      (6)   Day care uses (child and adult).
         (a)   The use shall be operated in accordance with all applicable laws
and, if a state permit is required, such permit shall be obtained prior to
beginning operation.
         (b)   The use may be part of a place of public assembly, provided the
place of public assembly is in conformance with the standards of this Zoning
Ordinance.
         (c)   Primary access to the site shall be from a public roadway.
      (7)   All other educational facilities. All buildings shall be located at
least 50 feet from any adjoining property line, including right-of-way lines.
      (8)   Public assembly uses.
         (a)   Parking shall be provided on-site or off-site with Zoning
Administrator approval.
         (b)   The use shall be conducted so that it does not create parking or
traffic congestion or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the peace and
enjoyment of surrounding homes as places of residence.
         (c)   Expansion to abutting lots or parcels shall meet the following
standards:
            1.   The applicant shall control the property onto which the
expansion is proposed;
            2.   It shall allow the use to take access from a public roadway;
            3.   It will involve the installation of a Type B bufferyard
between the use and abutting residential uses, unless equivalent buffering is
already provided; and
            4.   The expansion will not involve the location of buildings or
parking within 50 feet of residential property.
      (9)   Farmers market.
         (a)   The site shall be supplied with electrical power at secured, in-
ground stations that may be accessed by temporary users.
         (b)   The use is separated from all residential property by a Type B
bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering, or a local street or collector roadway.
         (c)   The use will be conducted so that it does not create parking or
traffic congestion or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the peace and
enjoyment of surrounding homes as places of residence.
      (10)   Recreational vehicle parks. Site plans shall include information
related to the following criteria which must be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (a)   Utility plan showing service to the site and individual spots.
         (b)   Fire access throughout the park which meets approval of the Fire
Department.
         (c)   Compliance with buffering, landscaping and screening
requirements.
         (d)   Plan for disposal of waste.
      (11)   All commercial parking.
         (a)   All lots must comply with the parking lot design and landscaping
standards.
         (b)   Lots shall be within 600 feet of the primary use property.
      (12)   Building or development contractor.
         (a)   Screening. Outdoor storage shall be fully screened from adjacent
nonindustrial uses.
         (b)   Bufferyard. The use shall be separated from a nonindustrial use
by a Type C Bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering.
      (13)   Micro-manufacturing.
         (a)   Gross floor area. The maximum gross floor area of a micro-
manufacturing facility shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
         (b)   Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage is permitted.
      (14)   Research and development laboratory.
         (a)   All testing conducted onsite is within a fully enclosed
building.
         (b)   All materials and equipment are stored in areas screened from
public view.
      (15)   Other light industrial uses.
         (a)   Indoor operations. All operations shall be conducted completely
within a building, except limited daily outdoor operations and storage may
occur behind the building and a minimum of 50 feet from any property line.
         (b)   Nuisances. No impacts or by-products of the use, including
noise, dust, or odor shall be discernible from abutting property.
         (c)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view
from the public-right-of-way and adjacent properties with a Type C Bufferyard
in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024)
§ 156.C.005 SPECIAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The standards of this section apply to all special uses set
out in §
156.C.003, Use Table.
   (B)   Permit required. A special use permit is required for:
      (1)   All land uses identified as a special use (S) in either
Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table; or
      (2)   A land use that is being proposed to be transferred from a
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use per §
156.K.007, Conversion of Nonconformities.
   (C)   Review and approval.
      (1)   Standards. In the review of special use permit applications, the
Zoning Administrator, the Plan and Zoning Commission, and the Board of
Adjustment shall utilize the following standards:
         (a)   Surrounding properties. The proposed special use will operate or
be designed in a manner that does not diminish the use or functionality of
surrounding properties;
         (b)   Hours of operation and site improvements. Provisions for hours
of operation, parking and loading areas, driveways, lighting, signs,
landscaping, buffering, and other site improvements have been provided;
         (c)   Public services. Adequate public services (such as: streets,
off-street parking, pedestrian facilities, water, sewer, gas, electricity,
police and fire protection) must be available without the reduction of services
to any existing uses;
         (d)   Nuisance. If, in the opinion of Plan and Zoning Commission or
Board of Adjustment, the special use becomes a nuisance, the special use permit
may be recalled for further review, which could lead to the need for additional
conditions, restrictions, or the revocation of the permit.
         (e)   Design features. The proposed use will incorporate design
features to sufficiently protect adjacent uses including but not limited to:
service areas, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, safety provisions, access
ways to and from the site, buffering, fencing, and building placement; and
         (f)   Compatibility. The proposed use is compatible with adjacent
existing uses. Compatibility shall be expressed in terms of appearance,
architectural scale and features, site design and scope, landscaping, as well
as the control of adverse environmental impacts, including noise and lighting,
or other undesirable conditions.
      (2)   Conditional approval. The Board of Adjustment may require
additional conditions beyond the general standards listed in division (C)(1) of
this section, to reasonably mitigate any adverse impacts upon surrounding
properties in the zoning district of the property for which the special use is
requested.
   (D)   Standards for residential uses.
      (1)   Manufactured home park.
         (a)   Area and dimensional regulations. The area and dimensional
regulations in
Table 156.C.005-1, Manufactured Home Park Development Standards.
 
Table 156.C.005-1,
Manufactured Home Park Development Standards
             Min.  Min. Lot Min.  Min.   Min.    Min.    Min.    Min.
Manufactured Site  Area per Lot   Lot    Front   Street  Side    Rear    Max.
Home Type    Area  Dwelling Width Depth  Setback Side    Setback Setback Height
                                                 Setback
                                                                         1
Single-Wide  10    5,500    55    80 ft. 4 ft.   14 ft.  14 ft.  10 ft.  story
             acres sf.      ft.                                          /15
                                                                         ft.
                                                                         1
Double-Wide  10    6,000    60    80 ft. 4 ft.   14 ft.  14 ft.  10 ft.  story
             acres sf.      ft.                                          /15
                                                                         ft.
 
         (b)   Buffering and open space. The manufactured home park shall be
surrounded by a Type C bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering, along all street frontages and along all other park
perimeter property lines. This space shall be in addition to the space required
for each manufactured home site and shall not be used for other park
facilities, recreation area, accessory storage structures, or parking areas.
The park shall include a minimum of 8% of the site dedicated to open space with
shade trees and ground cover with tree maintenance in wooded portions.
Continued maintenance of the open area and its planting shall be the
responsibility of the property owner or operator of the park.
         (c)   Manufactured home space. All manufactured homes shall be placed
in a designed manufactured home space and shall not obstruct the use of or
project over, any driveway, walkway, or public utility easement.
         (d)   Accessory buildings. Private accessory buildings may be located
in the rear yard of a manufactured home space and set back a minimum of five
feet from any lot line and shall not exceed ten feet in height. Accessory
buildings, porches, decks, awnings, or canopies shall be located at least five
feet from the boundaries of the individual manufactured home site.
         (e)   Skirting. All manufactured homes shall be completely skirted
with materials approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         (f)   Emergency shelter. All manufactured home parks shall have a
structure to provide shelter from tornadoes and other weather-related storms.
This structure shall either have a basement or shall itself be underground for
storm protection. This structure shall be required to have a minimum occupancy
ratio of seven square feet of floor area per each individual lot in the
manufactured home park.
         (g)   Signs. One main identification sign shall be permitted with an
area not to exceed 48 square feet and six feet in height. Freestanding signs
must be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line.
         (h)   Other regulations.
            1.   Number and location of access drives shall be controlled for
traffic safety and protection of surrounding properties, and no manufactured
home site space shall be designed for direct access to a street outside the
boundaries of the park. Interior access drives shall be properly lighted, with
right-of-way at least 50 feet in width that acts as a public utility easement,
and paved in accordance with City Engineering and Fire Access standards.
            2.   At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on
each manufactured home site, and, in addition, one off-street space shall be
provided per manufactured home in other locations convenient to groups of
homes. No parking shall be permitted on the street. A special area shall be
designed for accessory storage of boats and boat trailers, campers and other
recreational vehicles. All required parking shall be clearly defined in
accordance with §
156.E.003, Parking Design.
      (2)   Boarding or rooming house. Boarding or rooming houses that existed
as of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance shall be:
         (a)   Registered with the State of Iowa and shall have submitted
occupancy reports to the Department of Inspections and Appeals, in accordance
with I.C.A. Chapter 135O, Boarding Homes;
         (b)   In full compliance with §
152.024, Rooming House, Boarding House, Dormitory Rooms and Other Rooming Units
of the city's Code of Ordinances and all applicable building and fire codes of
the city, as amended from time to time;
         (c)   Subject to the city's rental registration and inspection
program;
         (d)   Responsible for making an application for a special use permit
as set forth in §
156.J.003, Legislative Review Procedures, which requires that the boarding
home:
            1.   Has not more than six occupants;
            2.   Has sleeping rooms that have no less than 50 square feet per
person for multiple occupancy or 70 square feet of floor space per sleeping
room for single occupancy;
            3.   Has on-site staff supervision if there are three or more
occupants.
      (3)   Halfway houses and ex-offender rehabilitation services. A halfway
house or ex-offender rehabilitation is prohibited within 750 feet of any other
such business, any school, place of public assembly, library, public park,
public playground, or areas zoned or used for residential use.
   (E)   Standards for public and institutional uses.
      (1)   Day care uses (adult and child).
         (a)   Street access. In the RR, RL, and RM zoning districts, the
facility shall be located on and have access to a public street.
         (b)   Outdoor activities. Outdoor activities and activity areas,
including play lots, shall be:
            1.   Located a minimum of 25 feet from any residentially used lot
line or separated by a Type A Bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering; and
            2.   Completely secured and enclosed by a fence.
         (c)   Internal circulation. Internal traffic circulation patterns are
established and signed so that:
            1.   Dedicated client drop-off and pick-up areas are safe for
clients leaving and re-entering vehicles the site and so that vehicle stacking
does not impede traffic on- or off-site; and
            2.   A bus, if applicable, can drop-off and pick-up clients in
designated areas and is able to either turn around within the drop-off area or
alternatively re-access the street via a circular drive.
      (2)   Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, or memorial park.
         (a)   Location. A mausoleum structure shall be separated from a
residential use by a Type C Bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering.
         (b)   Design. The site shall be located on and have access to a public
street.
         (c)   Existing cemeteries. Nothing in this division shall be construed
to make an existing cemetery a nonconforming use with respect to the
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (F)   Standards for commercial uses.
      (1)   Adult entertainment businesses.
         (a)   Establishment. The establishment of an adult entertainment
business shall include the opening of such business as a new business, the
relocation of such business, the addition of such business activity to that of
any other business, or a conversion of an existing business location to any of
the uses and activities herein described and defined.
         (b)   Expansion. It shall also include any addition to or expansion of
an existing adult entertainment business that causes said business to occupy
over 20% more space than before such addition or expansion.
         (c)   Location and operation.
            1.   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult
entertainment business as herein defined within 750 feet of any other such
business, any school, place of public assembly, library, public park, public
playground, or areas zoned or used for residential use.
            2.   Measurement shall be taken on a direct line from the property
line of such adult entertainment business to the property line of such other
business, school, place of public assembly, library, public park, public
playground, or area zoned or used for residential use.
            3.   All building openings, entries, windows and the like shall be
constructed, located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a
view of display areas from, or a view into the interior of the adult
entertainment business from, any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other
public or semi-public areas.
            4.   Any adult entertainment business in existence on the effective
date of this chapter that does not comply with the minimum separation
requirements defined in division (F)(1)(c)1. and (F)(1)(c)2. of this section,
may be continued as a nonconforming. Such nonconforming use shall not be
expanded, extended, or altered with regard to the land area, building, or
structure involved in such use. The provisions of division (F)(1)(c)3. of this
section shall apply to all adult entertainment businesses, including said
nonconforming uses, upon adoption of this chapter.
      (2)   Commercial parking.
         (a)   Generally. The use shall comply with applicable requirements of
Article E, Parking, Loading, and Stacking.
         (b)   Surface parking.
            1.   The use shall be separated from a residential use by a Type B
bufferyard, in accordance with §
156.F.004, Buffering.
            2.   The location of ingress and egress shall minimize traffic
congestion and the effect of headlights on residential uses.
         (c)   Structured parking.
            1.   Structured parking is prohibited in the AG, RR, RL, and RM
residential zoning districts.
            2.   Structured parking design standards in §
156.E.003, Parking Design.
      (3)   Self-service storage/mini-warehouse.
         (a)   Applicability. These special use standards for self-service
storage/mini-warehouse shall apply to this use when located within the GC,
General Commercial zoning district.
         (b)   Location. The self-service storage/mini-warehouse land use
category shall not be permitted to be located in any location which is visible
from any existing road or planned road which is classified as major or minor
arterial on the city’s adopted comprehensive plan.
         (c)   Storage unit access. Individual storage units shall only be
permitted to be accessed internally of a building.
         (d)   Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
   (G)   Heavy industrial uses. All uses in the heavy industrial use category
shall:
      (1)   Employ the best practical disposal of refuse matter or water-
carried waste;
      (2)   Effectively control obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise, or similar nuisances;
      (3)   Locate and screen, fence, and landscape with a Type C Bufferyard as
set out in §
156.F.004, Buffering, all outdoor storage of equipment not intended for over-
the-road or rail use, supplies or materials intended for refabrication, waste
materials, industrial by-products, or items intended for junkyards. The
property owner may appeal to the Board of Adjustment relating to any requested
relief of this requirement; and
      (4)   New and expanding structures used for the principal heavy
industrial activity are subject to review under the special use permit
standards and additional setbacks from any district zoned AG, RR, RL, RM, RH,
MU, UC, GC, PI, and REC districts may be required.
   (H)   Standards for in-ground solar panel arrays.
      (1)   Solar panel array (principal use). Solar panel arrays installed as
a utility-scale solar energy system and as the principal use shall conform to
all height, setback, and landscaping requirements within the underlying
district. The following additional standards apply to all solar panel arrays as
a principle use:
         (a)   Prohibited. Concentrating solar power (CSP) systems shall be
prohibited.
         (b)   Site plan. A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator demonstrating compliance with:
            1.   Setback and height limitations as established in the
underlying zoning district;
            2.   Applicable zoning district requirements such as landscape
surface area ratio; and
            3.   Applicable solar requirements per this section.
         (c)   Compliance. Solar arrays installed as utility-scale solar energy
system installations shall comply with applicable local, state, and federal
regulations.
         (d)   Building code compliant. All solar panel array systems shall be
compliant with all currently adopted building codes.
         (e)   Stormwater management. Solar panel arrays shall be considered
pervious and therefore shall be exempt from the calculation of the landscape
surface ratio requirements in the underlying zoning district. The support or
mounting posts, footings, impervious driveway surfaces, parking areas, and
buildings on the site shall count toward the coverage requirements.
         (f)   Solar glare. Solar panel arrays that use concentrator
technologies and have not incorporated antiglare measures into the system or
installation shall be placed in areas so that the concentrated solar glare
shall not be directed onto inhabited adjacent properties or roadways.
         (g)   Design. The design of the solar panel arrays shall use
materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping similar to their
background or the existing natural environment to the most reasonable extent
possible without prohibiting the installation.
         (h)   Fencing. A security fence must be installed along all exterior
sides of the utility-scale solar array installation and be equipped with a
minimum of one gate and locking mechanism on the primary access side. Security
fences, gates, and warning signs must be maintained in good condition until the
installation is dismantled and removed from the site according to the
decommissioning plan as established in division (H)(1)(k) below.
         (i)   Signs. Signs shall comply with Article G (Signs).
         (j)   Buffering. The site shall be constructed with buffering as
required in §
156.F.004 (Buffering).
         (k)   Decommissioning plan.
            1.   The applicant shall submit a decommissioning plan signed by
the party responsible for decommissioning and the landowner addressing the
following with the permit application.
               A.   Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be
initiated (e.g. end of land lease, no power production for 12 months, etc.).
               B.   Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit,
structures, fencing, roads, and foundations.
               C.   Restoration of property to the condition prior to the
development of the utility-scale solar panel array system.
               D.   The timeframe for completion of decommissioning activities.
               E.   Description of any agreement (e.g. lease) with the
landowner regarding decommissioning.
               F.   The party currently responsible for decommissioning.
               G.   Plans for updating this decommissioning plan.
         (l)   Location.
            1.   The setback from any residential dwelling unit shall be 300
feet from the nearest edge of the solar panel array.
            2.   Exemption. If the property owner of the nearest residential
dwelling unit allows, the solar panel array may be developed within 300 feet of
the structure while still adhering to all other requirements of the in-ground
solar panel array use. If this exemption is utilized, a landscape bufferyard
type B or completely opaque fence may be requested by the owner of the
residential dwelling unit and thus required between the in-ground solar panel
array and property of the residential dwelling unit. This opaque buffer can
also meet the standards for division (H)(1)(h), Fencing, as long as all other
requirements of that standard are met. Confirmation with city staff from the
property owner will be needed to grant this exception.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024; Ord. 15097, passed
12-20-2024; Ord. 15103, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.C.006 FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICTS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has, in I.C.A. Chapter
414, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to
secure safety from floods and to promote health and the general welfare.
   (B)   Flooding. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the
community. These losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
      (1)   The cumulative effect of floodplain construction on flood flows,
which causes increases in flood heights and flood water velocities; and
      (2)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding.
   (C)   Methodology. This Zoning Ordinance relies upon engineering methodology
for analyzing flood hazards which is consistent with the standards established
by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
   (D)   Intent. The provisions of this section are designed to:
      (1)   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood
flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially;
      (2)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
      (3)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (4)   Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard; and
      (5)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   (E)   Applicability. The regulations of the Flood Hazard Districts shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the Floodway
Boundary and Floodway Map to be within the 100-year flood boundaries.
   (F)   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps prepared as part of the "Flood Insurance Study for the City
of Marshalltown, Iowa", dated April 17, 1984, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and
all explanatory material provided with the "Flood Insurance Study" and the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps are also declared to be a part of this section.
   (G)   Rules for Flood Hazard Overlay Districts boundaries interpretation.
The boundaries of the Flood Hazard Overlay Districts shall be determined by
scaling distances on the Official Floodplain Map. Where interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the Floodplain Administrator or Engineering Department
shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of
the overlay boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present their
case and submit technical evidence.
   (H)   Compliance. No structure or land shall be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Zoning
Ordinance.
   (I)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this
section to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this section imposes greater restrictions,
the provisions of this section shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   (J)   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall
be literally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
   (K)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
section does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Marshalltown for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or
any administrative decision resulting from this section.
   (L)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this section shall not be affected by such
judgement.
   (M)   Flood Hazard Overlay Districts established. The floodplain areas
within the jurisdiction of this Zoning Ordinance are divided into the following
subdistricts:
      (1)   Floodway Overlay District. The Floodway Overlay District shall be
consistent with the boundaries of the floodway as shown on the Official
Floodplain Map.
      (2)   Floodway Fringe Overlay District. The Floodway Fringe Overlay
District shall be those areas shown as floodway fringe on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map designated as Zones A2 - A4, A6, and A8.
      (3)   General Floodplain Overlay District. The General Floodplain Overlay
District shall be those areas shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as
being within the approximate 100-year flood boundary designated as Zone A.
   (N)   Floodway Overlay District.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All uses within the Floodway Overlay District shall
be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance
(or underlying zoning district), and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Overlay District.
      (2)   Performance standards. All floodway subdistrict uses allowed as a
permitted or special use shall meet the following standards:
         (a)   No use shall be permitted in the floodway subdistrict that would
result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
         (b)   All uses within the floodway subdistrict shall:
            1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
            2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage; and
            3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of
the channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch,
swale, or any other drainage facility or system.
         (c)   Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the floodway
fringe subdistrict, and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.
         (d)   If permitted, buildings, shall have a low flood damage
potential, and shall not be for human habitation, and shall adhere to all
applicable provisions of this section.
         (e)   Storage of equipment or materials that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. Storage
of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway
subdistrict within the time available after flood warning.
         (f)   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, the United States
Corps of Engineers, and other applicable agencies.
         (g)   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be permitted by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources and shall be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
         (h)   Subject to all applicable permits of regulating agencies,
pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks
or otherwise sufficiently stabilized and protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
   (O)   Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
      (1)   Permitted uses. All uses within the floodway fringe subdistrict
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance or underlying zoning district, and provided they meet applicable
performance standards of the floodway fringe subdistrict.
      (2)   Performance standards. All uses must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards.
         (a)   All structures. All structures shall:
            1.   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure;
            2.   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage; and
            3.   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
         (b)   Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration by
the Floodplain Administrator, where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces
and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential buildings shall be
provided with a means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the 100-year flood.
         (c)   Non-residential buildings. All new or substantially improved
non-residential buildings shall have the first floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood-proofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state
shall certify that the flood-proofing methods used are adequate to withstand
the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with the 100-year flood, and that the structure, below the
100-year flood level, is water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator.
         (d)   New and improved structures. All new and substantially improved
structures:
            1.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
               A.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
               B.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
               C.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood waters.
            2.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
            3.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
         (e)   Factory-built homes.
            1.   Factory-built homes including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.
            2.   Factory-built homes including those placed in existing
factory-built home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot
above the 100-year flood level.
         (f)   Utility and sanitary systems.
            1.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment
facilities shall be provided with a level of flood protection equal to or
greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
            2.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to
avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during
flooding.
            3.   New or replacement water supply systems and water supply
treatment facilities shall be designed in accordance with Iowa DNR requirements
and protected to a level equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year
flood elevation.
            4.   Utilities such as gas and electrical systems shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the
risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
         (g)   Flammable materials and the like. Storage of materials and
equipment that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant
life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year
flood level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated,
or:
            1.   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to
prevent movement due to flood waters; or
            2.   Be readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.
         (h)   Flood control structural works. Private flood control structural
works such as levees, private flood walls and the like shall provide, at a
minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of
design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition,
private structural flood control works shall be approved by the state’s
Department of Natural Resources.
         (i)   Affect. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
other drainage facility or system.
         (j)   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages
and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals shall meet the applicable
performance standards. Subdivision proposals shall meet city standard
specifications in regards to flood protection and storm water conveyance.
         (k)   Detached structures. The exemption of detached garages, sheds
and similar structures from the 100-year flood elevation requirements may
result in increased premium rates for insurance coverage of the structure and
contents, however, said detached garages, sheds and similar accessory type
structures are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements when:
            1.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation;
            2.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
            3.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
            4.   Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures; and
            5.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the 100-year flood level.
         (l)   Recreational vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites
within this district shall either:
            1.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
            2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
            3.   Meet the requirements the section.
   (P)   General Floodplain Overlay District.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within the
general flood plain subdistrict to the extent they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance or underlying zoning district; and provided they meet the
applicable performance standards of the General Floodplain District:
         (a)   Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-built
homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon approval by
the Floodplain Administrator.
         (b)   All such uses shall be reviewed by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources to determine: whether the land involved is either wholly or
partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and the base flood elevation. The
applicant shall be responsible for providing the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
      (2)   Bridges and culverts. Whereby the United States Army Corps of
Engineers may require review, review by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources is not required for the proposed construction of new or replacement
bridges or culverts where:
         (a)   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two square miles; and
         (b)   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code.
      (3)   Performance standards.
         (a)   All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as
determined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Overlay District.
         (b)   All uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe Overlay District.
   (Q)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals to Board of Adjustment. Where it is alleged there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party
may appeal such action. A request for an appeal shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The
official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
      (2)   Appeals to the court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision
in the office of the Board.
   (R)   Hearings. A public hearing is not required by the Board of Adjustment
when acting on an appeal.
   (S)   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, within a
reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as such
action is in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and it shall make its decision, in writing, setting
forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision.
   (T)   Floodplain Administrator decision factors. The Floodplain
Administrator shall consider all relevant factors specified in other sections
of this Zoning Ordinance and:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate
of rise and sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      (11)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
      (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   (U)   Conditions.
      (1)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Floodplain
Administrator may attach such conditions to the approval as deemed necessary to
further the purpose of this subchapter.
      (2)   Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
         (a)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
         (b)   Limitation on periods of use and operation;
         (c)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions; and
         (d)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures; provided, such are approved by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical
alternative to achieving the purposes of this subchapter.
   (V)   Flood-proofing measures. Floodproofing measures shall be designed
consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood
velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and
other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Floodplain
Administrator shall require that the applicant submit a plan for document
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. Such
floodproofing measures may include, but are not necessarily limited to the
following:
      (1)   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
      (2)   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters, or
similar methods of construction.
      (3)   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
      (4)   Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water
through walls.
      (5)   Addition of mass or weight structures to resist flotation.
      (6)   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
      (7)   Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to
prevent the entrance of flood waters.
      (8)   Pumping facilities or comparable practices for subsurface drainage
systems for building to relieve external foundation wall and basement flood
pressures.
      (9)   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure
or floating debris.
      (10)   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage and
stormwaters into the buildings or structures.
      (11)   Location of all electrical equipment, circuits, and installed
electrical appliances in a manner that will assure they are not subject to
flooding.
   (W)   Penalties for violations. Violations of the provisions of this article
or failure to comply with any of the requirements shall be considered a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty provided in §
10.999 of the Marshalltown Code of Ordinances.
   (X)   Amendments. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in
this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or
repealed as provided in I.C.A. §§ 414.4, 414.5, and 414.21, 1977 as amended. No
amendment, supplement, change, or modification to this chapter shall be
undertaken without prior approval from the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.C.007 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize certain uses of
property that are incidental to, and customarily associated with, the principal
use, which require standards to manage impacts on the principal and adjacent
uses.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Establishment. Accessory uses and structures may only be
established or constructed if they meet the standards of this section and all
other applicable standards of this Zoning Ordinance. These standards apply
when:
         (a)   Establishment or construction. An accessory use or structure is
established or constructed;
         (b)   Structure expansion. An existing accessory structure is expanded
by more than 10% of its gross floor area; and
         (c)   Use expansion. There is an expansion of the accessory use to or
within an existing building, in an outdoor area devoted to the use, or a
combination thereof.
      (2)   Unlisted accessory uses. Refer to §
156.C.010, New and Unlisted Uses, as the same means of interpretation apply to
accessory uses as apply to principal uses.
   (C)   Standards that apply to all accessory uses and structures.
      (1)   Use. An accessory use or structure may be established provided that
it is associated with a primary use permitted in §
156.C.003, Use Table and the associated use category definitions in §
156.M.003, Definitions, and that it complies with the standards of this
section. No accessory structure may be used unless the primary structure also
is being used.
      (2)   Subordinate.
         (a)   An accessory use or structure shall be subordinate to and serve
a principal use or structure.
         (b)   A non-agricultural accessory structure shall be subordinate in
height and gross floor area to the principal structure.
      (3)   Commercial use. Accessory structures located on residentially zoned
or used property shall not be used for commercial purposes other than home
occupations that comply with this section.
      (4)   Timing of construction. No detached accessory structure shall be
constructed until the construction of the rafters, or general equivalent, of
the primary structure has commenced.
      (5)   Same property and ownership. An accessory use or structure shall be
located on the same property and shall be under the same ownership as that of
the principal use or structure served.
      (6)   Separation. No accessory structure shall be located closer than
five feet to any other structure.
      (7)   Setbacks. Accessory structures shall comply with the front, side
street, and side setback standards for the primary structure established in
Article B, District Development Standards. Detached accessory structures have a
minimum rear setback of ten feet and attached accessory structures shall comply
with the rear setback that applies to the primary structure.
      (8)   Height. The maximum height for a residential or nonresidential
accessory structure is 18 feet, unless specified within this section.
      (9)   Easements. Accessory structures permanently affixed to the ground
shall not encroach into an easement.
      (10)   Compatibility. Accessory buildings (in excess of 120 square feet)
shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and shall
use building materials as set forth in §
156.D.002, General Requirements.
   (D)   Decks and patio.
      (1)   Front yard decks and patios may extend into the required front yard
setback ten additional feet.
      (2)   Rear and side yard decks must comply with the setbacks listed in
their respective district.
      (3)   Fences and screening for decks, patios, pools and other structures
on the interior of the yard shall not exceed six feet above the floor or ground
level of said structure; provided, they are attached or directly adjacent to
the primary building on the lot and meet the underlying primary building
setbacks.
   (E)   Residential accessory uses and structures. Residential accessory uses
and structures include sheds for the storage of household items and equipment,
garages, pergolas, and similar structures. Except as provided in the standards
of this division, the following standards shall apply to residential accessory
uses and structures:
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   No accessory building or part thereof shall be located in the
front yard.
         (b)   Any accessory building that is not a part of the main building
shall be located not less than five feet from any portion of the main building
or any other structure on the lot (not including fences).
      (2)   Front setbacks. Accessory structures shall comply with the front
setback standards for the principal structure established in §
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards.
      (3)   Dimensional requirements. Residential accessory uses and structures
shall comply with the dimensional requirements established in
Table 156.C.007-1, Accessory Structure Dimensional Requirements, below.
      (4)   Side yard setback. Any accessory building located entirely or in
part in a side yard shall be erected in conformity with the side yard
regulations of the zoning district in which the building is located. On a
corner lot in any dwelling district, the width of the yard along the side
street line shall not be less than one-half of the depth of the front yard.
      (5)   Rear lot line. Where the rear lot line of a corner lot is the side
lot line of the adjoining lot, the side yard regulations of the district shall
apply to the location of the accessory building.
      (6)   Attached structures. Attached accessory structures, such as
attached garages, shall comply with the setbacks of the principal structure.
      (7)   Storage. Semi-trailers and shipping containers shall not be used
for storage in residential zoning districts.
Table 156.C.007-1, Accessory Structure Dimensional Requirements
                      Max.        Maximum Floor Minimum  Max. Wall Max.
Housing Type Lot Size Footprint 1 Area          Setback2 Height    Structure
                                                                   Height
Table 156.C.007-1, Accessory Structure Dimensional Requirements
                          Max.        Maximum      Minimum  Max. Wall Max.
Housing Type Lot Size     Footprint 1 Floor Area   Setback2 Height    Structure
                                                                      Height
             0.5 acre or  30%         1,000 s.f.   5 ft.    10 ft.    15 ft.
             less
             0.5 - 1 acre 30%         1,600 s.f.   5 ft.    12 ft.    15 ft.
Single-      1 - 5 acres  30%         3,000 s.f    5 ft.    12 ft.    20 ft.
Family and                            5,000 s.f.
Duplex                                plus 1,000
Residencies  5 acres or               s.f. per
             more         30% plus    acre over 5  10 ft.   14 ft.    20 ft.
                                      acres not to
                                      exceed
                                      10,000 s.f.
Multi-family
Residencies                           300 s.f. per
(Multiplex,  Any Size     30%         unit         10 ft.   10 ft.    15 ft.
Townhouse,
Apartment)
TABLE NOTES:
1   Calculated as a percentage of the permitted rear yard.
2   Minimum setback from property lines when structure located entirely in the
rear yard. Refer to §
156.C.007(E) for setback on corner lots.
 
   (F)   Dwelling, accessory (ADUs).
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as an accessory use to
the dwelling, single-family detached use category in the following zoning
districts; Agriculture (AG), Rural Residential (RR), Low Density Residential
(RL), Medium Density Residential (RM), High Density Residential (RH) and Mixed-
Use (MU).
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as an accessory use to
the dwelling, single-family attached use category in the following zoning
districts; Low Density Residential (RL), Medium Density Residential (RM), High
Density Residential (RH), Mixed-Use (MU), and Urban Core (UC).
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units may be either an integrated ADU or a
detached ADU.
      (4)   Maximum floor area of the ADU.
         (a)   Standard. An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000
square feet or 50% of the size of the single-family residence, whichever is
larger.
         (b)   Measurement. The floor area is measured as the area within the
ADU itself and does not include areas of an accessory building that are used
for other purposes, such as a detached garage or a workshop that is not
incorporated into the ADU.
      (5)   Setbacks. An ADU shall adhere to the same setback standards as a
single-family attached or detached residence for the zoning district in which
the ADU is to be located.
      (6)   Prohibited locations. ADUs may not be established within structures
that do not have a permanent foundation.
      (7)   If a manufactured home as defined in I.C.A. § 431.5, sub. 3, or a
mobile home as defined in I.C.A. § 431.5, sub. 5, is used as an accessory
dwelling unit, the manufactured home or mobile home shall be converted to real
property by being placed on a permanent foundation and assessed for real estate
taxes pursuant to I.C.A. § 435.26.
      (8)   Utility lines. If full utility access that includes a separate
metering system for billing purposes cannot be provided to the accessory
dwelling unit, then new or separate utility lines may be required at the
discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   Additional standards for specific accessory uses or structures.
      (1)   Home-based business.
         (a)   Permitted home-based businesses. All no-impact home-based
businesses are permitted.
         (b)   Prohibited home-based businesses. The following home-based
businesses are considered prohibited:
            1.   Animal hospitals;
            2.   Private clubs;
            3.   Restaurants;
            4.   Stables and kennels;
            5.   Automobile repair or auto body shops. More than two vehicles
per year that are not registered at the residence and are rebuilt, repaired, or
reconstructed shall constitute an automobile repair or auto body shop;
            6.   Automobile paint shop;
            7.   Any occupation which is considered illegal by law; and
            8.   Any use which does not meet the standards in division (G)(1)
(d) of this section.
         (c)   Home-based businesses other than listed above. Any home-based
business which is not considered "permitted" or "prohibited" shall use and
abide by the special use process as described in Subsec. 156.J.005.1, Special
Use Permit, with the exception of a review by the Plan & Zoning Commission. A
special fee for a special use permit for a home-based business shall be set by
resolution. The Board of Adjustment shall review the home-based business in
regards to the standards listed in division (G)(1)(d) of this section. The
Board shall take into account concerns by neighbors and the possible negative
impacts to the residential character of the neighborhood. The Board may place
any restrictions on the home-based business and the Board shall be critical
when evaluating requests for additional employees.
         (d)   Standards for all home-based businesses.
            1.   Area limitation. The occupation may not exceed 25% of the
gross floor area of the principal dwelling.
            2.   Safety. The occupation may not be more dangerous to life,
personal safety, or property than any other activity ordinarily carried on with
respect to a dwelling used solely for residential purposes.
            3.   Non-compliance. Any home-occupation which does not abide by
the terms of this section shall be punishable under Article L, Enforcement and
Remedies.
            4.   Modifications or additions. Structural modifications or
additions to the residence for the expansion of a home-based business shall be
constructed to be compatible with the primary structure and remain residential
in appearance.
            5.   Traffic and parking. Traffic generated by the home-based
business shall not be objectionable to the neighboring residents. Off-street
parking shall be adequate to accommodate the parking demand generated by the
home-based business.
            6.   Deliveries. The occupation shall not require the delivery or
shipment of materials, merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than passenger
motor vehicles, one-ton step-up vans, or similar-sized trucks that are less
than ten tons gross vehicle weight.
            7.   Equipment. Any merchandise or stock in trade sold, repaired or
displayed shall be stored entirely within the residential structure or in an
accessory building.
            8.   Signs. Any sign utilized by a home-based businesses in a
residential district shall be limited to one building-mounted sign which shall
not exceed one square foot in area.
            9.   Residential character. The building or premises occupied shall
not be rendered objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of
the neighborhood due to exterior appearance or by the emission of dust, gas,
noise, odor or smoke, or in any other way.
            10.   Residential design features. The building shall include no
features of design not customary for residential use.
            11.   No exterior display. No use shall indicate from the exterior
any display that the building is being used in part for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling, with the exception of permitted signage.
            12.   Employees. The home-based business allows one employee to
work and assist in the home-based business that does not reside on the
premises. All other employees must reside on the premises.
         (e)   Existing home-based businesses. Existing home-based businesses
that are in conformance at the time of adoption of this chapter shall remain in
conformance. If an existing business is vacated, any new business must meet
current regulations.
         (f)   Violation. Any home-based business that does not abide by the
requirements set forth within this chapter, operates without being registered,
or falls out of compliance with this chapter shall be subject to the Violation
and Penalty section of this chapter. This includes fines being levied after
written documentation is sent to the residents to abate violations of this
chapter. If a home-based business operates without regard to the requirements
of this chapter or registration previously obtained, they be subject to penalty
along with revocation of their registration and termination of the home-based
business. A fine of $100 will be levied for each offense. Each day that the
home-based business is considered to be non-compliant, not operating within the
requirements of this chapter, or ceases to terminate business as ordered will
constitute separate offenses.
      (2)   Solar panel array (accessory use). 
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar arrays.
            1.   Shall be located in the interior side or rear yard and
screened from adjacent residential property and all public rights-of-way with
type B bufferyard (see §
156.F.004, Buffering).
            2.   Shall meet the setback requirements for detached accessory
buildings in the zoning district in which the solar array is located.
            3.   Shall not exceed a height of ten feet.
               A.   When located over land the measurement shall be taken from
ground level at
the solar panel.
               B.   When located over a body of water or within an area
designed to be subject to regular inundation by water, such as a stormwater
management facility, the measurement shall be taken from an elevation which is
one foot above the designed 100-year storm event water level.
            4.   An application for ground-mounted solar panels shall be
presented with site specifications, dimensions, and landscaping plan.
            5.   Not allowed on residential use properties regardless of zone.
         (b)   Roof-mounted arrays. Roof-mounted solar panels may be located on
principal and accessory buildings.
            1.   A roof-mounted array on a pitched roof may not extend more
than 12 inches above the roof surface if the roof is visible from the public
right-of-way or from a residential property, nor may it extend more than 12
inches beyond any edge of the roof;
            2.   Where an array is placed atop a flat roof, it may not extend
more than five feet above the roof and shall be screened from the public right-
of-way with the building’s facade parapet or similar mechanism;
            3.   Installed roof-mounted arrays shall meet the International
Building Code standards for wind loads; and
            4.   A roof-mounted solar panel array that cannot meet these
placement standards requires a special use permit.
      (3)   Small wind energy conversion system (SWECS).
         (a)   General regulations.
            1.   Other permits required. The owner/operator of the SWECS shall
also obtain any other permits required by other federal, state, and local
agencies/departments prior to constructing the system.
            2.   Number of systems per lot.
               A.   No more than one freestanding SWECS may be placed on any
parcel or lot for residential use. Building-mounted SWECS are prohibited on any
parcel or lot containing a single-family detached or attached use.
               B.   No more than one freestanding SWECS may be placed on any
parcel or lot with a non-residential use that is taller than the tallest
existing principal building located on the parcel or lot. Additional
freestanding SWECS which conform to setback requirements contained in this
division and which are no taller than the tallest existing principal building
located on the parcel or lot may be allowed. Additional building-mounted SWECS
may be allowed within the parameters of this section.
               C.   Any mixed-use building shall be considered a non-
residential use for the purposes of this division.
            3.   Tower. Only monopole towers may be permitted for freestanding
SWECS. Lattice, guyed or towers of any other type may not be considered to be
in compliance with this division. SWECS towers shall be utilized for the sole
purpose of supporting wind energy conversion systems. No other uses may be
permitted on SWECS towers.
            4.   Color. Freestanding SWECS shall be a neutral color such as
white, sky blue, or light gray. Building-mounted SWECS shall match the color of
the building on which it is mounted. Other colors may be allowed at the
discretion of the Board of Adjustment. The surface shall be non-reflective.
            5.   Lighting. No lights may be installed on the tower, unless
required to meet FAA regulations.
            6.   Signage. No signage or advertising of any kind may be
permitted on the tower or any associated structures.
            7.   Climbing apparatus. The tower shall be designed to prevent
climbing within the first ten feet.
            8.   Maintenance. Facilities shall be well-maintained in accordance
with manufacturer’s specifications and shall remain in an operational condition
that poses no potential safety hazard nor is in violation of any provisions
contained within this division or elsewhere within this Zoning Ordinance.
            9.   Displacement of parking prohibited. The location of the SWECS
shall not result in the net loss of required parking as set out in §
156.E.004, Required Off-Street Parking.
            10.   Utility notification. The city will notify the utility of
receipt of an application to install an interconnected customer-owned
generator. Off-grid systems are exempt from this notification requirement.
            11.   Interconnection. If connected to the grid, the SWECS shall
meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa Utilities Board. No permit of any kind may be issued until
the city has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection
agreement. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
            12.   Restriction on use of electricity generated. A SWECS shall be
used exclusively to supply electrical power to the owner for on-site
consumption, except that excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not
presently needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company in
accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code,
as may be subsequently amended.
            13.   Shadow flicker. No SWECS may be installed and operated so to
cause a shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
            14.   Safety controls. Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an
automatic and manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent
uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower
structure, rotor blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking system
shall also be capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power
outage so as to prevent back feeding of the grid.
            15.   Noise. All SWECS shall not emit more than 60 dB in
residential zones and 75 dB in any other zone. This shall be proven through
provided engineered specification.
            16.   Shut off. A clearly marked and easily accessible shut off for
the wind turbine will be required as determined by the Building Official of the
City of Marshalltown.
            17.   Electromagnetic interference. All SWECS shall be designed and
constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is
determined that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner/
operator shall take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this
interference including relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the
approval of the city. A permit granting a SWECS may be revoked if
electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
            18.   Wind access easements. The enactment of this division does
not constitute the granting of an easement by the city. The SWECS owner/
operator shall have the sole responsibility toacquire any covenants, easements,
or similar documentation to assure and/or protect access to sufficient wind as
may or may not be necessary to operate the SWECS.
            19.   Engineer certification. Applications for any freestanding or
building-mounted SWECS shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
turbine support structure, including the tower, base, and footings, or existing
structure if applicable. An engineering analysis of all components of the SWECS
showing compliance with the applicable regulations and certified by an Iowa
licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
            20.   Installation. Installation shall be done according to
manufacturer’s recommendations. All wiring and electrical work shall be
completed according to the applicable building and electric codes. All
electrical components shall meet code recognized test standards.
            21.   Removal. If a site, or any wind turbine, is not used for a
period of one year or is in a state of disrepair as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, it shall be the duty and obligation of the party then in
possession and control of the site to have the unused structure completely
dismantled and removed from the site.
            22.   Right of entrance. As a condition of approval of a special
use permit, an applicant seeking to install SWECS is required to sign a
petition and waiver agreement which shall be recorded and run with the land
granting permission to the city to enter the property to remove the SWECS
pursuant to the terms of approval and to assure compliance with the other
conditions set forth in the permit. Removal will be at the expense of the
owner/operator and the cost may be assessed against the property.
            23.   Feasibility study. A feasibility study shall be made of any
site prior to installing a wind turbine. The feasibility study shall include
measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed turbine site for at least three
months.
         (b)   Bulk regulations.
            1.   Setbacks. The minimum distance between any freestanding SWECS
and any property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to:
               A.   One hundred fifty percent of the total system height for
towers up to 65 feet in height.
               B.   Two hundred percent of the total system height for towers
that are 65 feet and up to 80 feet in height.
               C.   Two hundred fifty percent of the total system height for
towers that are 80 feet and up to 100 feet in height.
               D.   Three hundred percent of the total system height for towers
that are 100 feet and taller in height.
               E.   The setback shall be measured from the property line to the
point of the SWECS closest to the property line.
               F.   The required setback for any building-mounted SWECS shall
be equal to the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS
is to be attached at such time that the application to install a building-
mounted SWECS is received by the city.
         (c)   Maximum height. Height is measured from the ground to the top of
the tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades.
            1.   For lots of more than three and fewer than five acres, the
maximum height shall be 65 feet.
            2.   For lots of five and up to 40 acres, the maximum height shall
be 80 feet.
            3.   For lots of 40 acres and up to 100 acres, the maximum height
shall be 100 feet.
            4.   For lots that are 100 acres and larger, the maximum height
shall be 140 feet.
            5.   Building-mounted SWECS may be a maximum of ten feet higher
than the point of attachment to the building on which they are attached.
         (d)   Minimum lot size.
            1.   The minimum lot size for a freestanding SWECS is three acres.
            2.   The minimum lot size for a building-mounted SWECS is one acre
for any building of less than five stories in height.
            3.   There is no minimum lot size for building-mounted SWECS to be
mounted on buildings of five or more stories in height.
         (e)   Blade length. The length of each individual blade may not exceed
50% of the height of the tower.
         (f)   Clearance of blade. No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade
may extend within 30 feet of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis SWECS
may extend within ten feet of the ground. No blades may extend over parking
areas, driveways or sidewalks. No blade may extend within 20 feet of the
nearest tree, structure or above ground utility facilities.
         (g)   Location. No SWECS shall be located less than 50 feet from any
other SWECS.
            1.   No part of a SWECS may be located within or over drainage,
utility or other established easements.
            2.   A freestanding SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear
yard for residential uses. For a freestanding SWECS for all other uses, the
location shall be appropriate to the property and setting and shall be
determined through the special use permit and site plan review process.
            3.   A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of
applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations as amended from
time to time.
            4.   No SWECS may be constructed so that any part thereof can
extend within 20 feet laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding
secondary electrical service lines or service drops). The setback from
underground electric distribution lines shall be at least five feet.
            5.   Building-mounted SWECS are prohibited unless the owner has
obtained a written analysis from an Iowa licensed structural engineer
determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause damage to the structure
and that the SWECS can be securely fastened so as to not pose a hazard caused
by detaching from the structure.
      (4)   Swimming pools.
         (a)   General regulations.
            1.   Permits required.
               A.   No swimming pool shall be constructed, excavated or
established in the city without first obtaining a building permit therefor. An
application for a permit shall be submitted through the building permit process
to the city which includes the type and size of pool, together with a site plan
containing the following information: location of pool; location of all
structures on the building lot including house, garage, fencing or other
improvements; location of pumps, filter, wiring, protective fencing, back flush
and drainage outlets, grading plans and finish elevation around the pool;
location of existing underground or overhead wiring, utility easements, trees
and similar features; together with location of structures on adjacent lots.
               B.   Exceptions. Temporary above-ground swimming pools are
exempt from this permit requirement.
            2.   Fees. Normal building permit fees shall be charged as
currently done through the building permit review process for an accessory use
structure.
            3.   Enforcement of provisions. The Zoning Administrator and
Building Inspector, or duly authorized representative, shall be charged with
enforcement of this division (G)(4). Any pool erected and in use before the
adoption of this code is considered a legal non-conforming swimming pool.
            4.   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this division
(G)(4) shall be guilty of a code violation and subject to the payment of a
maximum fine of $1,250. If the person violating this division of the code does
not remedy the issue after contact with the city and initial fine, then they’ll
receive an additional code violation for each day that the requirements of this
code are not met and accumulate an additional fine of a maximum of $100 for
each separate violation.
         (b)   Minimum regulations.
            1.   Pools shall not be located within ten feet (measured
horizontally) from underground or overhead utility lines of all types.
            2.   Pools shall not be located within any private or public
utility, drainage, walkway or other easement.
            3.   Construction of pools shall be undertaken so as to avoid
hazards, damage or considerable inconvenience to adjacent property.
            4.   The lot owner shall be liable for damages to any business or
private property caused during pool construction or use.
            5.   To the extent feasible, back-flush water or water from pool
drainage shall be directed onto the owners’ property or onto approved public
drainage ways and shall not drain onto adjacent private land. Drainage onto
public streets or other public drainage ways shall require permission from the
appropriate local city officials and Marshalltown Water.
            6.   Any pool lighting shall be directed toward the pool and not
toward adjacent property.
            7.   Outdoor swimming pool areas shall be enclosed with a permanent
safety fence at least four feet in height to prevent uncontrolled access to the
pool area, and the fence shall have a self-closing gate and self-latching with
the latch inaccessible to small children and at least four feet from the ground
level. The fence shall be completely installed before filling the pool.
               A.   The use of temporary fencing (such as portable, garden, and
snow fencing) is not allowed to satisfy this requirement.
               B.   Fencing is not required for temporary above-ground swimming
pools which have at least four-foot-high vertical sidewalls provided the sole
access is by means of a removable ladder, ramp, or stairs which must be removed
when the pool is not in use.
            8.   All wiring, installation of heating units, grading,
installation of pipe or other construction shall be subject to inspection by
the City Inspector.
            9.   Nuisances, such as undue noise, lighting of adjacent property,
health and safety hazards, damage to vegetation on adjoining property, and the
like, shall not be permitted.
            10.   Filling of pools from fire hydrants or other public
facilities shall require the permission of the appropriate local city officials
and Marshalltown Water.
         (c)   Location regulations.
            1.   Single-family residential.
               A.   Pools shall not be located within ten feet of any rear lot
line nor within five feet of any side lot line, nor within six feet of any
principal structure or frost footing. Pools shall not be located within any
required front yard.
               B.   The filter unit, pump, heating unit and any other noise-
making mechanical equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any
residential structure on adjacent property and not closer than eight feet to
any lot line.
            2.   Multi-family residential. Private swimming pools intended for
and used by occupants and guests of occupants of multiple-family dwellings
shall adhere to the following regulations:
               A.   No part of the water surface of the swimming pool shall be
closer than 40 feet to any lot line.
               B.   No pumps, filters or other apparatus used in connection
with the pools shall be located closer than 40 feet to any lot line.
               C.   The pool areas shall be adequately fenced to prevent
uncontrolled access from the streets or adjacent as contained in division (G)
(4)(b)(7) of this section. Adequate screening, including, but not limited to, a
landscape bufferyard type B shall be placed between the pool area and adjoining
single-family district lot lines as found in
Table 156.F.004-2.
               D.   All deck areas, adjoining patios or other similar areas
used in conjunction with the pools, shall be located at least 15 feet from any
lot line in an adjoining single-family district.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024; Ord. 15097, passed
12-20-2024; Ord. 15098, passed 2-10-2025; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.C.008 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   These regulations are intended to establish criteria and standards
under which limited duration temporary uses may be conducted in commercial
districts. These regulations apply to temporary structures used in conjunction
with a temporary use.
      (2)   The intent is to prevent the creation of any nuisance to the
occupants of adjacent buildings, premises or property and the general public.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Permit required. A temporary use permit shall be required, as
established in Subsec. 156.J.004.8, Temporary Use Permit, to establish a
temporary use and is subject to administrative approval depending on the
conformance of the application with the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Listed uses. Any temporary use that this section does not allow, or
that the Zoning Administrator determines to be substantially similar to those
not allowed, is prohibited.
      (3)   Unlisted uses. The Zoning Administrator may interpret unlisted uses
as requiring a temporary use permit based on the provisions of §
156.C.010, New and Unlisted Uses.
   (C)   Short-term and long-term temporary uses.
      (1)   Short-term temporary use. A short-term use shall be defined as a
use with a maximum duration of seven consecutive days or less. A short-term
temporary use does not require a temporary use permit.
      (2)   Long-term temporary use. A long-term use shall be defined as a use
with duration of more than seven consecutive days or more than seven days
within any month. A temporary use permit will only be required for a long-term
temporary use.
   (D)   Application and permit processing. A temporary use permit shall be
required for all temporary structures used in conjunction with a long-term
temporary use. A temporary use permit must be issued prior to the commencement
of any temporary use. The Zoning Administrator may, from time to time, specify
the form of the temporary use permit application. Applications for temporary
use permits shall be secured from the Zoning Administrator in the manner
prescribed by this chapter, who shall cause the application to be directed to
all concerned city departments. Affected departments shall comment on the
application. Temporary uses may be subject to additional permits or inspections
as required by any applicable law or regulation.
   (E)   Evaluation of temporary use permit application. The Zoning
Administrator shall only consider an application for a temporary use permit if
all of the following criteria can be met:
      (1)   The temporary use is consistent with all Comprehensive Plan, the
Code of Ordinances of the city, this Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and city and
state regulations.
      (2)   The temporary use complies with all applicable codes.
      (3)   The temporary use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will
not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means or odor, noise, dust
or another nuisance.
      (4)   Temporary uses shall only be allowed in MU, UC, GC, and GI zoning
districts.
      (5)   The additional parking required by the temporary use will be
provided on-site, if applicable, or adequate street parking is available in the
immediate area.
      (6)   Increased traffic caused by the temporary use will not adversely
affect the surrounding neighborhood or city at large.
      (7)   The temporary use shall be limited to parking lots of already
established businesses. A temporary use is not allowed on an empty lot.
      (8)   All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary
structures including, but not limited to, trash receptacles, signs, stands,
poles, electric wiring or any other fixtures and appurtenances or equipment
connected therewith, within five days after the termination of the temporary
use.
      (9)   The property owner shall be responsible to assure adequate cleanup
of uses involving the construction of placement of temporary structures.
      (10)   Permanent sanitary facilities shall be made available to all
employees and attendants of the use during its operational hours.
      (11)   There shall be no discharge of wastewater or hazardous materials.
The applicant must indicate how any such discharge will be contained and
disposed of.
      (12)   No area of public right-of-way may be used without obtaining
approval from the Zoning Administrator, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Director
of Public Works.
      (13)   A signed lease agreement between the property owner and the
applicant, for the property on which the activity is to take place.
      (14)   Proof of insurance, the owner or operator must provide a
certificate of insurance as evidence of comprehensive general liability
insurance by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state.
      (15)   All temporary structures shall conform to the zoning setback
requirements unless stated otherwise in the chapter.
      (16)   Multiple concurrent temporary uses on the same zoning lot shall be
prohibited.
      (17)   No detached or freestanding sign shall be permitted. The maximum
amount allowed for a wall sign shall be based upon one square foot of sign for
each foot of length on the longest side of the structure. All other provisions
of the sign code shall apply.
      (18)   Electrical service shall be provided as required by the City
Electrician.
      (19)   Long-term temporary uses shall only be allowed for a maximum of
180 days per calendar year.
   (F)   Uses permitted with a temporary use permit. Any temporary structure
used in conjunction with a temporary use must apply for a temporary use permit.
Temporary uses include, but are not limited to, the retail sales of goods and
services.
   (G)   Specific temporary use standards.
      (1)   Portable-storage unit.
         (a)   The unit shall be on the same property as the use requiring the
service of the unit or container;
         (b)   The unit shall not encroach into setbacks or sidewalks;
         (c)   The unit shall be located on an all-weather surface;
         (d)   The unit shall be permitted for up to 180 calendar days per
year; and
         (e)   The unit shall be removed upon project completion.
   (H)   Conditions of approval. The Zoning Administrator may impose such
conditions on a temporary use permit as is necessary to meet the purpose of
this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent
uses. Conditions which may be imposed may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Setback and open space requirements;
      (2)   Parking;
      (3)   Fences, walls or other screening;
      (4)   Signage;
      (5)   Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress;
      (6)   Property maintenance during course of the activity;
      (7)   Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration or other nuisances;
      (8)   Hours of operations; and
      (9)   Other conditions as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
   (I)   Fees.
      (1)   The application fee for a temporary use permit shall be set by
resolution. In addition, all grounds shall be cleaned after the temporary use
is complete.
      (2)   This shall include proper disposal of all garbage and debris and
replacement of any moved structure or fence.
      (3)   Improper cleanup may be grounds for non-issuance of further
temporary use permits.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.C.009 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate wireless
telecommunications facilities as defined in §
156.M.003, Definitions. This section provides opportunities to supply wireless
telecommunications services in the city with minimal negative impact to the
community while respecting both residential, mixed-use, and commercial
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   All facilities. This section applies to all wireless communications
facilities.
      (2)   Airport zoning protected. The provisions of this section shall not
be deemed to prohibit administration and enforcement of airport zoning for the
protection of navigable airspace, pursuant to I.C.A. Chapter 329, by a
municipality, airport, or aviation authority.
   (C)   Existing towers. Legally existing wireless communication towers are
deemed as equivalent to sites that are approved pursuant to the provisions set
out in this Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Permitted by right. The following facilities are permitted by right:
      (1)   Stealth wireless communication antennas. New antennas on existing
structures (including, but not limited to, flag poles, buildings, water towers,
light poles, electric towers, church steeples, or silos) do not require a
special use permit, but may require an electrical or building permit.
      (2)   Co-located antennas. New antennas being placed on existing wireless
support structures with a valid special use permit do not require a special use
permit, but may require an electrical or building permit.
      (3)   Small cell facility. Small cell wireless facilities shall be sited
and reviewed in accordance with I.C.A. Chapter 8C, Iowa Cell Siting Act.
   (E)   Permitted wireless telecommunication facilities by district. 
Table 156.C.009-1, Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by
District, shows which wireless telecommunication facility types are allowed in
each grouping of districts and provides a cross-reference to specific standards
in this section for each type.
Table 156.C.009-1
Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by District
Type of Wireless
Telecommunication AG, RR, RL, RM, RH, MU, UC, GC, PI, REC GI Standards1
Facility
Table 156.C.009-1
Permitted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities by District
Type of Wireless
Telecommunication       AG, RR, RL, RM, RH, MU, UC, GC, PI, REC GI Standards1
Facility
Small Cell              P                   P                   P  F.2
Concealed               S                   P                   P  F.3
Industrial Microcells,
Distributed Antenna
Systems (DAS),          S                   P                   P  F.4
Macrocells, and Similar
Facilities
Freestanding Tower      --                  S                   P  F.5
Those not permitted by,
or not meeting the      --                  S                   S  F.6
requirements of this
section
Notes:
1. The standards of division (F)(1), Generally, apply to all districts and
facilities.
P = Permitted; S = Special Use Permit; -- = Prohibited
 
   (F)   Standards.
      (1)   Generally. The following standards shall apply to all wireless
telecommunications facilities:
         (a)   Tower design. Support structures shall be designed to collapse
upon themselves or to collapse within the smallest possible area should
structural failure occur. The applicant shall submit written certification and
supporting documentation from a structural engineer to this effect.
         (b)   Screening. Equipment cabinets and related structures or
equipment not located within central communications hubs shall be screened or
camouflaged and if not collocated shall meet the requirements for accessory
buildings per §
156.C.007, Accessory Uses and Structures. Central communications hubs shall be
considered principal buildings and shall meet the minimum setback regulations
and maximum height restrictions of the district in which they are located or as
may be more strictly conditioned and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
         (c)   Lighting. Telecommunication towers shall only be illuminated as
required by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and/or the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Security lighting around the base of a tower
must be shielded so that no light is directed towards adjacent properties or
rights-of-way.
         (d)   Advertising. No advertising of any type may be placed on the
facility.
      (2)   Small cell.
         (a)   Other than associated equipment cabinets and other equipment
that may be located on the ground, such facilities shall be collocated.
         (b)   The height of such equipment shall not increase the height of
the utilized support structure by more than five feet.
         (c)   All collocated equipment shall be camouflaged.
      (3)   Concealed.
         (a)   Unless collocated, minimum setback regulations shall be
controlled by the district in which it is located or as may be more strictly
conditioned and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
         (b)   The height of such facilities may exceed the maximum height
regulation of the district in which it is located but shall be limited to the
height specified in the special use permit application or as may be more
strictly conditioned and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
      (4)   Industrial microcells, distributed antenna systems (DAS),
macrocells, and similar facilities.
         (a)   Other than associated equipment cabinets and other equipment
that may be located on the ground, such facilities shall be collocated.
         (b)   The height of such equipment shall not increase the height of
the utilized support structure by more than five feet.
         (c)   All collocated equipment shall be camouflaged.
      (5)   Freestanding tower.
         (a)   Facilities shall not exceed 200 feet in height.
         (b)   Support structures shall meet the minimum setback regulations of
the GI district.
         (c)   Telecommunications towers shall be designed for more than one
accommodation.
         (d)   Support structures shall be designed to collapse upon themselves
or to collapse within the smallest possible area should a structural failure
occur. The applicant shall submit a written certification and supporting
documentation from a structural engineer to this effect.
         (e)   Equipment cabinets and related structures or equipment not
located within central communications hubs shall be screened or camouflaged and
shall meet the requirements for accessory buildings per §
156.C.007, Accessory Uses and Structures. Central communications hubs shall
meet the minimum setback regulations and maximum height restrictions of the GI
district.
      (6)   Those not permitted by, or not meeting the requirements of this
section.
         (a)   All regulating details of the facility (i.e. type, height,
setbacks, etc.) shall be as specified in the special use permit application or
as may be more strictly conditioned and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
         (b)   If installing a telecommunications tower, it shall be designed
for more than one accommodation.
         (c)   Support structures shall be designed to collapse upon themselves
or to collapse within the smallest possible area should a structural failure
occur. The applicant shall submit a written certification and supporting
documentation from a structural engineer to this effect.
   (G)   Maintenance and enforcement.
      (1)   Maintenance. All required screening, landscaping, camouflaging,
concealment mechanisms, and other features shall be maintained, repaired, or
replaced.
      (2)   Enforcement. Enforcement and penalties due to violations of any
section of this section shall be as otherwise stated in Article L, Enforcement
and Remedies.
   (H)   Removal of defective or abandoned facilities.
      (1)   Repair or removal. Any component of a wireless telecommunications
facility that is found to be defective or unsafe shall be repaired immediately
by the owner or operator to comply with federal, state, and local safety
standards or removed within 30 days upon receipt of written notice.
      (2)   Abandonment. A tower that is not used for a period of 12
consecutive months, or that has not been inspected pursuant to division (I),
Inspections, below, shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove
the tower from the property within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Zoning
Administrator. An abandoned tower that is not removed within the 90-day period
is a public nuisance, and the city shall take actions to abate the nuisance by
removal and assess the costs thereof to the property.
   (I)   Inspections. Telecommunication towers shall be inspected by a
qualified tower inspection service once every 36 months by the owner, operator,
or a representative to assess the structural condition of the tower and support
equipment. An inspection report shall be prepared and filed with the Zoning
Administrator upon request. The required report shall certify that the tower
continues to meet or exceed the current published EIA/TIA structural standards
and is in sound and safe operating condition.
   (J)   Utilization of Section 6409 Wireless Facilities Deployment of the
Spectrum Act being part of the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of
2012.
      (1)   Applicable facilities. The permissions granted by the Spectrum Act
Section 6409 Wireless Facilities Deployment (Section 6409) shall be applicable
only to wireless telecommunications facilities deemed to be an eligible
facility in existence prior to the original enactment of this section.
Modifications shall not substantially change eligible facilities.
      (2)   Required information.
         (a)   To make modifications to a wireless telecommunications facility
per the permissions of Section 6409, the property owner shall submit the
following information:
            1.   Name, address, telephone numbers, and email addresses of the
property owner, the applicant, and the owner of the facility proposed for
modification;
            2.   Evidence that the wireless telecommunications facility is an
eligible facility that existed prior to April 11, 2022;
            3.   Location map and elevation drawings of the existing facility
and the proposed modifications prepared and certified by a professional
engineer;
            4.   All existing equipment from all providers and, if applicable,
all equipment owned and operated by railroad companies (The information
provided for the existing eligible facility may be used as the baseline of
facts regarding the site's characteristics if it is the facility's first
utilization of Section 6409 and shall be used to prevent abuse of the
legislation); and
            5.   A letter describing the request.
         (b)   The letter, and additional application submissions as required
above, shall clearly demonstrate the proposed modification would not
substantially change the existing eligible facility. Substantial changes are
made if any one of the following occurs:
            1.   For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it increases the
height by more than 20 feet or 10%, whichever is greater; for those towers in
the rights-of-way and for all wireless telecommunication facilities, it
increases the height of the facility by more than 10% or ten feet, whichever is
greater;
            2.   For towers outside of public rights-of-way, it protrudes from
the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower
structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for those
towers in the rights-of-way and for all wireless telecommunications facilities,
it protrudes from the edge of the support structure more than six feet;
            3.   It involves installation of more than the standard number of
new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;
            4.   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current
site of the wireless telecommunications facility;
            5.   It would defeat the existing concealment elements of the
wireless telecommunications facility; or
            6.   It does not comply with conditions associated with the prior
approval of the tower or base station unless the non-compliance is due to an
increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation
that does not exceed the corresponding "substantial change" thresholds.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.C.010 NEW AND UNLISTED USES.
   (A)   Use categories. Each of the use categories and specific uses listed in
Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table, are defined in §
156.M.003, Definitions. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a use that is
not listed if the proposed use fits within a defined use category or is
functionally the same as a permitted, limited, or special use.
   (B)   If not authorized then prohibited. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that a proposed use does not fit within a given use category and is
not functionally the same as a permitted, limited, or special use, then the use
is a prohibited use.
   (C)   Decision criteria. In making such determinations, the Zoning
Administrator may consider but not be limited to the following criteria:
      (1)   The actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relation
to those of the use type;
      (2)   The amount of site area or floor space and equipment devoted to the
activity;
      (3)   Vehicle parking demand;
      (4)   Average daily and peak hour trip generation (people, personal
vehicles, and delivery vehicles);
      (5)   Types of vehicles used and their parking requirements;
      (6)   Building impervious surface coverage;
      (7)   Regulated air or water emissions;
      (8)   Noise, lighting, dust, and odors;
      (9)   Solid waste generation;
      (10)   The number of employees on a typical shift;
      (11)   Use and storage of hazardous materials;
      (12)   Character of associated buildings and structures;
      (13)   How the use is advertised;
      (14)   Nature and impacts of operation; and/or
      (15)   Hours of operation.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.C.011 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the
management of illicit discharges, soil erosion, sediment deposition, and the
environmental impacts of land uses (e.g., noise, vibration, air quality, water
quality, and glare), in order to ensure that the city continues to provide a
desirable environment for residences, recreation, education, culture, commerce,
and industry.
   (B)   Compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall not
be interpreted as authorizing a practice or operation which would constitute a
violation of any other applicable statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation.
Where these regulations conflict with other regulations, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
   (C)   Administration. All uses of land or structures shall conform to the
standards in this section.
   (D)   Noise. No use, operation, or activity shall cause or create noise in
excess of the sound levels prescribed in
Chapter 134, Noise Control, of the city’s Code of Ordinance.
   (E)   Vibration.
      (1)   Generally. No land use shall produce vibration that exceeds the
limits set out by this section.
      (2)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to vibration generated by:
         (a)   Noises emanating from construction activities between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. that are temporary in nature.
         (b)   Transient noises from moving vehicles, such as trucks and
automobiles or trains.
      (3)   Standards. The standards of
Table 156.C.011-2, Vibration Standards, shall be met, except as provided in
division (E)(2), above.
Table 156.C.011-2
Vibration Standards1
Frequency in Cycles Per Adjoining Zoning District                 Impact
Second                  AG, RR, RL, RM, RH MU, UC, GC, PI, REC GI Vibration2
Table 156.C.011-2
Vibration Standards1
Frequency in Cycles Adjoining Zoning District                     Impact
Per Second          AG, RR, RL, RM, RH MU, UC, GC, PI, REC GI     Vibration2

Less than 10        0.0004             0.0002              0.0039 0.0098
10 - 19             0.0002             0.0011              0.0022 0.0055
20 - 29             0.0001             0.0006              0.0011 0.0028
30 - 39             0.0001             0.0004              0.0007 0.0018
40 - 49             0.0001             0.0003              0.0005 0.0013
50 or more          0.0001             0.0002              0.0002 0.0010
Table Notes:
1   Vibrations that do not exceed 60 per minute may be twice this value.
2   Vibrations occurring no more than eight times in a 24-hour period with a
maximum separation of one minute.
 
      (4)   Measurement. An operator trained to measure vibrations shall make
all such measurements and shall submit and certify them with the city.
   (H)   Air quality.
      (1)   Generally. Air quality shall be maintained according to state and
federal standards. Demonstration of compliance shall be provided as required by
this section.
      (2)   Emissions. Applicants for the approval of uses that will emit air
pollutants that are subject to regulation pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act
shall demonstrate compliance with that law.
      (3)   Control of wind-blown dust. Landowners shall control wind-blown
dust.
   (I)   Glare.
      (1)   Glare from use. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc
welding or acetylene torch cutting), which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall
be performed in such manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the
property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines
or street rights-of-way.
      (2)   Glare from buildings and structures. Buildings and structures
(including signs) shall be designed and oriented to avoid glare that materially
interferes with the safe operation of streets.
   (J)   Erosion control.
      (1)   Storm water management. Measures to protect water quality and to
manage the quantity and velocity of stormwater runoff shall be implemented
pursuant to the standards set out in Chapter 55, Erosion and Sediment Control
for Construction Sites in the city's Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   Grading, erosion, and sediment control. Measures to protect water
quality during construction and for land disturbance activities shall be
implemented pursuant to the standards set out in Chapter 55, Erosion and
Sediment Control for Construction Sites in the city's Code of Ordinances.
   (K)   Other performance standards. In addition to the performance standards
of this section, the following shall apply to all uses:
      (1)   Outdoor storage.
         (a)   Outside storage of non-saleable merchandise or other materials
shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Snow storage. Adequate area shall be provided on the lot for snow
storage or provisions shall be made by the property owner for the snow to be
hauled off-site.
      (3)   Use compatibility.
         (a)   All uses shall be designed and operated to be compatible with
the adjacent residential uses.
         (b)   Limitations on design and operation of uses shall include
architectural and building mass, hours of operation, delivery hours, noise and
lighting controls, signage, and traffic considerations.
      (4)   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground, where
feasible.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE D - BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 156.D.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to address the quality and
sustainable design of buildings and building sites in order to:
      (1)   Character. Preserve and enhance a community character that conveys
a positive, lasting impression on both residents and visitors;
      (2)   Functionality. Provide buildings that are functional, safe, and
attractive;
      (3)   Public realm. Establish the physical and functional relationships
between buildings and the public realm; and
      (4)   Form. Prescribe the rules related to building massing, form, and
design.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this article apply to the following
development activities:
      (1)   New development. New residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use
development or change in use from residential to nonresidential or mixed-use;
or
      (2)   Increase in intensity. Increase in apartment units, manufactured
home pads, gross floor area, or impervious surface by 25% or more, cumulatively
over a five-year period.
   (C)   Timing of compliance. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued
until all site improvements required in this article are constructed in
conformance with the approved permit or plan required in §
156.J.002, Common Review Provisions.
   (D)   Design practices. The principles below should be considered in all
design practices in addition to specific standards found in §
156.D.002, General Requirements:
      (1)   Clustering. Where applicable in the RL zoning district, housing
should be clustered to preserve valuable environmental resources and provide
usable recreational open space.
      (2)   Open space. The open space system is as carefully designed as the
housing area so as to offer usable permitted open space types visible from
roadways and spatially defined by abutting building facades and/or landscape
elements.
      (3)   Multimodal transportation. Vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle
transportation is facilitated through a connected system of roads, sidewalks,
and/or trails so as to provide many choices with regard to mode and route.
      (4)   Traffic calming. Traffic calming techniques may be used to reduce
vehicle speed and increase pedestrian and bicycle safety.
      (5)   Facade direction. Principal buildings address the street,
presenting front facades on the publicly visible side of the building. The
front facade of each principal building shall face a dedicated public street or
the limits of a private parking unit and no building shall have the rear facade
facing a dedicated public street.
      (6)   Parking design. The visual impact of vehicular off-street parking
and garages on public streetscape views is minimized through innovative site
planning and building design including parking areas located to the rear of
buildings, using architectural design elements such as massing, form,
materials, and fenestration to make garages visually compatible with inhabited
buildings, and parking areas screened with landscape elements.
      (7)   Support uses. Neighborhood support uses, such as neighborhood
commercial areas, daycare facilities, community centers, places of public
assembly, and schools are designed so as to be visually compatible with the
residential character of the neighborhood and accessible by all transportation
modes.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.D.002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The city sees the interaction between the built environment
and the public as a crucial ingredient in maintaining a certain sense of place.
As a part of this, the visual aspects of overall building design and placement
must be scrutinized when considering a proposed development. This section
outlines design standards for building facades. These standards seek to
increase the prospect of compatibility between buildings, styles, and
generations. Designers must infuse their individual talents and creativity into
each project for these standards to be successful.
   (B)   Flexibility in administration. Because these standards cannot cover
every possible scenario that may arise, the Zoning Administrator is authorized
to make determinations on development applications that may vary from the
written standards so long as the determination meets the intent of this
article.
   (C)   The following materials shall not be used as exterior finish
materials. This regulation shall not apply to residential buildings containing
12 or less residential dwelling units.
      (1)   Wood fiber hardboard siding, oriented strand board siding, plastic
or fiberglass panels;
      (2)   Galvanized, aluminum coated, zinc-aluminum coated or unpainted
exterior metal finishes;
      (3)   Unfired or underfired clay, sand, or shale brick; and
      (4)   Smooth or untextured concrete finishes.
   (D)   Primary materials. For the purposes of this section, the following are
deemed primary materials:
      (1)   Vinyl siding;
      (2)   Brick, including thin brick;
      (3)   Natural or manufactured stone;
      (4)   Pre-cast concrete panel, provided it has an integrated color and is
textured or patterned;
      (5)   EIFS, exterior insulation and finish system;
      (6)   Stucco with a weather barrier layer and wall drainage system; and
      (7)   Architectural masonry units including split face, weathered face,
sandblasted face and ground face blocks.
   (E)   Secondary materials. For the purposes of this section, the following
are deemed secondary materials.
      (1)   Embossed or pre-finished architectural metal panel (26+ gauge),
which has an appearance of masonry, stucco, or any other appearance that is
approved by the Zoning Administrator;
      (2)   Masonry or cement fiberboard siding that, for residential
applications, is manufactured and installed in traditional profiles such as
four-inch to eight-inch horizontal beveled or shake;
      (3)   Glass;
      (4)   Tile;
      (5)   Stainless steel;
      (6)   Chrome;
      (7)   Wood; and
      (8)   Smooth-faced finished concrete masonry units.
   (F)   Metal roofs. Metals roofs shall be allowed if the following conditions
are met or otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator:
      (1)   Openings shall not be seen on the fascia and shall be completely
covered with material designed and built for metal roofing systems.
      (2)   Corrugated galvanized steel panels shall not be used. This
regulation shall not apply to residential buildings containing 12 or less
residential dwelling units.
      (3)   Roof and fastener color shall be the same, with the exception of
trim pieces.
   (G)   Ground-mounted equipment. Mechanical equipment mounted on the ground
and associated with apartments, nonresidential and mixed-use buildings,
including, but not limited to, HVAC systems and meter banks, shall be screened
from view from public and private streets by landscaping or screening walls.
   (H)   Refuse containers. Dumpsters shall be provided for multiple-family
residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use development for solid waste
collection services. Such facilities are subject to the following standards:
      (1)   The facilities shall be located no more than 200 feet (walking
distance) from the individual uses that they are intended to serve;
      (2)   Access to the facilities shall be:
         (a)   Configured to meet the requirements of the refuse hauler; and
         (b)   Provided from an alley if an alley is present and used for
service to other properties;
      (3)   The areas where dumpsters are stored shall be fully enclosed by an
opaque wall with a minimum height of six feet constructed of brick, stone,
stucco-finished concrete block, wood or vinyl;
      (4)   The enclosures shall:
         (a)   Have opaque service gates which remain closed at all times
except when the dumpster is being serviced;
         (b)   Include separate, opaque pedestrian access gates or a pedestrian
access opening that screens the dumpster from view;
         (c)   Be large enough to accommodate:
            1.   One or more dumpsters that are of sufficient size to serve the
development, based on the frequency of solid waste collection; and
            2.   One or more recycling bins (whether provided at the time of
development or not), based on the anticipated generation of recyclable
materials and the frequency of collection; and
         (d)   Meet city engineering design standards, including those that
pertain to maneuvering space.
      (5)   The facilities shall be located in a side or rear yard of the
parcel proposed for development unless it is not possible to provide service
access in such locations according to the refuse service provider; and
      (6)   If an enclosure must be located in a front yard to meet the
requirements of the refuse service provider, it shall be designated and
constructed with the same cladding materials used for the principal building
walls.
   (I)   Exemption. A building wall is exempt from the requirements of this
section under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The subject property is zoned GI, General Industrial;
      (2)   The building walls are not visible from an existing major arterial,
or minor arterial nor are they adjacent to a proposed street of such
classifications from the Comprehensive Plan; and
      (3)   The building contains uses in the following use categories:
         (a)   Heavy industrial use category;
         (b)   Light industrial use category;
         (c)   Warehousing and freight movement use category; or
         (d)   Wholesale trade use category.
   (J)   Alternative building materials and forms. The Zoning Administrator may
approve alternative building materials and forms not specified in this section
if the Zoning Administrator determines that, compared to the permitted primary
and secondary materials, the alternative:
      (1)   Is substantially equal to or better in quality, durability, and
appearance and will not violate any provision of this article;
      (2)   Is proposed in order to achieve a minimum bronze certification in
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED"), and the materials
qualify for LEED points under both the "energy and atmosphere criteria" and the
"materials and resources criteria" of the LEED checklists; or
      (3)   Is part of a building that is certified by the Environmental
Protection Agency as designed to earn an ENERGY STAR rating, and the materials
substantially improve the energy efficiency of the building compared to
materials that are permitted in this section.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.D.003 SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX.
   (A)   Generally. These standards apply to single-family detached and duplex
developments within the districts where they are permitted as set out in §
156.B.003, Use Table.
   (B)   Placement of buildings. Primary entrances shall face a public right-
of-way to the maximum extent practicable. The Zoning Administrator may approve
alternative orientations for primary entrances facing common green spaces or
other common areas such as courtyards, plazas, and gathering spaces. The
placement of a principal dwelling in a perpendicular or sideways orientation on
an interior lot is prohibited (See Figure 156.D.003-1, Building Placement).
 
Figure 156.D.003-1
Building Placement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2691.png]
 
   (C)   Garage door orientation. Garage doors on a single-family detached or
duplex dwelling on a lot in the RL, Low-Density Residential, RM, Medium-Density
Residential, or RH, High-Density Residential districts shall be oriented in one
of the manners depicted in
Table 156.D.003, Garage Orientation.
 
Table 156.D.003
Garage Orientation
Requirements                                                                      Illustration
Garage in Front.                                                                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
1.   Garage doors shall be oriented to the street and extend in front of the   bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
front wall plane of the residence.                                                IMAGES/0-0-0-2693.png]
2.   Doors may not exceed 3 stalls in width.
Semi-Flush.
1.   Garage doors oriented toward the street shall be positioned semi-flush or
recessed.                                                                         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
2.   Semi-flush doors shall be a minimum of two feet and a maximum of 20 feet  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
behind the front wall plane of the residence and create a minimal intrusion into  IMAGES/0-0-0-2695.png]
the livable area of the home.
3.   Semi-flush doors may not exceed 3 stalls.
Recessed.
1.   Garage doors oriented toward the street shall be positioned semi-flush or [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
recessed.                                                                         bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
2.   Recessed doors shall be a minimum of 20 feet behind the front wall plane oIMAGES/0-0-0-2697.png]
the residence.
3.   Recessed doors may not exceed 3 stalls.
Side-Loaded.                                                                      [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
1.   Garage doors oriented perpendicular to the front wall plane have no       bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
restrictions on door width or recessed position.                                  IMAGES/0-0-0-2699.png]
Detached.
1.   Detached garages placed entirely to the rear of the house have no         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
restrictions on door width or recessed position.                                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
2.   Detached garages that are closer to the street than the rearmost portion oIMAGES/0-0-0-2701.png]
the residence shall be a minimum of 20 feet behind the front wall plane of the
residence.
 
   (D)   Transitions.
      (1)   Scale. Where a duplex directly abuts or is across a street from a
single-family detached dwelling, the building height of the duplex shall be no
greater than eight feet higher than the single-family detached dwelling that
abuts or is across the street. Where a duplex is located between a detached
dwelling and apartments or nonresidential development, the duplex may not
exceed the height of the adjacent single-family detached dwelling by more than
one story. See Figure 156.D.003-3, Scale Transitions.
      (2)   Bufferyards. Bufferyards are required per § 156.F.004, Buffering
where the single-family detached dwelling and the duplex are in differing
zoning districts.
 
Figure 156.D.003-3
Scale Transitions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2703.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2705.png]
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.D.004 MULTIPLEX.
   (A)   Generally. These standards apply to multiplexes developments within
the districts where they are permitted as set out in §
156.B.003, Use Table.
   (B)   Buffering. A multiplex adjacent to a single-family use or AG, RR, or
RL zoning districts shall provide a Type B bufferyard as established in §
156.F.004, Buffering.
   (C)   Building scale and massing. Any portion of a building that is closer
than 50 feet from a common property line that abuts an AG, RR, or RL zoning
district or single-family use shall be no higher than 12 feet above the highest
point of the closest residential structures. This does not apply if the
residential structure is located across the street from the development or if
it is within the same development proposal.
   (D)   Building elements. All multiplex buildings shall include a minimum of
three of the following building elements:
      (1)   Outdoor gathering areas;
      (2)   Sculptures, monuments, and other public art installations;
      (3)   Porches;
      (4)   Functional shutters;
      (5)   Bay windows;
      (6)   Balconies; or
      (7)   Columns, eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or frieze boards.
   (E)   Roof massing. Monolithic roof structures that cover more than 4,000
square feet shall include changes in direction or treatments that break up the
appearance of mass. Such treatments may include elements such as dormers,
towers, or chimneys. (See Figure 156.D.004-1, Illustrative Application of
Building Design Standards for illustrative examples.)
   (F)   Garages. Attached street-facing garages shall meet the following
standards.
      (1)   Not more than three garage stalls shall face the street; or
 
Figure 156.D.004-1
Illustrative Application of Building Design Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2707.png]
Figure Note: The sample images above are shown only for illustrative purposes
and are not meant to prescribe that these forms must be used.
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.D.005 TOWNHOUSE.
   (A)   Generally. These standards apply to multiplexes developments within
the district(s) where they are permitted as set out in §
156.B.003, Use Table.
   (B)   Standards of design.
      (1)   Street elevation(s).
         (a)   Street-facing building facades must use vertical modulation,
such as recesses and projections, and horizontal modulation and fenestration to
break up wall planes and to clearly distinguish individual dwelling units. The
building facades, materials, or colors must substantially vary so no three
units are the same. (See illustrative examples in
Figure 156.D.005-1, Illustrative Application of Building Design Standards.)
         (b)   A townhouse community with three or more buildings must
substantially vary the buildings in heights, dispositions, scales (number of
units), materials, or colors.
      (2)   Bulk. Townhouse dwellings may include up to but not exceed eight
units.
      (3)   Transitions.
         (a)   When directly abutting or across a street from a single-family
detached dwelling in an RM or RH district, the building height must be equal to
or no greater than eight feet higher than the abutting dwelling. When
separating single- and multi-family dwellings or nonresidential development, a
townhouse dwelling may not exceed the adjacent single-family detached dwelling
by more than one story. See Figure 156.D.003-3, Scale Transitions. Building
height may not exceed two stories when adjacent to an RL district.
         (b)   Bufferyards are required per §
156.F.004, Buffering.
   (C)   Building elements. All townhouse buildings shall include a minimum of
three of the following building elements:
      (1)   Outdoor gathering areas;
      (2)   Sculptures, monuments, and other public art installations;
      (3)   Porches;
      (4)   Functional shutters;
      (5)   Bay windows;
      (6)   Balconies; or
      (7)   Columns, eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or frieze boards.
   (D)   Balconies and railings. Balcony and railing materials may be different
than the materials used on exterior walls.
   (E)   Roof massing. Roof forms and rooflines must be broken into a series of
smaller building components when viewed from the street. Long, linear unbroken
rooflines exceeding 50 feet are prohibited. Such treatments may include
elements such as dormers, towers, or chimneys. (See
Figure 156.D.005-1, Illustrative Application of Building Design Standards for
illustrative examples.)
   (F)   Stairs. Stairs that provide primary access to units on upper floors
shall be covered.
   (G)   Garage design. Attached street-facing garages shall meet one of the
following standards.
      (1)   The garage doors shall not comprise more than 40% of the total
length of the building’s facade; or
      (2)   Garages shall be arranged in sets of two single-bay doors that are
offset by at least five feet from the front plane of an adjacent garage door.
 
Figure 156.D.005-1
Illustrative Application of Building Design Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2709.png]
Figure Note: The sample images above are shown only for illustrative purposes
and are not meant to prescribe that these forms must be used.
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.D.006 APARTMENT.
   (A)   Generally. These standards apply to apartment developments within the
district(s) where they are permitted as set out in:
      (1)   Section
156.B.004, Residential District Development Standards; and
      (2)   Section
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards.
   (B)   Building massing and scale.
      (1)   Apartment buildings shall be designed such that the primary
entrance and windows of all first-row buildings face a public street.
      (2)   Any portion of a building that is closer than 50 feet from a common
property line that abuts a residential district or use shall be no higher than
12 feet above the highest point of the closest residential structures. This
does not apply if the residential structure is located across the street from
the development. An apartment building containing more than four dwelling units
shall be designed to break up a rectangular floor plan and avoid a boxlike or
monolithic appearance.
      (3)   The following or similar techniques shall be used to avoid the
appearance of a box-like or monolithic building:
         (a)   Primary entrance treatments that are recessed or project from
the main facade such as canopies and porte cocheres. Support columns and roofs
of canopies and porte cocheres shall match or be consistent with the
architectural design of the building.
         (b)   The use of dormers, bay windows, or other windows that create
dimensions that break up the facade;
         (c)   Changes in wall planes of at least five feet at intervals of not
more than 30 feet;
         (d)   Balconies that are used irregularly, some projecting, some
recessed; and
         (e)   Varying roof lines.
      (4)   Elements such as eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or frieze boards
shall be used to contribute to the visual interest of the building.
   (C)   Internalized design.
      (1)   Ingress to and egress from all dwelling units in an apartment
development shall be made through the interior of the building rather than from
direct outside entrances to each unit.
      (2)   Uncovered exterior stairways are prohibited.
   (D)   Awnings. Awnings, where installed, shall be constructed with fabric or
metal coverings. Plastic coverings are prohibited. This regulation shall not
apply to residential buildings containing 12 or less residential dwelling
units.
   (E)   Balconies and railings. Balcony and railing materials may be different
than the materials used on exterior walls.
   (F)   Pedestrian access. All fences and gates shall have appropriate
connections to neighboring non-residential properties through the use of fence
or gate door unless it can be shown that is not possible due to site
constraints to promote walkability and connectivity.
   (G)   Parking location. Wrap-around design of multifamily buildings around a
core parking structure is strongly encouraged to ensure the garage appearance
is enhanced by additional architectural or landscape features.
   (H)   Attached garages. Attached street-facing garages shall meet one of the
following standards.
      (1)   The garage doors shall not comprise more than 40% of the total
length of the building’s facade; or
      (2)   Every set of two single-bay garage doors or every double garage
door shall be offset by at least five feet from the front plane of an adjacent
garage door.
   (I)   Detached garages. The building design and roof type of garage units
shall be consistent with those of the principal building(s). Detached garage
buildings that are adjacent to street rights-of-way shall include a Type B
bufferyard (see §
156.F.004, Buffering) between the garage building(s) and street.
   (J)   Building elements. All buildings in a multiple-family development
shall include a minimum of three of the following building elements.
      (1)   Visual interest. Elements such as outdoor gathering areas, porches,
shutters, bay windows, or balconies shall be used to contribute to the visual
interest of the building.
      (2)   Architectural features. Columns, eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or
frieze boards shall be used to contribute to the visual interest of the
building.
   (K)   Building variation and articulation. An apartment community with three
or more buildings must substantially vary the buildings in heights,
dispositions, scales (number of units), materials, or colors.
   (L)   Carports. Carports are permitted within the vehicular use areas of
apartment developments, provided they do not encroach into any required yards
or building setbacks or into any easements, and subject to the following
standards:
      (1)   Openness. Carports shall be no less than 50% open on all sides,
except for a side or sides that abut a wall of a principal building.
      (2)   No other storage. Carports shall not be used for storage of any
items except motor vehicles.
      (3)   Height. Carports shall not exceed ten feet in height.
      (4)   Drainage. Drainage from carports shall be captured and conveyed on
site and shall not impact adjacent properties.
      (5)   Construction. Carports and their support posts shall be firmly
anchored to the ground and shall meet applicable building codes.
      (6)   Design. Carports shall be constructed so that all structural
components, including support posts and roof forms, match or are consistent
with the design elements incorporated into the principal building(s).
   (M)   Roofing systems.
      (1)   Covering. Sloped roofs shall be covered with quality materials,
comparable to slate, concrete tile, dimensional shingles, metal shingles, or
architectural metal seam roofing.
      (2)   Integrated solar arrays. Building-integrated solar arrays (solar
panels that double as roofing) may be used on flat or pitched roofs.
      (3)   Projections. Roofs shall contain at least one projection for every
50 linear feet of building frontage. Roof projections may include cupolas,
dormers, balustrade walks, chimneys, or gables.
 
Figure 156.D.006-1
Illustrative Application of Building Design Standards for Apartment Buildings
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2711.png]
FIGURE NOTES:
A = Breaking up building form | B = Breaking up roof form to avoid it appearing
monolithic | C = Vertical articulation, such as a wall offset | D = Horizontal
articulation, such as an expression line | E = Stairs shall be covered
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.D.007 URBAN CORE AND MIXED-USE.
   (A)   Generally. These standards apply to any exterior wall of a
nonresidential or mixed-use building in the UC, Urban Core or MU, Mixed Use
zoning districts visible from a public or private street, a residential
property, or public open space.
   (B)   Building form.
      (1)   Scale and orientation. Commercial and mixed-use buildings shall
provide for pedestrians in both scale and structure orientation.
      (2)   Build-to line. Structures shall be built to within five feet of the
property line to provide for an urban edge and maintain continuity in the
improved street frontages.
      (3)   Public entrance. Each structure shall have a prominent identifiable
public entrance from the primary street.
      (4)   Secondary entrances.
         (a)   Secondary and service entrances are allowable from secondary
streets and off-street parking areas.
         (b)   Secondary entrances located on public alleyways shall be at-
grade to prevent tripping hazards and prevent encroachments into the pedestrian
traveled way.
      (5)   Height. See §
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards, for
building height requirements in the UC and MU zoning districts.
      (6)   Building proportions. In the UC District buildings shall be
proportioned to be prominent at the primary street facade.
   (C)   Placement.
      (1)   Principal structures. Principal structures shall be placed within
the minimum and maximum setbacks established in §
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards, to
create an urban edge and to define the pedestrian realm.
      (2)   Parking. Parking should be provided on the street as much as
possible with parking lots or garages placed on the interior of the block with
access from the side or the rear of the buildings or alleyways.
      (3)   Garages. All attached or detached garages shall be placed towards
the rear of a building except on a corner, where a side entrance may also be
allowed. These may be accessed via privately controlled lanes and alleyways.
      (4)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures shall not be placed in
such a manner that they extend in front of the rear building line of the
primary structure.
   (D)   Massing and scale.
      (1)   Facades. Building facades shall be architecturally differentiated
with at least three of the following elements:
         (a)   Buildings shall utilize elements such as massing, windows,
canopies, and articulated roof forms to create a visually distinct building
base, middle, and top (see Figure 156.D.007-1, Horizontal Articulation);
         (b)   Variations in building heights;
         (c)   Building insets or projections of at least two feet that extend
the full height of the building;
         (d)   Material changes for different building planes or elements;
         (e)   Accents through the use of moldings, sills, cornices, canopies,
or spandrels; or
         (f)   Other facade features, such as an arcade, balcony, gallery,
oriel or bay windows, pavilion, pergola, porches, porticos, terrace, tower, or
vestibules.
      (2)   One-story buildings.
         (a)   UC district. One-story buildings shall be prohibited in the UC
district.
         (b)   MU district. In the MU district, one-story commercial buildings
shall be constructed to appear of greater height in relation to the street.
This can be achieved through the use of pitched roofs with dormers or gables
facing the street, a higher parapet, and/or the use of an intermediate cornice
line to separate the ground floor and the upper level.
 
Figure 156.D.007-1
Horizontal Articulation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2713.png]
 
   (E)   Building design.
      (1)   Awnings and canopies.
         (a)   Awnings and canopies shall not extend more than five feet from
the facade of the building.
         (b)   Awnings and canopies shall be attached to the building facade
and shall not extend vertical support structures into the ground plane.
         (c)   Awnings and canopies shall maintain a minimum of eight feet of
vertical clearance from the ground plane.
      (2)   Entryways.
         (a)   Each building shall have a clearly visible entrance with either
an overhang, canopy or portico, recess or projection, arcade, raised corniced
parapet over the door, peaked roof form, arch, patio, display windows,
architectural detailing, or another design element approved by the Plan and
Zoning Commission.
         (b)   Doorways adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be set back so
that doors do not swing into a right-of-way.
      (3)   Required offsets.
         (a)   Fenestration and articulation. Buildings shall be vertically
articulated with a width equal to 20% of the building height. Vertical
articulation may include projections, recesses, arcades, porticos, or other
features that provide for different wall planes.
         (b)   Transparency.
            1.   The front facade and side street facade of any new
nonresidential building shall be comprised of at least 50% windows and doors at
the ground level. Highly reflective glass, dark-tinted glass, or other types of
glass that are intended to obscure the transparency shall be prohibited.
            2.   Accessory structures shall be comprised of at least 25%
windows and doors at the
ground level. Accessory structures that are not open for business to the public
are exempt from the transparency requirements of division (E)(3)(b)1., above,
provided they are placed between the rear of the primary building and rear yard
setback and are not visible from the public street.
      (4)   Materials. The allowable types and proportions of building
materials on public-facing and non-public-facing elevations are set out in §
156.D.002, General Requirements, in addition to the following standards:
         (a)   The visible sides of buildings, from the street, shall be
consistent in design and use of materials.
         (b)   All sides of buildings visible from the public right-of-way
shall be architecturally treated to produce an aesthetically pleasing facade
that is compatible with surrounding buildings and cohesive as a development
block. Building design shall include at least two materials as identified in §
156.D.002.
         (c)   The front facade, or any facade that directly abuts a public
right-of-way including a street-side yard of any building shall be at least 50%
brick or masonry stone.
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed of similar and/or
complementary materials as the primary structure.
         (e)   No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roofing
material, metal siding, non-architectural sheet metal, concrete block or other
similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building, except as trim
material, unless the Zoning Administrator determines that the said material,
when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance or provides
continuity to unite all structures within the property together into one
project concept.
         (f)   All material fasteners shall be concealed.
         (g)   All structures shall be constructed on permanent foundations and
may not be placed in a temporary manner.
      (5)   Nonresidential and mixed-use buildings. Residential units in a
mixed-use building shall not be on the ground/first level of any building also
containing a commercial use listed in §
156.C.003, Use Table, except that a maximum of 40% of the ground floor area may
be residential provided it is not adjacent to a front or street side yard.
      (6)   Rooftop mechanicals. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
screened from view using materials consistent and compatible with the primary
building materials.
   (F)   Pedestrian amenities.
      (1)   Street furniture. Public seating, trash receptacles, and
directional kiosks shall be of uniform design and provided throughout district,
approved by the Plan and Zoning Commission. Street trees, landscaping, weather
protection, public art, street furniture, and other pedestrian amenities in
public rights-of-way and plazas shall provide a minimum passable sidewalk width
of five feet.
      (2)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall connect to existing perimeter sidewalks
and to all building entrances; parking courts, garages, or structures; civic
spaces; and any other pedestrian destinations.
   (G)   Open space.
      (1)   Amount required. See §
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards for the
minimum required open space by building type and zoning district.
      (2)   Types of open space. See
Table 156.B.007-1, Public Civic and Open Space Standards, for minimum standards
for open space types within the UC and MU zoning districts.
   (H)   Signage.
      (1)   The location and size of signs shall be integrated into the design
of the overall development and shall meet regulations outlined in Article G,
Signs.
      (2)   Signage is considered as part of the architectural theme of the
building and district and shall be reviewed in the site plan.
      (3)   Roof signs shall be prohibited.
      (4)   Directional signs limited to two per premise shall be permitted and
shall be limited to six square feet each with a maximum height of four feet.
      (5)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument signs only with a
permitted size that shall be no more than 48 square feet in area and ten feet
in height.
   (I)   Service areas.
      (1)   Lighting.
         (a)   Lighting of outdoor service, loading, and storage areas shall be
the minimum necessary for security purposes and shall be designed and directed
so as not to create glare or lighting impacts at the street or on surrounding
properties.
         (b)   Lighting of entryways is encouraged and to the extent practical
should be attached to the building.
         (c)   Lighting shall be provided at secondary entryways located in
pedestrian alleyways.
      (2)   Service area screening. Service areas, garbage receptacles, utility
meters, and mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened from public
view and located for convenient access by service vehicles. Screening of these
areas shall be integrated into the overall building and landscape design.
      (3)   Loading and unloading. On-site space for stacking vehicles that are
waiting to load or unload may be provided as necessary. Otherwise,
accommodation shall be provided on-street.
   (J)   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground, where feasible.
   (K)   Stormwater. All stormwater collected from the roofs of the buildings
shall be diverted underground, where feasible.
      (1)   Whenever structures are erected or structurally altered, parking
spaces shall be provided on the same zoning lot as the building in accordance
with the requirements of Article E, Parking, Loading, and Stacking. Uses that
predominately occur during different times may share parking if it can be
demonstrated that collectively the minimum number of parking spaces is provided
at all times.
      (2)   Parking lots shall be located in the rear of all commercial uses or
on the side. Parking located on the side is allowable in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The parking shall not extend into the required front yard
setback.
         (b)   Landscaping shall be placed between the parking spaces and the
front property line in accordance with §
156.F.003, Development Landscaping.
         (c)   A single parking aisle with parking on one side, which is
adjacent to the building, and meets the minimum dimension established in §
156.E.003, Parking Design, shall be permitted where appropriate.
      (3)   Parking areas shall be designed to minimize headlights shining into
residential properties.
      (4)   Parking areas shall be set back five feet from the property line
and shall be landscaped with vegetation and or turf. This requirement can be
waived where parking lots adjoin and have cross-access agreements/easements.
      (5)   Off-street parking requirements shall be contained entirely outside
of the public right-of-way.
      (6)   The maximum amount of surface parking shall not exceed the
specified minimum by more than 25%. If additional parking is desired, it shall
be placed underground, within an enclosed building, or in a tuck-under garage.
The exception is shared parking when a zoning lot is developed/redeveloped with
shared uses in mind.
   (L)   Vehicular access.
      (1)   Driveway locations shall be spaced such that they are at least five
feet from any adjacent driveway.
      (2)   Shared driveways are allowed.
      (3)   Driveway location shall comply with the requirements of the
visibility triangle as set forth in Subsection 156.B.008.a, Measurements.
      (4)   Two driveway approaches may be permitted on each street frontage,
of each premise, excluding single-family attached, single-family detached and
duplex properties. At locations where driveways are not shared with an
adjoining property, each driveway shall be placed in such a way as to not
impede the visual clearance to access the public street.
      (5)   Access to attached and detached garages shall be from the rear of a
building only, except if the property is located on a corner lot and the side
street may be used for access.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.D.008 URBAN CORE HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY.
   (A)   Generally. The following standards shall apply within the UC-HD, Urban
Core Historic District Overlay in the UC, Urban Core zoning district and are
intended to implement the Marshalltown Downtown Master Plan. The standards of
the underlying UC, Urban Core zoning district shall apply in the case of a
conflict between the standards set forth in §
156.B.005, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Development Standards, and the
standards of this section.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply within the
UC-HD Overlay district when new construction or more than 10% of an existing
building's front or street-facing side exterior is the subject of review.
   (C)   Features and treatment methods.
      (1)   Masonry. Retain and repair original masonry and mortar. When
replacement of failed masonry is required, new masonry units shall match the
existing in dimension, composition, color, texture, and profile.
   (D)   Building facade elements. The following building facade element
treatments shall apply to the expansion of existing buildings:
      (1)   Parapet.
         (a)   Retain and repair existing parapets.
         (b)   Avoid complete removal of a parapet except in cases where it is
in danger of collapse or deterioration beyond repair. A rebuilt parapet should
match the original as closely as possible in height and material. A rebuilt
parapet removed by a prior owner, should align with the scale and material but
not create a false sense of history.
      (2)   Cornice. Retain and repair existing cornices.
      (3)   Roof.
         (a)   If full replacement or major repair is necessary, utilize a
compatible substitute material that will not change the character of the
building.
         (b)   Decorative features such as cupolas, cresting, dormers,
chimneys, visible shingle patterning, integral gutters, and original vents
shall remain.
         (c)   New elements such as dormers, skylights, antennas, solar panels,
and mechanical equipment shall be placed in a manner that they are screened
from public view.
      (4)   Windows.
         (a)   Retain and repair existing windows. Replacement windows shall be
of the same exterior dimension as the original window opening.
         (b)   New window openings in facades that are visible from a public
street or in any location that would impact a character-defining facade is not
allowed.
      (5)   Storefronts, bulkheads, display windows.
         (a)   Preserve and restore original storefronts, bulkheads, and
display windows when they remain in place. These building elements are usually
considered to be "character-defining" and effort should be made to retain the
original whenever possible.
         (b)   Remove cover-up siding and infill framing as part of storefront
rehabilitation.
         (c)   Repair the original materials or, if absolutely necessary,
replace with material that closely aligns with the original in appearance and
durability. Deteriorated wood elements can often be replaced with matching
milled pieces. Cast iron elements should be evaluated for structural stability.
         (d)   Maintain or restore the original size, configuration, divisions
and shape of storefronts.
      (6)   Doors and entries.
         (a)   Retain original recessed entries.
         (b)   Repair and restore architectural details.
      (7)   Decorative details.
         (a)   Retain original wood accents and details where they remain.
         (b)   Remove modern materials that cover historic exterior materials.
         (c)   Retain original cast iron and pressed metal where it remains.
         (d)   Apply paint only to historically painted materials.
      (8)   Signs and awnings.
         (a)   Avoid painting over historic painted signage.
         (b)   Signs shall not obscure historic architectural features or
disrupt the facade pattern.
         (c)   Storefront window signs shall not obscure the view through the
storefront. Signs shall be less than 25% of the total window glass.
         (d)   Awnings shall be triangular in section.
         (e)   Awnings shall be designed to fit the storefront openings without
obscuring architectural details.
         (f)   Awnings shall be supported structurally by the building and
shall not have posts supporting them from the ground.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.D.009 NONRESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Generally. Any exterior wall of a nonresidential building visible from
a public or private street, a residential property, or public open space shall
meet the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Exterior wall materials.
      (1)   Primary materials. A minimum of 80% of the primary exterior wall
and 60% of the ancillary exterior walls shall be finished with the materials
listed in §
156.D.002(D), Primary Materials.
      (2)   Secondary materials. The remaining percentages of the primary and
ancillary exterior walls may be finished with the materials listed in §
156.D.002(E), Secondary Materials.
   (C)   Building form.
      (1)   Neighborhood-scale. Buildings that cover up to 30,000 square feet
of gross floor area shall have moderate changes in height or roof lines, which
can be accomplished by one or more of the following techniques:
         (a)   Modules shall be offset from each other by a horizontal recess
or projection of the building facade that measures 10% or more of the building
height;
         (b)   Dormers with ridge lines that are three feet or more below the
ridge line of the roof;
         (c)   A compound roof shape, in which the highest ridge line and the
lowest ridge line have a height difference of two to five feet;
         (d)   Parapet walls that vary in height from two to four feet and
which are designed of equal or greater height to screen from public view all
rooftop mechanical equipment; or
         (e)   Towers that have a height that is four to six feet above the
highest peak or ridge of the roof or highest point of the parapet for a minimum
of 10% of the facade on which the tower is located.
      (2)   Community-scale. Buildings that cover between 30,001 square feet
and 60,000 square feet of gross floor area shall have major changes in height
per every 50 lineal feet of roofline, so which can be accomplished by one or
more of the following techniques:
         (a)   A compound roof shape, in which the highest ridge line and the
lowest ridge line have a height difference of five or more feet;
         (b)   Parapet walls that vary in height by more than four feet, are
proportional to the building, and which are designed of equal or greater height
to screen from public view all rooftop mechanical equipment;
         (c)   Towers that have a height that is more than six feet above the
highest peak or ridge of the roof or highest point of the parapet. The mass of
such towers shall be proportional to the building, so that the towers appear as
substantial, but not overwhelming, architectural elements;
         (d)   Ground-level arcades and second floor galleries/balconies;
         (e)   Functional or faux chimneys; or
         (f)   Other features that reduce the apparent mass of the building.
      (3)   Regional-scale. Buildings that cover more than 60,001 square feet
of gross floor area shall have major changes in height per every 50 lineal feet
of roofline, which shall, in addition to the requirements for community-scale
buildings, must include:
         (a)   Significant architectural features to identify principal
entrances; and
         (b)   Elements such as towers or significant projections from the
building to break up the building mass.
   (D)   Multi-story buildings. Buildings with three or more stories shall be
designed with a clearly differentiated base, middle, and top.
      (1)   Building base. A recognizable base shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
         (a)   Thicker walls, ledges, or sills; or
         (b)   Raised planters, which are integral to the building facade.
      (2)   Building top. A recognizable top shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
         (a)   Cornice treatments, other than just colored stripes or bands; or
         (b)   Sloping roofs with eaves and brackets.
   (E)   Building articulation.
      (1)   Major building articulation. Buildings shall be articulated using
one or more of the following major articulation design techniques uniformly
over the entire building facade:
         (a)   A step back of upper floors to create human-scale and to reduce
building scale and mass;
         (b)   Increased setbacks for up to 30% of a street elevation to create
public space; (public space may include outdoor seating/dining areas, pocket
parks, fountains and/or water features, children's play areas, or similar space
open to the public);
         (c)   Variations in building heights for a minimum of 30% of the
building facade;
         (d)   Building insets or projections of at least two feet that extend
the full height of the building for a minimum of 30% of the building facade;
         (e)   Material changes for different building planes or elements;
      (2)   Minor building articulation. Buildings shall be articulated using
two or more of the following minor articulation design techniques uniformly
over the entire building facade:
         (a)   Windows or faux window openings;
         (b)   Doors or faux door openings;
         (c)   Recessed or projecting building entries;
         (d)   Projecting bay windows;
         (e)   Window moldings;
         (f)   Arcades;
         (g)   Recessed or projecting porches;
         (h)   Recessed or projecting balconies;
         (i)   Functional or decorative canopies and awnings;
         (j)   Cornices;
         (k)   String courses;
         (l)   Columns;
         (m)   Wall sconces;
         (n)   Brick patterning, including soldier courses, or other building
material or color variations;
         (o)   Score lines; or
         (p)   Accents through the use of moldings, sills, cornices, canopies,
or spandrels.
   (F)   Building entrances. Each building shall have clearly-defined customer
entrances that include at least two of the following features:
      (1)   Canopies, porticos, arcades, or overhangs;
      (2)   Recesses or projections;
      (3)   Over the door or peaked roof forms;
      (4)   Arches;
      (5)   Outdoor patios or plazas;
      (6)   Display windows;
      (7)   Obviously differentiating architectural details such as moldings
that are integrated into the building structure and design; and/or
      (8)   Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas
and/or places for sitting.
   (G)   Roofing.
      (1)   Styles. Flat roof and pitched roof systems are allowed, subject to
the following standards:
         (a)   Mansard roofs are not allowed.
         (b)   Any material that is permitted by building code is allowed on
flat roof systems.
         (c)   Flat roof systems shall be hidden by parapet walls that are of
equal or greater height to screen from public view all rooftop mechanical
equipment.
      (2)   Approved materials. Roofing materials used on pitched roof systems
shall be proven, high-quality, durable materials, including:
         (a)   Architectural shingles;
         (b)   Concrete tile;
         (c)   Slate;
         (d)   Architectural standing seam metal;
         (e)   Building-integrated photovoltaics (solar panels that double as
roofing material);
         (f)   Green roof systems (encouraged); or
         (g)   Others approved by the Zoning Administrator and the Commission.
      (3)   Prohibited materials.
         (a)   Corrugated metal and other roofing materials that are not listed
in division (G)(2) above are prohibited.
         (b)   Reflective roof surfaces that produce glare are prohibited,
except for solar panels or white roofs intended to radiate absorbed or non-
reflected solar energy and reduce heat transfer to the building.
   (H)   Elevations.
      (1)   Front elevation. In addition to the above articulation features,
the front elevation of a building shall have:
         (a)   Architectural features that animate the facade along its entire
length, spaced at intervals of not more than 30 feet in horizontal distance.
These features may include wall sconces, display windows, faux windows,
material patterning, entry areas, towers, pilasters, and columns, or other
elements that create a pattern of light and shadow on the building wall.
         (b)   Awnings, arcades, or overhangs that project at least six feet
along not less than 50% of the facade.
      (2)   Side and rear elevations. Side and rear elevations shall have
architectural features that animate no less than 50% of the facade, which shall
include:
         (a)   Awnings, arcades, or overhangs that project at least six feet
and connect to awnings, arcades, or overhangs on the front elevation;
         (b)   No blank wall surfaces that extend for more than 15 or 30 feet
in vertical or horizontal distance, respectively; and
         (c)   Wall sconces, display windows, faux windows, material
patterning, entry areas, towers, pilasters, and columns, or other elements that
create a pattern of light and shadow on the building wall.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE E - PARKING, LOADING, AND STACKING
§ 156.E.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to ensure that:
      (1)   Provision of parking. Adequate, attractive, and safe off-street
parking is provided by this Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Residential protection. Sufficient parking is provided in
nonresidential areas that are near residential neighborhoods, so that the
character and quality of life in the residential neighborhoods are protected
from overflow parking;
      (3)   Provision of loading spaces. Adequate loading areas are provided
that do not interfere with the function of other vehicular use areas;
      (4)   Provision of access. Access to sites are managed to maintain the
desired function and safety of the adjacent street(s); and
      (5)   Lighting. Vehicular use areas and sites are designed and lighted to
promote public safety without creating undue light pollution and off-site
glare.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Development activities. The standards of this article apply to the
following development activities:
         (a)   New residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use development or
change in use from residential to nonresidential or mixed-use;
         (b)   Increase in apartment units, manufactured home pads, gross floor
area, or impervious surface by 20% or more, cumulatively over a five-year
period; or
         (c)   Change in use requiring additional parking, loading, or stacking
spaces (also known as vehicle use areas).
      (2)   Exemptions.
         (a)   Changes in the use(s) of existing buildings that result in fewer
required parking, loading, or stacking spaces shall not be required to provide
additional parking spaces.
         (b)   A permitted use may be converted to another permitted use
without full compliance with the required number of parking, loading, or
stacking spaces if the Zoning Administrator determines:
            1.   No additional parking, loading, or stacking spaces could be
provided without removing or partially removing a structure; and
            2.   The amount of parking, loading, or stacking spaces available
is at least 80% of the parking, loading, or stacking required for the new use.
      (3)   Change of use (maximum parking). Uses with off-street parking in
excess of the maximum allowed for a nonresidential use resulting from a change
of use in an existing building are not required to remove the excess parking
spaces.
   (C)   Timing of compliance. A Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued
until all site improvements required in this article are constructed in
conformance with the approved permit or plan required in §
156.J.002, Common Review Provisions.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.E.002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. Off-street loading, stacking, and access shall be provided,
located, and designed in accordance with the standards of this article.
   (B)   Lighting and noise. The following standards shall apply to all vehicle
use areas:
      (1)   Lighting shall comply with Article H, Outdoor Lighting.
      (2)   An area used for primary circulation, frequent idling of vehicle
engines, or loading activity shall be designed and located to minimize the
effects of noise, pollution, and vehicle lights on an adjoining property.
   (C)   Associated building, use, or structure. Vehicle use areas (VUA) shall
be maintained as long as the associated building, use, or structure is in use
or operation. No person shall utilize such building, use, or structure without
providing the VUAs required in this article. It shall be unlawful to
discontinue, reduce, or remove the required VUAs apart from the discontinuance,
removal, or reduction of the building, use, or structure that requires the VUA.
   (D)   Maneuvering space.
      (1)   Prohibited. No VUA shall be designed or built to require a vehicle
to maneuver into a public right-of-way or overhang or encroach an adjacent
property under separate ownership in order to park, load, unload, or stack,
except:
         (a)   In the case of single-family and duplex dwellings where backing
onto the public right-of-way is permitted; or
         (b)   Where a cross-access easement is in place.
      (2)   Barrier. In order to prevent overhang or encroachment described in
division (D)(1), Prohibited, above, a VUA shall include a permanent curb, wall
or other physical barrier. Such a physical barrier shall be located a minimum
of two feet from the right-of-way or property line.
   (E)   Location. Except as permitted in §
156.E.006, Parking Credits and Reductions, a VUA required by this article shall
be located on the same property as the building, use, or structure it serves
and it shall be located behind any required bufferyard as set out in Article F,
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening.
   (F)   Calculations.
      (1)   Fractions. If the final calculated number of required parking,
loading, or stacking spaces includes a fractional space, the number of required
spaces shall be increased to the next whole number if the fraction is five-
tenths or more, and when the fraction is less than five-tenths, the next lower
whole number shall apply.
      (2)   Variables for calculating required spaces. The variables used for
calculating spaces are measured as shown in Table 156.E.002, Parking, Loading,
and Stacking Variable Meanings.
Table 156.E.002
Parking, Loading, and Stacking Variable Meanings
Variable The number of required spaces is calculated based on the number of:
Table 156.E.002
Parking, Loading, and Stacking Variable Meanings
Variable The number of required spaces is calculated based on the number of:
Per
Dwelling Dwelling units on the subject property.
Unit
Per      Spaces available for a recreational vehicle to connect to utilities provided at
Campsite the recreational vehicle park.
Per      Bedrooms in the facility instead of the number of bed or some other measure.
Bedroom
Per
Gross    Gross floor area of the establishment, which measurement is described in
Floor    Subsection 156.B.008.a, Measurements.
Area
Per      Employees during the shift in which the maximum number of employees is present.
Employee
         Seats affixed to the floor that are provided to guests (patrons, members, etc.),
Per Seat with benches or pews measured as one seat per two feet of width. Space
         requirements for uses with unaffixed seats shall be based on the seating
         capacity permitted by the Fire Code and approved by the Fire Marshal’s office.
Per      Students or enrollees that the facility is permitted to have according to the
Student  appropriate licensing agency, if applicable.
 
      (3)   Multiple nonresidential uses. If several nonresidential uses occupy
a single parcel or building, the parking requirements shall be calculated
separately for each use within the development, or as set out in §
156.E.006, Parking Credits and Reductions, whichever results in a lesser number
of required spaces.
   (G)   Surfacing and drainage. All vehicle use areas shall be graded,
surfaced, and maintained so that water does not accumulate, flow, or drain onto
abutting public or private property. The surfacing of VUAs shall consist of
asphalt, concrete, or other all-weather surface approved by the City Engineer.
   (H)   Dedication of spaces. Off-street parking, loading, and stacking spaces
shall not be used interchangeably to meet one another's requirements nor shall
their placement interfere with one another's use.
   (I)   Insufficient vehicle use area. The Zoning Administrator may require a
landowner to provide additional VUA even if the number of spaces provided meets
the minimum requirement for the established use, if vehicles are consistently
required to park or unload on the street (where on-street parking is
prohibited) or on other properties due to a lack of usable VUA.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.E.003 PARKING DESIGN.
   (A)   Design and construction requirements.
      (1)   Tandem parking. Each parking space shall be accessible from a
street or alley through aisles and/or driveways, except that tandem parking
arrangements are permitted for single-family, two-family, and manufactured home
uses or as allowed based on an approved parking study as described in §
156.E.006, Parking Credits and Reductions.
      (2)   Dead-end aisles. Dead-end aisles are not permitted unless adequate
turnarounds usable by a two-axle vehicle are provided.
      (3)   Marking. All parking spaces for nonresidential and mixed-uses shall
be clearly marked on the pavement with yellow or white traffic paint or raised
pavement markers approved by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Parking space orientation. Parking areas shall be designed to
minimize headlights shining into residential properties as required per
screening per § 156.F.005.
      (5)   Parking module dimensions. Parking modules shall be dimensioned as
shown in
Table 156.E.003, Parking Module Dimensions. The dimensions that are set out in
the table are illustrated in
Figure 156.E.003, Illustrative Parking Module Configurations.
Table 156.E.003
Minimum Parking Module Dimensions
A         B        C                 D               E        F
                   Depth of Stall 90 Width of Aisle  Width of Module Width
Angle of  Width of Degrees to Aisle                  Stall
Parking   Stall                                      Parallel
(Degrees)          One Way Two Way   One Way Two Way to Aisle One Way Two Way
Table 156.E.003
Minimum Parking Module Dimensions
A         B        C                 D               E        F
                   Depth of Stall 90 Width of Aisle  Width of Module Width
Angle of  Width of Degrees to Aisle                  Stall
Parking   Stall                                      Parallel
(Degrees)          One Way  Two Way  One Way Two Way to Aisle One Way Two Way

30        9        16.8     12.9     11      18      18       44.6    43.8
45        9        19.1     15.9     13      18      12.7     51.2    49.8
60        9        20.1     17.8     18      18      10.4     58.2    53.6
90        9        18       18       24      24      9        42      60
Parallel  91       212      212      12      18      N/A      30      36
                   (length) (length)
TABLE NOTES:
1   End spaces must be 10 feet
2   Please note that accessible stalls allow 8 foot with a minimum 5 foot no
parking area next to them.
 
 
Figure 156.E.003
Illustrative Parking Module Configurations
Illustrative dimensions for one stall row Illustrative dimensions for two stall row
parking module                            parking module
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/ bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2715.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2717.png]
 
   (B)   Surfacing and drainage.
      (1)   Paving and grading. Except as set forth in division (D),
Alternative Paving Materials, below, all off-street parking areas, driveways,
and access drives must be paved with an all-weather surface and graded and
drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulations within the area.
      (2)   Equipment and service vehicles. Areas in rear and interior side
yards used to store equipment or service vehicles used in connection with the
operation of a business located on the premises in areas zoned General
Commercial or General Industrial, may be surfaced with gravel that is
maintained to eliminate blowing dust and erosion and must be screened per §
156.F.005, Screening, when adjacent to residential use or zoned areas or public
right-of-way.
   (C)   Setback. No part of any parking area shall be closer than five feet to
any established street right-of-way, alley, or property line. Where a parking
area of a non-residential use or district adjoins any residential use or
district, it shall be screened in accordance with the standard of §
156.F.004, Buffering.
   (D)   Alternative paving materials. The City Engineer may approve
alternative paving materials for parking areas not specified in §
156.E.002(B), Surfacing and Drainage, if the City Engineer determines that the
alternative, compared to the permitted materials, is substantially equal to or
better in quality and durability.
   (E)   Snow storage. Parking lots and landscaping and buffering required by
Article F, Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening, shall be designed so that
snow can be efficiently plowed into on-site storage areas. Snow storage areas
shall be located and designed so that:
      (1)   Reduction of spaces. The amount of parking on the site is not
reduced below 80% of the number of spaces required by Table 156.E.004-1,
Minimum and Maximum Off-Street Parking, when snow is stored on-site;
      (2)   Circulation and visibility. Storage of snow does not interfere with
circulation on the site or with visibility at points of ingress or egress or at
street intersections;
      (3)   Landscape islands. Landscape islands shall not be used for snow
storage unless specifically identified on the site development plan. All light
poles, landscaping, or internal pedestrian pathways shall be protected from
vehicle encroachment with concrete curbing or similar permanent and elevated
landscaping elements approved by the Zoning Administrator;
      (4)   Risk mitigation. The location of the snow storage area does not
create an unreasonable risk of snow being pushed into street rights-of-way;
      (5)   Heavy snow events. The snow storage area is located and configured
so that snow can be removed from the site during periods of heavy snowfall that
are combined with sub-freezing temperatures; and
      (6)   Pervious storage area. The area under the stored snow is pervious
landscape area, and runoff from snowmelt is directed through stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) to slow water and improve its quality.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15091, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 156.E.004 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section applies to all uses and structures in all zoning
districts, except as provided below.
      (2)   The minimum requirements of this section do not apply to the Urban
Core (UC) district. However, the maximum requirements of this section do apply.
   (B)   Residential parking. Parking spaces for household living use types or
specified building types that are located in private garages, carports, or
individual driveways do not have to be marked. An area on a private residential
lot is considered a parking space if:
      (1)   Dimensions. The area is at least 9 feet wide and 18 feet deep in
dimension and may also be part of an access drive to a private garage or
carport and shall be counted in the Minimum and Maximum Spaces of
Table 156.E.004 for Household Living;
      (2)   Encroachment. The area does not encroach upon a public sidewalk;
      (3)   Surface. The area has an improved hard surface as required in §
156.E.003(B), Surfacing and Drainage; and
      (4)   Access. The area is accessible from the street or alley.
   (C)   Minimum and maximum spaces. Off-street parking spaces must be provided
for the uses listed in
Table 156.E.004, Minimum and Maximum Parking, below. The uses must provide the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces, and parking spaces may not exceed
the maximum number of spaces.
   (D)   Multiple activities. Except as otherwise provided, where multiple
activities associated with a single-use take place on-site, the required
parking shall include a combination of the site's activities. For example, a
truck stop is required to provide parking based on applicable retail sales
area, car wash, overnight accommodations, and any other applicable activities.
Table 156.E.004
Minimum and Maximum Parking
SF = square feet GFA = Gross Floor Area -- = No minimum or no maximum, as
applicable
Use Category Subtype Minimum Spaces Maximum Spaces
Table 156.E.004
Minimum and Maximum Parking
SF = square feet GFA = Gross Floor Area -- = No minimum or no maximum, as
applicable
Use Category        Subtype             Minimum Spaces      Maximum Spaces
Residential and Agricultural
                    Dwelling, Apartment 1 per dwelling unit 1 per bedroom
Household Living    Dwelling, Single-   2 per dwelling unit 6 per dwelling unit
                    Family Attached
                    Dwelling, Single-   2 per dwelling unit 6 per dwelling unit
                    Family Detached
                    Dwelling, Duplex    2 per dwelling unit 6 per dwelling unit
Household Living    Dwelling, Townhouse 1 per dwelling unit 6 per dwelling unit
                    Dwelling, Multiplex 1 per dwelling unit 1 per bedroom
                    Manufactured Home   --                  2 per dwelling unit
                    Park
                    Assisted Living     0.3 per unit + 0.75 1 per unit + 1 per
                    Facility            per employee        employee
                    Boarding or Rooming 1 per bedroom       1 per bedroom
Group Living        House
                    Group Home          2 per dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit
                    Nursing Home        1 per 2 beds        2 per 2 beds
                    Group Living (Other 2 per dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit
                    than Listed)
                    Accessory Dwelling  --                  --
                    Unit
                    Bed and Breakfast   1 per bedroom       2 per bedroom
                    Home
                    Farm Stand          1 per stand         3 per stand
Residential         Group Day Care (6   --                  1 per dwelling unit
Accessory Uses1     to 12 children)
                    Residential
                    Accessory Use       --                  --
                    (Other than Listed)
                    Upper-Story         1 per dwelling unit 1.5 per dwelling
                    Residential                             unit
Agricultural and    Community Garden    --                  2 per lot
Animal Services     Kennel              1 per 1,000 SF GFA  1 per 250 SF GFA
                    Plant Nursery,
                    Greenhouse, and     --                  --
                    Landscaping
                    Business
                    Veterinary Clinic   1 per 500 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
Agricultural and    Veterinary Hospital 1 per 500 SF retail 1 per 300 SF retail
Animal Services                         area                area
                    Crop Production     --                  --
                    Nursery (Retail)    1 per 500 SF retail 1 per 200 SF retail
                                        area                area
                    Stable (Public or   1 per horse boarded 2 per horse boarded
                    Commercial)
Public and Institutional
                    Adult Day Care      1 per employee      1.75 per employee
                    Pre-School or Child 1 per employee      1.75 per employee
                    Day Care Center
                    Group Day Care      1 per employee      1.75 per employee
Day Care            Center
                    Botanical Garden,
                    Nature Preserve or  --                  --
                    Trail
                    Bus or Train        --                  --
                    Passenger Terminal
                                        1 per 400 SF
                                        office, research,
                    College or          and library area;
                    University          plus 1 space per    --
                                        300 sq ft assembly
                                        areas and
Educational                             classrooms
Facilities          Training Facility
                    or Vocational       1 per 300 SF GFA    --
                    School
                    School, Primary or  2 per classroom
                    Secondary (Public   (Primary); 1 per
                    or Private)         employee + 1 per 5  --
                    -Primary            students
                    -Secondary          (Secondary)
Educational         All Other
Facilities          Educational         1 per 400 SF GFA    --
                    Facilities
                    Government/Non-     1 per 400 SF GFA    --
                    Profit Office
Government          Government Services
Facilities          (Police, Fire,      --                  --
                    Emergency Medical
                    Services)
                    Hospital            1 per 3 patient     --
                                        beds
Medical Facilities  Funeral Home or     1 per 6 seats       --
                    Mortuary
                    Clinic, Medical     1 per 300 SF GFA    --
                    Lab, or Urgent Care
                    Botanical Garden,
                    Nature Preserve or  --                  --
                    Trail
                    Cemetery,
Parks and Open      Columbarium,        --                  --
Areas               Mausoleum, or
                    Memorial Park
                    Park, Playground,
                    and Common Open     --                  --
                    Space
                    Airport or Heliport -Special Study, refer to § 156.E.004(F)
Passenger Terminal  All other Passenger --                  --
                    Terminal Uses
                    Club or Lodge       1 per 300 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
                    Place of Public     1 per 6 seats       1 per 1.5 seats
                    Assembly
Public Assembly     Library, Aquarium,  1 per 1,000 SF GFA  1 per 500 SF GFA
                    Museum, or Gallery
                    Senior, Youth, or   1 per 300 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
                    Community Center
Social Service      All Social Services Special Study, refer to § 156.E.004(F)
Utilities           Major Utility       1 per employee      --
                    Minor Utility       --                  --
Commercial and Office
Adult Business      Adult Entertainment 1 per 400 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
                    Business
                    Archery/Firearms    1 per 3 bays or 1   1 per bay or 1 per
                    Range               per 300 SF firing   100 SF firing area
                                        area if no bays     if no bays
                    Bar or Tavern       1 per 200 SF GFA    1 per 100 SF GFA
                    Bowling Alley       1 per lane          4 per lane
                    Dance Club or Dance 1 per 200 SF GFA    1 per 100 SF GFA
Entertainment       Hall
(Indoor)            Fitness Gym         1 per 600 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
                    Entertainment
                    (Indoor) (Other     1 per 450 SF GFA    1 per 100 SF GFA
                    than Listed)
                    Movie or Other      1 per 4 seats       1 per 3 seats
                    Theater
                    Tattoo or Piercing  1 per chair plus 1  1.5 per chair plus
                    Business            per employee        1 per employee
                                        1 per 6 seats or 1  1 per 4 seats or 1
                    Amphitheater        per 30 SF if no     per 50 SF if no
                                        permanent seats     permanent seats
Entertainment       Campground without
(Outdoor)           Overnight           1 per campsite      --
                    Accommodations
                    Golf Course         --                  --
                    Golf Driving Range  1 per tee area      3 per tee area
                                        1 per 300 SF        1 per 250 SF
                                        outdoor             outdoor
                    Mini-Golf Course    entertainment area  entertainment area
                                        plus 1 per 200 SF   plus 1 per 150 SF
Entertainment                           GFA                 GFA
(Outdoor)           Entertainment       1 per 1,000 SF      1 per 300 SF
                    (Outdoor) (Other    outdoor             outdoor
                    than Listed)        entertainment area  entertainment area
                    Stadium, Running    1 per 6 seats or 1  1 per 4 seats or 1
                    Track, or Ball      per 50 SF if no     per 30 SF if no
                    Field               permanent seats     permanent seats
                    Bank or Credit      1 per 350 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
Offices/Suites      Union
                    Offices (Other than 1 per 400 SF GFA    1 per 200 SF GFA
                    Listed)
                                        0.3 per guest room  1 per guest room +
                                        + 1 per 3 persons   1 per 1 person
                    Bed and Breakfast   (based on maximum   (based on maximum
                    Inn                 design occupancy)   design occupancy)
                                        for accessory       for accessory
                                        meeting space and   meeting space and
Overnight                               catered functions   catered functions
Accommodations      Campground with
                    Overnight           1 per campsite      --
                    Accommodations
                    Overnight           .8 per guest room + 1 per guest room +
                    Accommodations      1 per 800 SF public 1 per 400 SF public
                    (Other than Listed) meeting area and    meeting area and
                                        restaurant space    restaurant space
Parking, Commercial All Uses            --                  --
                    Catering            1 per employee or 1
Restaurants         Establishment       per 1,500 SF GFA,   --
                                        whichever is less
                    Food Delivery       1 per employee      2 per employee
                    Microbrewery        1 per 200 SF dining 1 per 25 SF dining
                                        or tasting area     or tasting area
Restaurants         Restaurant (Other   1 per 200 SF GFA    1 per 25 SF GFA
                    than Listed)
                    Restaurant, Drive-  1 per 250 SF GFA    1 per 25 SF GFA
                    In or Drive-Through
Retail Repair,      All Uses            1 per 400 SF GFA    1 per 25 SF GFA
Sales, and Service
Self-Service        All Uses            1 per 20 storage    1 per 10 storage
Storage                                 stalls              stalls
                    Car Wash            1 per 3 employees   --
                    Heavy Vehicular     1 per 1,000 SF      1 per 25 SF sales
                    Equipment Sales,    sales and service   and service
                    Service, and Repair building(s)         building(s)
                    Vehicle Fuel        1 per 400 SF GFA    1 per 25 SF GFA
Vehicle Sales and   Station
Service             Vehicle Repair,     1 per 250 SF GFA +  1 per 25 SF GFA + 1
                    Major               1 per employee      per employee
                    Vehicle Service,    1 per 400 SF GFA    1 per 25 SF GFA
                    Minor
                    All Other Vehicle   1 per 500 SF sales
                    Sales and Service   and service         --
                                        building(s)
Industrial
                                        1 per employee or 1
Heavy Industrial    All Uses            per 1,500 SF GFA,   --
                                        whichever is less
                    Building or         1 per 1,500 SF      1 per 300 SF
                    Development         storage area        storage area
Light Industrial    Contractor
                    Light Industrial    1 per employee or 1
                    (Other Than Listed) per 1,500 SF GFA,   --
                                        whichever is less
Warehousing and     All Uses            1 per 2,000 SF GFA  --
Freight Movement
                                        1 per employee + 1
Waste-Related       All Uses            per 15,000 SF of    --
Service                                 outdoor storage or
                                        salvage area
Wholesale Trade     All Uses            1 per 1,500 SF GFA  1 per 400 SF GFA
Notes:
1   In addition to the required and maximum for the primary use.
 
   (F)   Special studies.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Some of the uses listed in
Table 156.E.004-1, Minimum and Maximum Parking, have widely varying parking
demand characteristics. Accordingly, their parking requirements are listed as
"Special Study." Required parking for these uses are established according to
the standards of this section.
         (b)   Special studies may also be submitted to support a request to
reduce the number of required parking spaces to less than that set out in
Table 156.E.004-1, due to the nature of the operations and/or location of a
proposed use. The special study must include and support all requested
reductions in parking. Further parking credits and reductions that are
otherwise available pursuant to §
156.E.006, Parking Credits and Reductions, may not be applied when parking
reductions are granted pursuant to this section, unless the reductions are
supported by the special study.
      (2)   Special study requirements.
         (a)   A special study must be conducted by a qualified transportation
planner or traffic engineer at the applicant's expense.
         (b)   The special study must provide:
            1.   A peak parking analysis of at least five functionally
comparable uses; and
            2.   Documentation regarding the comparability of the referenced
uses, including: name, function, location, gross floor area, parking
availability, access to transportation network (including vehicular, bicycle,
pedestrian, and transit), use restrictions, and other factors that could affect
the parking demand.
      (3)   Approval of special study.
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may rely upon the special study or may
request additional information or analysis, including, but not limited to:
alternative or new data points, or consideration of additional or alternative
factors related to comparability or peak demand, as supported by sound
engineering principles.
         (b)   As a condition of approval of a special study, the Zoning
Administrator may require that land be reserved as an undeveloped area for
additional future parking if there is a demonstrably high probability the use
could change, resulting in a higher demand for parking.
   (G)   Unlisted uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not
specifically addressed in this article, the Zoning Administrator shall apply
the off-street parking standard specified for the use that the Zoning
Administrator deems most similar to the proposed use according to §
156.C.010, New and Unlisted Uses, or require that the applicant provide a
special study according to division (F), Special Studies, above.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15091, passed 9-23-2024; Ord. 15104, passed
6-23-2025)
§ 156.E.005 REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE PARKING.
   (A)   Number of required spaces. Parking for disabled persons shall be
provided as set out in Table 156.E.005-1, Accessible Parking Requirements, or
as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards for
Accessible Design and ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities
published by the United States Access Board. If any of the standards within
this section and the United States Access Board are in conflict then whichever
requires more spaces shall be used. Required accessible parking spaces are
included in the total number of required parking spaces per §
156.E.004, Required Off-Street Parking.
Table 156.E.006-1
Accessible Parking Requirements
Number of Required Parking Minimum Number of         Minimum Number of Van-
Spaces                     Accessible Parking Spaces Accessible Parking Spaces
Table 156.E.006-1
Accessible Parking Requirements
Number of Required Parking Minimum Number of         Minimum Number of Van-
Spaces                     Accessible Parking Spaces Accessible Parking Spaces
1 to 25                    1                         1
26 to 50                   2                         1
51 to 75                   3                         1
76 to 100                  4                         1
101 to 150                 5                         1
151 to 200                 6                         1
201 to 300                 7                         2
301 to 400                 8                         2
401 to 500                 9                         2
                           2% of total parking       1 out of 6 accessible
501 to 1,000               provided in each lot or   spaces, rounded up
                           structure
1,001 and over             20 plus 1 for each 100    1 out of 6 accessible
                           over 1,000                spaces, rounded up
 
   (B)   Parking space size specifications. Figure 156.E.005-1, ADA Parking
Space Dimensions, details the specific size requirements for both standard
automobile and van accessible ADA accessible parking spaces.
 
Figure 156.E.005-1
ADA Parking Space Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2719.png]
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.E.006 PARKING CREDITS AND REDUCTIONS.
   (A)   Generally. This section sets out several ways to reduce or receive
credit for the number of required off-street parking spaces that must be
provided according to §
156.E.004, Required Off-Street Parking.
   (B)   Administrative credits and reductions. The Zoning Administrator may
approve the following parking credit and reduction options for a property. If
such administrative reductions are proposed in a legislative review application
the presence of such reductions shall have no bearing on the recommendation or
final decision of the administrative review bodies involved. The administrative
credit and reduction options are cumulative if more than one is used on a
property.
      (1)   On-street parking credit.
         (a)   On-street parking spaces may provide credit to satisfy the
minimum parking space requirements in the nonresidential and mixed-use zoning
districts established in §
156.E.004, Required Off-Street Parking on streets designed for on-street
parking. The use of on-street parking spaces to satisfy minimum parking
requirements in no way guarantees the use of such parking spaces to customers,
employees, or visitors of the subject property.
         (b)   On-street spaces shall be located on a public or private street,
shall be available to the general public, and directly abutting the subject
property.
         (c)   Bus stops, clear zones adjacent to curb cuts, and other areas in
which parking is prohibited shall not be included in the calculation of
available on-street parking spaces.
         (d)   An on-street parking space shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
length. A minimum of 16 linear feet of an on-street parking space shall be
directly adjacent to the subject property in order to be counted as a parking
space.
      (2)   Shared parking reduction.
         (a)   Shared parking allows a reduction of up to 25% in the total
number of required parking spaces when a property is occupied by two or more
uses that typically do not experience peak use of parking areas at the same
time. When any land or building is used for two or more uses that are listed in
Table 156.E.005-1, Shared Parking Table, below, the minimum total number of
required parking spaces may be determined by the following procedures, which
are followed by Table 156.E.005-2, Illustrative Shared Parking Credit
Calculation, showing an example of how to calculate shared parking reductions.
            1.   Determine the minimum parking requirements for each use
category in Column (A) as if it were a separate use excluding spaces reserved
for use by specified individuals or classes of individuals (for example,
accessible spaces or spaces posted as "reserved");
            2.   Multiply the sum of required parking spaces for each use by
the corresponding percentages for each of the five time periods set forth in
Columns (B) through (F) of Table 156.E.005-1, below;
            3.   Calculate the total for each time period; and
            4.   Select the column with the highest total to find the required
number of shared spaces.
Table 156.E.006-1,
Shared Parking Table
             Weekday                    Weekend                    (F)
(A)          (B)          (C)           (D)          (E)           Night
Use Category Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 (midnight to
             a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       6:00 a.m.)
             p.m.)        midnight)     p.m.)        midnight)
Table 156.E.006-1,
Shared Parking Table
              Weekday                  Weekend                    (F)
(A)           (B)          (C)         (D)          (E)           Night
Use Category  Day (6:00    Evening (6: Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 (midnight to
              a.m. to 6:00 00 p.m. to  a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       6:00 a.m.)
              p.m.)        midnight)   p.m.)        midnight)
Residential   60%          90%         80%          90%           100%
Offices       100%         10%         10%          5%            5%
Retail Sales
or Personal   60%          90%         100%         70%           5%
Service
Overnight
Accommodation 75%          100%        75%          100%          75%
s
Restaurant    50%          100%        100%         100%          10%
Indoor
Recreation or 40%          100%        80%          100%          10%
Outdoor
Recreation
All Others    100%         100%        100%         100%          100%
 
Table 156.E.006-2, Illustrative Shared Parking Reduction Calculation
EXAMPLE: A mixed-use building in the MU zoning district has 35 apartments,
30,000 square feet of general office space, and 40,000 square feet of retail
space. Separately, these uses would require 270 parking spaces ((35 sp. x 2
sp./unit) + (30,000 sf. x (1 sp./350 sf.)) + (40,000 sf. x (1 sp./350 sf.)) =
270). However, combined, they could share 196 parking spaces, a 27% reduction.
             Weekday                    Weekend                    (F)
(A)          (B)          (C)           (D)          (E)           Night
Use Category Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 (midnight to
             a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       6:00 a.m.)
             p.m.)        midnight)     p.m.)        midnight)
Table 156.E.006-2, Illustrative Shared Parking Reduction Calculation
EXAMPLE: A mixed-use building in the MU zoning district has 35 apartments,
30,000 square feet of general office space, and 40,000 square feet of retail
space. Separately, these uses would require 270 parking spaces ((35 sp. x 2
sp./unit) + (30,000 sf. x (1 sp./350 sf.)) + (40,000 sf. x (1 sp./350 sf.)) =
270). However, combined, they could share 196 parking spaces, a 27% reduction.
             Weekday                    Weekend                    (F)
(A)          (B)          (C)           (D)          (E)           Night
Use Category Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 Day (6:00    Evening (6:00 (midnight to
             a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to       6:00 a.m.)
             p.m.)        midnight)     p.m.)        midnight)
Residential  60% x 70 =   90% X 70 = 63 80% = 56     90% = 63      100% = 70
70 spaces    42
Office or    100% x 86
Industrial   =86          10% x 86 = 9  10% x 86 = 9 5% x 86 = 4   5% x 86 = 4
86 spaces
Retail Sales 60% x 114 =  90% x 114 =   100% x 114 = 70% x 114 =
and Service  68           103           114          80            5% x 114 = 6
114 spaces
COLUMN       196          175           179          147           80
TOTALS
TABLE NOTE:
The largest number, 196, is the number of parking spaces required. This example
is a 27% reduction compared to individual calculations.
 
         (b)   Where a shared parking reduction is to be applied to uses on two
or more lots under different ownership, the following shall be provided to the
Zoning Administrator:
            1.   A plan that provides for interconnected parking lots and
required residential spaces to be clearly designated and separated from spaces
provided for employees, customers, and service;
            2.   Recorded easements, accepted on a form acceptable to the City
Attorney, that provide, at a minimum:
               A.   A guarantee of each owner’s rights to the use of the
parking facility;
               B.   A requirement that any termination of or amendment to the
agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city;
               C.   Cross-access among the parking areas and connections to
allow parking by the different uses anywhere on the connected properties;
               D.   Allocation of maintenance responsibilities;
               E.   A pedestrian circulation system that connects uses and
parking areas, making it easy and convenient for pedestrians to move between
uses; and
               F.   A right of enforcement by the city.
      (3)   Off-site parking credit. Off-site parking spaces may provide credit
to satisfy the minimum parking space requirements in any nonresidential or
mixed-use zoning district subject to the following:
         (a)   The off-site parking lot is within 300 feet of the subject
property, measured from the nearest property lines;
         (b)   The parking lot is wholly within a nonresidential or mixed-use
zoning district; and
         (c)   The parking lot complies with all applicable requirements of
this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Legislative credits and reductions.
      (1)   Plan and Zoning Commission. The Plan and Zoning Commission may
approve a reduction in the number of required parking spaces if the applicant
demonstrates that a reduction is appropriate based on the applicant providing a
parking study with specific parking demand forecasts for the proposed use and/
or on the provision of alternative parking or transportation demand management
programs that tend to reduce the demand for parking spaces, provided that:
         (a)   The study is prepared by a professional transportation planner
or traffic engineer;
         (b)   The forecasts are based upon a peak parking analysis of at least
five comparable uses; and
         (c)   The comparability of the uses is documented in detail, including
their location, gross floor area, street access, use types and restrictions,
hours of operation, peak parking demand periods, and all other factors that
could affect parking demand.
      (2)   Transportation professional. The Zoning Administrator may retain a
qualified transportation planner or traffic engineer, at the applicant's
expense, to review the parking demand forecast and provide recommendations to
the Plan and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Reserve. The balance of the land necessary to meet the parking
requirements shall be held in reserve as an undeveloped area, to meet any
future needs generated by an expansion of the business, a change in land use,
or underestimated parking demand.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.E.007 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Generally. This section establishes the requirements with off-street
loading spaces in connection with any nonresidential or mixed-use building,
structure, or use which is to be erected or substantially altered to provide
adequate space for off-street loading, unloading, and the maneuvering of
shipping and delivery vehicles in the GC, GI, and MU zoning districts.
   (B)   Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. Off-street
loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in
Table 156.E.007, Minimum Off-Street Loading Spaces Required.
Table 156.E.007
Minimum Off-Street Loading Spaces Required
Use Groupings1 Gross Floor Area in Square Feet Number of Required Loading
                                               Spaces
Table 156.E.007
Minimum Off-Street Loading Spaces Required
Use Groupings1           Gross Floor Area in Square Number of Required Loading
                         Feet                       Spaces
                         Less than 10,000           0
Industrial               10,000-50,000              1
                         50,001-100,000             2
                         Each additional 100,000    1
                         Less than 10,000           0
Commercial and Office,   10,000-100,000             1
Public and Institutional 100,001-200,000            2
                         Each additional 100,000    1
All Other Use Groupings  N/A                        N/A
Table Notes:
N/A = Not Applicable
1Refer to overall groupings of the uses in the Use Table in § 156.C.003 (for
example, Agricultural, Residential, etc).
 
   (C)   Design. To minimize impacts, off-street loading areas shall comply
with the following standards:
      (1)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street loading or
unloading areas may not glare on any right-of-way or adjacent property.
      (2)   Location. Not be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of
intersection of any two streets with no loading dock visible from a
thoroughfare or collector street right-of-way;
      (3)   Buffering. Docks and loading spaces shall be located behind
buildings and screened from view from abutting properties and public right-of-
way. Truck access and loading areas that are located between a principal
building and a residential property shall comply with the following additional
standards:
         (a)   Use of enclosed loading. The loading area shall be enclosed by a
roof and a wall between the principal building and the property boundary line
(as depicted in
Figure 156.E.007-1, Illustrative Example of Enclosed Loading, below). The walls
of the enclosure shall be tall enough to completely screen the delivery vehicle
and shall be designed and constructed with architectural elements such as
windows, awnings, or other features that complement the exterior of the
principal building. The portion of the bufferyard between the enclosed loading
and the property line may be reduced by one level of opacity with the remainder
of the bufferyard being the opacity level required by Table 156.F.004-1,
Bufferyard Types, for the applicable zoning district; or
         (b)   Absence of enclosed loading. The loading area shall be screened
along its length by a district bufferyard that has one additional level of
opacity (for example, from a Type B bufferyard to a Type C bufferyard) than
required by Table 156.F.004-1 and, additionally, the loading area shall contain
an eight-foot-tall masonry wall that is designed and constructed with the same
primary exterior finish materials of the principal building.
 
Figure 156.E.007-1
Illustrative Example of Enclosed Loading
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2721.png]
 
   (D)   Types of loading spaces.
      (1)   Loading for industrial uses. Each required loading space in the GI,
General Industrial zoning district shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and
45 feet in depth.
      (2)   Other uses. All other required loading spaces shall be a minimum of
12 feet in width and 18 feet in depth. All required loading spaces shall have a
minimum vertical clearance of 15 feet and shall be designated by signs as
loading spaces.
   (E)   Mixed-use developments. Where mixed-use developments may be adequately
and conveniently served by a common loading area, the Zoning Administrator may
approve a reduction in spaces required in Table 156.E.007-1, Minimum Off-Street
Loading Spaces Required. For this purpose, the minimum number of required
spaces shall be based on the use category having the greatest number of
resulting spaces.
   (F)   Outdoor storage. For the purposes of this section, each two square
feet of exterior area used for outdoor storage shall be considered equivalent
to one square foot of enclosed gross floor area.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.E.008 OFF-STREET STACKING.
   (A)   Generally. Stacking spaces create capacity of a drive-through lane to
hold vehicles while transactions are taking place at drive-through facilities.
Stacking spaces are nine feet in width by 20 feet in length and provide direct
access to a service window or other improvement. The position in front of a
drive-through station (e.g., a service window, ATM, or station at a drive-
through bank) is counted as a stacking space.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   Minimum number. Uses that include drive-through service shall not
have fewer than the number of stacking spaces established in Table 156.E.008,
Stacking Requirements.
      (2)   Bypass lane. A ten-foot-wide bypass lane is required adjacent to
stacking lanes to allow vehicles to travel around the drive-through activity
and exit the site or park.
      (3)   Turn-around area. Controlled entrances shall be designed so that
vehicles may turn around without entering the gated area or backing out into
the public right-of-way.
Table 156.E.008
Stacking Requirements
Activity Minimum Spaces Measured From
Table 156.E.008
Stacking Requirements
Activity                   Minimum Spaces         Measured From
Automated teller machine   3                      ATM keypad
(ATM)
Bank teller lane           5                      Teller window or pneumatic
                                                  tube station
Carwash stall, automatic   4
Carwash stall, self-       3                      Entrance to wash bay
service
Day care drop-off (between                        Facility passenger loading
7 to 11 children or        3                      area
adults)
Day care drop-off (11 or   3 plus 1 per every 500 Facility passenger loading
more children or adults)   square feet of heated  area
                           floor area
School, primary or
secondary (public or       Determined by Zoning Administrator
private)
Fuel pump island           2                      Pump island
Parking lot, controlled    4                      Key code box
entrance
Restaurant, drive through  4                      Order box2
(or a functionally similar 4                      Order box to first window
use)1                      2                      First window to second
                                                  window
Vehicle servicing          2                      Entrance to stall
Other                      Determined by Zoning Administrator
TABLE NOTE:
1If one window is provided (for both payment and pick-up), then six stacking
spaces are required measured at the order box and five stacking spaces are
required between the order box and the window.
2If the restaurant has dual order boxes then 3 spaces are required per order
box.
3Each space is measured to include a length of 25 feet.
4Stacking shall not block access to driveways or parking areas.
 
 
Figure 156.E.008
Illustrative Stacking Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2723.png]
Figure Notes:
A = Order Box | B = First Window | C = Second Window | D = Public Right-of-Way
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE F - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING
§ 156.F.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards
to achieve the following objectives, which, combined, promote the health and
general welfare of the citizens of Marshalltown:
      (1)   Appearance and beauty. Enhancement of the overall appearance and
natural beauty of the community;
      (2)   Buffering and screening. Buffering of incompatible land uses and
screening negative site elements;
      (3)   Heat island effect. Reduction of heat generated from paved
surfaces;
      (4)   Water quality and wildlife. Protection of water quality and
wildlife habitat;
      (5)   Vegetation and topsoil. Preservation of existing vegetation and
topsoil; and
      (6)   Benefits. Landscaping and landscaped open spaces provide multiple
benefits including energy conservation, increased property values, and an
enhanced aesthetic quality throughout the city.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this article apply to the following
development activities:
      (1)   New development. New residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use
development or change in use from residential to nonresidential or mixed-use;
      (2)   Increase in intensity. Increase in apartment units, manufactured
home pads, nonresidential gross floor area, or impervious surface by 20% or
more, cumulatively over a five-year period; or
      (3)   Change in use. Change in use requiring additional parking spaces.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.F.002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. Requirements for the planting of all landscape material is
set out in this section.
   (B)   Plant material standards.
      (1)   Plant variety. All plants shall be of the type and species
appropriate for the climate and location being planted. All plant material
shall be commercially produced and meet the minimum standards recognized by
landscape professionals. In order to reduce the threat and impact of plant
disease, multiple plant types and species shall be utilized on each site.
      (2)   Prohibited plants. Refer to Parks & Recreation Department for a
list of prohibited plants.
      (3)   Sizes. All required plants shall meet the size and variety
requirements in Table 156.F.002, Minimum Plant Sizes and Varieties.
 
Table 156.F.002-2,
Minimum Plant Sizes and Varieties
Plant Type                Minimum Size or Varieties
Overstory Tree            2.0-inch caliper
Understory Trees          1.5-inch caliper
Evergreen/Coniferous Tree 6-feet in height
Shrubs                    3-gallon container
Ornamental Grasses        1-gallon container
 
   (C)   Plant locations. All plantings shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Public right-of-way. A permit shall be obtained prior to planting
any street tree or landscape material in the public right-of-way.
      (2)   Sight distance triangle. No landscaping may be planted in violation
of the visibility triangle established in Subsection 156.B.008.a, Measurements.
Corner lots, and in situations where driveways and alleys intersect with street
rights-of-way, shall be kept free of landscaping and plant materials that
interfere with the vision of a motorist or pedestrian.
      (3)   Easements. No trees shall be placed within any public utility
easement. Any shrubs or ornamental grasses planted within public utility
easement (if allowed by the easement) shall not be required to be replaced in
the event maintenance, repair, or installation of a utility is needed.
      (4)   Fire safety. Landscaping shall meet minimum clearances from all
fire hydrants and building sprinkler systems as required by the Fire
Department.
      (5)   Spacing. In general, all plants shall be sited and spaced in a
manner to allow for appropriate growth to mature size.
   (D)   Plant substitutions. The following substitution of tree planting
requirements may be made:
      (1)   Overstory. One overstory tree may be substituted in place of ten
required shrubs.
      (2)   Understory. One understory tree may be substituted in place of five
required shrubs.
      (3)   Evergreen. One evergreen/coniferous tree may be substituted in
place of one required overstory tree.
      (4)   Substitution. One overstory tree may be substituted in place of two
required understory trees. Two understory trees may be substituted for one
required overstory tree.
      (5)   Grasses. Three ornamental grasses may be substituted for one
required shrub.
      (6)   Solar array substitutions.
         (a)   When an in-ground solar array is being developed as a primary
use and requires a bufferyard that includes overstory or understory trees, this
requirement may be substituted for 20 evergreens/shrubs of a minimum of four
feet in height (height of planting at initial installation) per 100 linear feet
of the bufferyard distance. When installed they should be no more than five
feet apart, a minimum of five feet away from the solar array, and at each
corner of the solar array, one evergreen/shrub of a minimum of four feet should
be placed in addition to the previous requirement. If a building is within 20
feet of a proposed in-ground solar array, is on the same parcel, and is owned
by the applicant developing the in-ground solar array, then it may be used as
the 100% opaque buffer for that side of the in-ground solar array.
         (b)   When an in-ground solar array is being developed as a primary
use and requires a bufferyard that includes overstory or understory trees, this
requirement may be substituted for a six-feet-tall, 100% opaque privacy fence.
When installed this fence should be a minimum of five feet from the solar array
and should completely cover sight of the solar array from the public right-of-
way and surrounding properties. Fence materials and installation must follow
the fence requirements within the Marshalltown Zoning Code. If a building is
within 20 feet of a proposed in-ground solar array, is on the same parcel, and
is owned by the applicant developing the in-ground solar array, then it may be
used as the 100% opaque buffer for that side of the in-ground solar array.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15097, passed 12-20-2024)
§ 156.F.003 DEVELOPMENT LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Applicability. Site landscaping is required around multiple-family
buildings, civic, institutional, commercial office and retail, industrial, and
mixed-use buildings.
      (2)   Planting requirements. The required number of overstory and
understory trees and shrubs or ornamental grasses as set out in the respective
zoning district.
   (B)   Off-street parking, driveways, and loading areas.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Landscape plan required. A landscape plan for all parking lots
regardless of size shall be prepared and submitted to the city for review and
approval for any landscaping, buffer, or screening required by the city.
         (b)   Preparation of landscape plan. To encourage landscape plans to
be thoughtfully arranged so site elements are artfully and technically
organized in a way that conveys meaning, coherence, and spatial organization, a
qualified individual or organization, as acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator, shall prepare the landscape plan.
         (c)   Landscape plan contents. All landscape plans are subject to the
contents set forth in the site plan procedures in §
156.J.004, Administrative Review Procedures.
      (2)   Parking lot design.
         (a)   All rows of parking that exceed 20 stalls in length shall be
terminated with a curbed landscaped island that is a minimum nine feet wide and
no less than 16 feet in length (32 feet in length for head-to-head parking
stalls).
         (b)   Off-street parking lots that exceed 100 stalls shall require no
parking or loading area shall be more than 100 feet from a tree located within
a landscaped open space area.
         (c)   Sidewalks that abut the front edge of any parking stall shall be
no less than seven feet wide to accommodate a two feet vehicle overhang.
      (3)   Sidewalk requirement. Every parking lot of more than 100 spaces
shall have at least one pedestrian walkway.
      (4)   Landscaping required. All parking lot islands shall be landscaped
with turf grass, ornamental grass plantings, plant beds, shrubs, trees, rock,
and/or chip brick. The use of pavers in an island shall only be used in
combination with plant-scaping materials. Sidewalks may be constructed within a
parking lot island as necessary to accommodate pedestrian circulation. See
Figure 156.F.003-1, Off-Street Parking, Driveways, and Loading Areas. See
Figure 156.F.003-1, Off-Street Parking, Driveways, and Loading Areas.
      (5)   Parking lot screening. Whenever an off-street parking area fronts
along a public street, an average of one overstory and two understory trees
shall be planted every 75 feet within the parking lot setback area. In areas of
public utility easement, no trees are required but the screening material must
incorporate plant-scaping. Additionally, a minimum three-foot-tall screen shall
be installed between the parking lot and the adjoining street along the entire
frontage in accordance with minimum visibility requirements at intersections,
driveways, and alleys. This screen can be constructed with any combination of
ornamental grasses, shrubs, earth berming, low masonry walls, and decorative
fencing. Shrubs and ornamental grasses shall have a mature height of at least
three feet.
      (6)   Parking lot setback. The parking lot setback shall be a minimum
width of five feet.
 
Figure 156.F.003-1
Off-Street Parking, Driveways and Loading Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2725.png]
 
   (C)   Trees required. Trees shall be required in all zoning districts
following the design standards provided within this section.
      (1)   Single-family detached. A minimum of two overstory trees is
required per single-family lot.
      (2)   Single-family attached and duplex. One overstory tree shall be
required for every 40 feet of average lot width.
      (3)   Other residential and non-residential.
         (a)   A minimum of five overstory trees per acre shall be required.
         (b)   Unless otherwise approved by the city, required trees shall not
be located within the street right-of-way, between the edge of the public
street and any sidewalk or trail. The trees shall be shown on a landscaping
plan provided to the Zoning Administrator. The tree planting plan shall include
the location, size, and species of all street trees being proposed.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.F.004 BUFFERING.
   (A)   Generally. The bufferyards required in this section provide transition
and physical barriers between properties of differing land uses to reduce the
effects of sight, sound, and other incompatibilities. The bufferyards are based
on the amount of screening they provide, which are classified from less
screening (Type A) to more screening (Type C), depending on the types and
intensities of adjoining land uses.
   (B)   General standards.
      (1)   Groundcover. In addition to the required plantings, walls, fences,
and berms, remaining portions of all bufferyards shall contain groundcover.
      (2)   Plant groupings. Bufferyard plantings may be located in small
groupings to appear more natural or evenly spaced.
      (3)   Earthen berms. Earthen berms within a bufferyard may vary and
undulate to accommodate drainage and to provide a more natural appearance.
Incorporation of a berm into a buffer yard may necessitate an increase in width
of the bufferyard beyond what is required in Table 156.F.004-1, Bufferyard
Classifications.
      (4)   Encroachment. No part of any required bufferyard shall be used for
structures, parking, storage, loading, locating refuse containers, or any
similar activity which may create a nuisance.
      (5)   Extent. All required bufferyards shall be located on the parcel
proposed for development.
      (6)   Access breaks. Breaks for pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle access
are permitted on the condition that access shall be designed to cross a
bufferyard at as near a perpendicular angle as practical.
      (7)   Low impact development. Low impact development and other similar
stormwater management features are permitted in a required bufferyard.
   (C)   Bufferyard types. There are three types of bufferyards, each of which
varies in width and the numbers and types of plants required per 100 linear
feet. The minimum planting requirements for each type of bufferyard are set out
in Table 156.F.004-1, Bufferyard Classifications, except that parking lot
setback plantings are set out in §
156.F.003, Development Landscaping. Illustrative examples of bufferyards are in
Figure 156.F.003-1, Illustrative Bufferyard Types.
Table 156.F.004-1
Bufferyard Classifications
           Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet            Height of Berm,
Type Width Overstory Trees Understory Evergreen Trees Shrubs Wall, or Fence1
                           Trees
Table 156.F.004-1
Bufferyard Classifications
              Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet            Height of Berm,
Type   Width  Overstory Trees Understory Evergreen Trees Shrubs Wall, or Fence1
                              Trees
Option 1: Landscape Only Bufferyard
Type A 5 ft.  0               2          --              10     N/A
Type B 10 ft. 1               2          1               12     N/A
Type C 15 ft. 2               1          1               15     N/A
Option 2: Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence2
                                                                6' tall fence
Type A 3 ft.  --              --         --              10     or wall/4' tall
                                                                berm
                                                                6' tall fence
Type B 5 ft.  --              --         --              15     or wall/4' tall
                                                                berm
                                                                6' tall fence
Type C 10 ft. --              2          --              20     or wall/4' tall
                                                                berm
TABLE NOTES:
1 A berm, wall, or fence is not required for landscape only bufferyards.
2 Plant material, including overstory trees, may be installed on the inside or
outside of the wall or fence facing the abutting properties. Plant material,
including overstory trees, must be installed on the outside of the wall or
fence facing the street.
 
 
Figure 156.F.004-1
Illustrative Bufferyards
Landscape Only Bufferyard using Overstory Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence
Trees, Understory Trees, Evergreens and   Bufferyard
Shrubs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2727.png]
 
   (D)   Bufferyard locations. Bufferyards shall be established within a
bufferyard easement on individual lots or parcels, unless a property owners'
association is established in which case bufferyards may be within common open
space. Properties separated by the public street right-of-way are not
considered adjoining for the purposes of this section. Bufferyards shall be
required as follows:
      (1)   Between zoning districts. The type of required bufferyard between
two adjoining zoning districts or use category in the GI zoning district, with
the type determined by the intensities of the districts.
Table 156.F.004-2, District Bufferyard Standards, establishes the required
bufferyard type between the zoning district of the parcel proposed for
development and the zoning of the abutting district. Where "--" is found there
is no bufferyard required.
Table 156.F.004-2
District Bufferyard Standards
Zoning of       Zoning of Abutting District
Parcel Proposed                                     GI - Heavy GI - All Other
for Development AG, RR, RL RM, RH MU, UC GC PI, REC Industrial Industrial Uses1
                                                    Uses1
Table 156.F.004-2
District Bufferyard Standards
Zoning of       Zoning of Abutting District
Parcel Proposed                                     GI - Heavy GI - All Other
for Development AG, RR, RL RM, RH MU, UC GC PI, REC Industrial Industrial Uses1
                                                    Uses1
Residential     --         --     --     -- --      C          C
(AG, RR, RL)
Residential     B          --     --     -- --      C          C
(RM, RH)
Mixed-Use (MU,  C          C      --     -- --      C          C
UC)
General         B          B      B      -- --      C          C
Commercial (GC)
Nonresidential  C          C      B      B  --      C          C
(PI, REC)
Heavy
Industrial Use  C          C      C      C  C       --         --
Category (GI)
All Other
Industrial Use  C          C      C      B  C       --         --
Categories (GI)
Table Notes:
1See §
156.C.003, Use Table, and associated specific uses and use categories as
defined in §
156.M.003, Definitions.
 
      (2)   Along corner and rear yards abutting collector and arterial
streets. When a corner or rear yard of a lot zoned RM, RH, MU, UC, GC, PI, or
REC abuts collector and arterial street right-of-way, a Type B bufferyard is
required. A Type C bufferyard is required for uses in the GI district.
      (3)   Single-family residential through (double frontage) lots. Any
single-family detached or attached residential lot having both its front and
rear lot lines abutting a public street, private street, or interstate highway
(a double frontage lot) or a corner lot which is adjacent to a double frontage
lot shall be required to have a Type C bufferyard along that corresponding rear
or side yard lot line. The rear yard and front side yard building setbacks
shall be measured from the farthest extent of the bufferyard.
      (4)   Adjacent to agricultural land. A Type A bufferyard is required for
a parcel proposed for development when adjoining agricultural land that is not
planned for development. At the time of development, unless no bufferyard is
required, the adjoining property would also be required to provide the
bufferyard required in
Table 156.F.004-2, District Bufferyard Standards.
      (5)   Along a natural resource feature, park, or recreation area.
Development must meet applicable city codes related to stream/riparian
protection.
      (6)   Adjacent to public streets. Refer to the requirements for trees and
parking lot screening in §
156.F.003, Development Landscaping.
   (E)   Natural area exemption. A parcel that would typically require
bufferyards may be exempt from the requirement to provide bufferyards where the
parcel is separated from the adjacent property by a natural area that meets or
exceeds the number of plantings required by the applicable bufferyard. Natural
areas shall be exempt from the shrub requirement.
   (F)   Warranted exceptions of bufferyard requirements. Should a bufferyard
requirement overburden a property by making development impractical, in the
sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator, the width of a required buffer may
be reduced, and a privacy fence, screen wall, or other measures may be used to
mitigate the impact on the property to be buffered.
   (G)   Credits for existing landscaping improvements.
      (1)   Generally. Existing trees, fences, and landscape or retaining walls
that meet, in part but not in whole, the bufferyard requirements set out
herein, may be counted toward a bufferyard requirement, provided that the trees
and landscaping are in good health or the fences or walls are structurally
sound.
      (2)   Existing landscaping credit. Credit shall be given for existing
trees and landscaping within bufferyards and perimeter yards.
   (H)   Relationship to other bufferyard requirements. Some limited or special
uses may have different requirements for bufferyards, as specified in §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards, and §
156.C.005, Special Use Standards. If bufferyards are required by another
section of this Zoning Ordinance along property boundaries that are also
district boundaries, then the most restrictive bufferyard requirement is
required.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.F.005 SCREENING.
   (A)   Generally. This section provides screening standards, including fences
and walls, for the separation of adjoining residential and nonresidential land
uses and screening standards for mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, and
refuse containers.
   (B)   Refuse containers.
      (1)   Refuse containers, including dumpsters, shall be screened on all
sides by the use of a permanent enclosure, with gates for disposal truck
access. The enclosure shall be constructed to visibly screen the receptacle
from public view and from adjoining properties. The design of the pedestrian
access to the receptacle or dumpster shall be designed to minimize the view
into the enclosure.
      (2)   The enclosure shall be landscaped to minimize the visual impact of
the enclosure on surrounding properties and public thoroughfares.
   (C)   Mechanical equipment.
      (1)   Overhead utilities. All electrical lines less than 30,000 volts
must be placed underground, unless a utility provider determines that
underground utilities are a safety hazard or impractical in which case this
requirement may be waived by the Plan and Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Ground-mounted. For all new development or redevelopment, all
ground-mounted mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, air-
conditioning condensers, heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling
equipment, and any other related utility structures and equipment that are
visible from any adjacent public thoroughfare shall be visibly screened from
public view by the use of one of the following approaches:
         (a)   A screening wall built of materials compatible and consistent
with the materials of the principal building;
         (b)   Landscape plantings of predominantly evergreen type trees and
shrubs to provide year-round screening;
         (c)   Fencing that has at least 80% opacity;
         (d)   Permanent earth-berming; or
         (e)   A combination of the above.
      (3)   Roof-mounted. Equipment must be 100% screened from ground level
views at all property lines by structural improvements such as:
         (a)   Parapet walls with cornice treatments;
         (b)   Screening walls constructed of materials consistent with the
principal building; or
         (c)   Sloped-roof systems or other architectural elements.
 
Figure 156.F.005-1
Roof-Mounted Equipment Screening
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2729.png]
FIGURE NOTES:
A = Line of Sight | B = Parapet Wall | C = Screened Area | D = Mechanical
Equipment
 
      (4)   Building-mounted. Mechanical equipment that is within public view
must be enclosed, screened by opaque fencing or landscaping, or painted to
match the building wall.
   (D)   Outdoor storage. Except for industrial uses that are legally
permitted, and uses in the GI district, all outside storage shall be screened
from all rights-of-way with a fence or wall at least six feet in height. No
outside storage shall be stacked in a way that it becomes visible from the
public right-of-way.
   (E)   Fences and walls. The following requirements apply to fences and walls
on residential and mixed-use lots and all fences and walls with a height above
average grade of 30 inches in nonresidential districts:
      (1)   General.
         (a)   All fences and walls shall not adversely affect the public
health, safety, and welfare of the city and shall conform to all applicable
building code requirements.
         (b)   Special fence requirements such as fencing provided around
parks, recreation, and school facilities may be erected to a height in excess
of the above limits upon approval of the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   All required screening walls shall be equally finished on both
sides of the wall.
      (2)   Height. The maximum height of a fence or wall:
         (a)   Within a visibility triangle shall be two feet (See Subsection
156.B.008.a, Measurements);
         (b)   Shall be six feet in all residential and mixed-use districts;
         (c)   Shall be eight feet in nonresidential districts;
         (d)   Shall be ten feet in the GI district East of 18th Avenue;
         (e)   Within a required front or corner side yard setback shall be
four feet;
         (f)   Shall be ten feet for all major utility uses in all zoning
districts.
      (3)   Sight distance. No fence, wall, shrubbery, earthen berm, sign, or
other obstruction to vision shall be permitted which serves to obstruct vision
between a height of two feet and six feet, six inches on any corner lot within
a triangle of 20 feet formed by intersecting street right-of-way lines.
      (4)   Materials.
         (a)   Non-residential and mixed-use districts. Fence and wall exterior
materials and design shall be similar or complementary to the materials and
design of the primary structure.
         (b)   Allowed materials. Materials used for fences and walls shall be
durable, and of a character commonly used in residential applications,
including:
            1.   Weather-resistant or finished (painted or stained and sealed)
wood;
            2.   Ornamental wrought iron or powder-coated aluminum (except on
fences/walls that are used for required screening purposes);
            3.   Cement fiberboard;
            4.   Vinyl;
            5.   Finished bamboo (stained and sealed);
            6.   Chain link with a top rail support;
            7.   Split rail with treated wood;
            8.   Masonry (brick, stucco-finished concrete, split face concrete
masonry units, or stone), but not unfinished concrete block; or
            9.   Combinations of these materials.
            10.   Wood, as long as any part of the fence contacts concrete or
the ground is treated with preservatives approved by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) or is naturally resistant to decay, such as cedar or
redwood. Fasteners and hardware used with treated or decay-resistant wood shall
be hot-dipped galvanized, stainless steel, or coated per manufacturers
standards for use with such woods.
         (c)   Limited materials.
            1.   Used or reclaimed wood or other materials may be used provided
they are in good condition and can be reasonably expected to last as long as
new materials;
            2.   Wire mesh fence may be permitted to enclose tennis courts and
game and recreation areas on public land and residential lots; or
            3.   Side or rear yard garden plots may use green garden fence,
woven wire or chicken wire; provided, it does not exceed five feet in height
using steel posts not exceeding five feet in height.
            4.   Major utility uses in the GI district may place barbed wire
cradles on top of fences or walls facing both inward and outward toward the
property. All other permitted uses within the GI district uses may place barbed
wire cradles on top of fences or walls facing inward only. Use of barbed wire
cradles for all uses within the GI district shall consist of an extension which
is no more than one foot, be located over the fence or wall owner’s property,
be placed at minimum six feet above adjacent grade, and the combined height of
the barbed wire cradle and the fence or wall shall not exceed the maximum
height of the fence or wall.
            5.   Subject to issuance of a special use permit for properties
outside the GI zoning district, all major utility uses may place barbed wire
cradles on top of fences or walls facing both inward and outward toward the
property. Use of barbed wire cradles shall consist of an extension which is no
more than one foot, be located over the fence or wall owner’s property, be
placed at minimum six feet above adjacent grade, and the combined height of the
barbed wire cradle and the fence or wall shall not exceed the maximum height of
the fence or wall.
         (d)   Prohibited materials. The following materials are not allowed as
fence or wall components:
            1.   Salvaged material or materials not specifically manufactured
for fencing, including but not limited to complete or partial pallets, PVC
pipe, scrap lumber, plywood, tree branches, tree trunks, sheet metal, trash,
tires, junk, entry or garage doors, utility poles, landscape timbers, plastic
or fiberglass sheets, spikes, nails, and razors.
            2.   An electric, razor wire, barbed (except in the GI district,
see limitations above in division (E)(4)(c)4.), chicken, woven, snow (except
from November 1 through March 31), plastic safety, concrete block, or
grapestake fence.
            3.   Agricultural fence products such as creosote posts, steel
posts, wire panels, field fence, high tensile wire, tube gates and similar
materials;
            4.   A fence composed solely of fence posts;
            5.   Any incomplete fence consisting only of posts and supporting
members;
            6.   Any fence or wall material the Zoning Administrator determines
that such structure creates a hazard to users of the street, sidewalk, or to
nearby property.
         (e)   Fence and wall orientation and maintenance.
            1.   Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained in an
upright position (not more than five degrees from vertical orientation), and in
good condition (e.g., free of rust, peeling paint or coatings, missing or
broken pickets, wood rot, and graffiti).
            2.   Orientation. The finished side of all fences shall face out
toward neighboring property or adjacent rights-of-way. Where fences are located
on the property line of residential property, the finished side of the fence
shall face the yard that does not belong to the applicant, unless the applicant
provides to the city written consent of the abutting property owner.
   (F)   Obstructions.
      (1)   No fence, screen, wall, or another visual barrier shall be located
or placed to obstruct the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching within
30 feet of any street intersection.
      (2)   Where an alley intersects a street, no visual barrier taller than
30 inches may be placed within a sight visibility triangle.
   (G)   Residential district maximums. In the following residential districts
(AG, RR, RL, RM, RH) or along the boundary between a residential and
nonresidential district, the following standards apply:
      (1)   Rear and side yards. No fence or wall shall exceed a height of six
feet above grade.
      (2)   Front yard.
         (a)   The maximum height of a fence or wall shall not exceed four
feet.
         (b)   Fences in the manufactured home parks shall not exceed a height
of four feet.
      (3)   Corner lot. Where a corner lot is platted with two front yards, and
a house is constructed facing one of the front yards, the second front yard
shall also be deemed to be a front yard.
   (H)   Nonresidential and multiple-family uses.
      (1)   Contiguous to residential. Where a multiple-family or
nonresidential use is contiguous to an AG, RL, or RM district, a solid wall,
fence or opaque landscape screen of not less than six nor more than eight feet
in height shall be erected on or near the property line separating these
districts.
      (2)   Screening dumpsters and storage facilities. Any lot in a commercial
or industrial district, with the exception of the UC and MU districts, abutting
any residential district shall be required to have adequate screening of
dumpsters and storage facilities.
      (3)   Adjacent to public street. When a side or rear yard of a multiple-
family, civic, institutional, commercial, industrial, or mixed-use is adjacent
to a public street, a solid wall, fence, or opaque landscape screen of not less
than six nor more than eight feet in height shall be erected.
   (I)   Exceptions to screening requirements. Screening requirements may be
waived by the Zoning Administrator if an opaque screening of equivalent height
or greater exists immediately abutting, and on the opposite side of the lot
line.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15099, passed 4-14-2025)
§ 156.F.006 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Generally. The following provisions aid in ensuring that all required
landscaping is installed and maintained and properly.
   (B)   Installation standards.
      (1)   National standards. All landscaping and all plant materials shall
be true to name, variety, and size and shall conform to all applicable
provisions of the American Standards for Nursery Stock, latest edition as
published by the American Horticulture Industry Association.
      (2)   Installation. Any required landscaping shall be in place at the
time an occupancy permit is approved. Should completion of landscaping be
delayed because of the season of the year, a temporary occupancy permit may be
issued if the developer posts a bond or other acceptable guarantee in the
amount of the landscaping as completed.
      (3)   Plant size requirement. All installed plant material shall be sized
according to Table 156.F.002-2, Minimum Plant Sizes and Varieties, unless
otherwise noted in this article.
      (4)   Tree topping. Unless a tree is interfering with an overhead power
line, no trees may be topped if the limbs are three inches in diameter or
greater.
      (5)   Nursery stock. Trees and shrubs planted pursuant to this article
shall be good, healthy nursery stock.
      (6)   Soil. Landscaped areas associated with new development shall be
prepared to achieve a soil depth of at least six inches with the depth
consisting of a soil mix of compost and organic matter to reduce the need for
fertilizers and increase water retention.
      (7)   Planters. Architectural planters may be permitted in the UC, Urban
Core zoning district and for infill development sites less than 6,000 square
feet in area.
      (8)   Visual clearance. In addition to observing the sight triangle
established in §
156.B.008, Measurements and Allowances, the branches of a tree in a landscape
island shall maintain a minimum of five feet of clearance from the surface of
the vehicle use area.
   (C)   Maintenance standards.
      (1)   Generally. Maintenance and care of landscaping on mixed-use and
nonresidential properties shall be according to the most current ANSI A300
Standards for Tree Care Operations.
      (2)   Conformance. All landscaping, buffering, and screening shall be
maintained at all times to conform to the regulations established in this
article. Landscaping, which is not maintained in a manner consistent with this
article shall be subject to the penalties established in § 156.L.003, Judicial
Remedies.
      (3)   Stormwater drainage.
         (a)   Any landowner shall be deemed exclusively responsible for
developing and implementing a plan to address stormwater drainage, which shall
be submitted to the city as a part of the site plan.
         (b)   The city shall not be responsible for any deficiencies which may
later be determined to exist under the stormwater management plan.
         (c)   The city shall undertake no corrective duties or actions
concerning any said deficiencies pertaining to stormwater drainage and
landscape maintenance.
      (4)   Other maintenance standards. In other areas, maintenance and care
shall meet the following standards:
         (a)   Landscape areas, including abutting landscaped portions of
public rights-of-way, shall be pruned as needed to present a healthy, neat, and
orderly appearance at all times.
         (b)   All landscaped areas shall be irrigated as needed to ensure
continuous healthy growth and development. Maintenance shall include the
removal and replacement of dead, dying, or diseased plant material.
         (c)   Trees extending over a street shall be kept pruned so as to not
interfere with street traffic.
      (5)   Tree removal. Nothing in this section shall require any application
or permit from any public utility provider prior to removing a tree whenever it
has determined the tree poses a hazard, or interferes with restoration or
continuation of utility services.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE G - SIGNS
§ 156.G.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
      (1)   Communication. Set out reasonable regulations for the design,
location, installation, operation, repair, and maintenance of signs which
facilitates businesses, residents, and other interested parties to communicate,
advertise, or be identified;
      (2)   Free speech. Provide for reasonable regulation while also
safeguarding the constitutionally protected right of free speech;
      (3)   Content neutrality. Create content-neutral sign regulations which
balance the legitimate needs of individuals, entities, and organizations to
convey messages with the legitimate objectives of the city to promote public
safety, enhance community character and enhance private property values;
      (4)   Compatibility. Assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land
uses;
      (5)   Clutter. Prevent and reduce sign clutter which can have negative
consequences to the city which include, but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Undue visual distractions which may create a public safety
hazard for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
         (b)   Degrading the aesthetic character of the city and therefore
making the city less attractive for residents, visitors, commerce, and private
investment; and
         (c)   Physical obstructions within the public right-of-way which
create public safety hazards.
      (6)   Permitting and enforcement. Provide timely, fair, and consistent
permitting and enforcement of signage throughout the city.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this article apply to the following
development activities:
      (1)   New development. New residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use
development or change in use from residential to nonresidential or mixed-use;
      (2)   Increase in intensity. Increase in apartment units, manufactured
home pads, gross floor area, or impervious surface by 20% or more, cumulatively
over a five-year period; or
      (3)   New sign. Construction, placement, painting, or another form of
creation of a new sign.
   (C)   No restriction on content. This article regulates only the sign
structure or copy design, and not the sign’s content. Despite any other
provision of this article, no sign is subject to any limitation based on the
content of its message. Any sign authorized in this article may contain any
non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy.
   (D)   Signs permitted before effective date. If a permit for a sign has been
issued in accordance with all city ordinances in effect prior to the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within
six months of the effective date of this article and diligently built to
completion, the sign may be completed in accordance with the approved permit.
Such sign is subject to provisions regarding nonconforming signs in §
156.K.005, Nonconforming Signs.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.G.002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or convert
any sign within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining
a sign permit issued in accordance with Subsec. 156.J.004.4, Sign Permit.
   (B)   Actions not requiring a permit. The following actions do not require a
sign permit:
      (1)   Maintenance. Routine maintenance, not involving structural changes
to the sign;
      (2)   Message. Changes of message, either manually or electronically, on
an electronic message sign or changeable copy sign, subject to limitations of §
156.G.004(K), Changeable Copy, on the frequency of message changes.
   (C)   Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs are exempted from
the permit requirements of this article, but shall be in compliance with all
other applicable codes and ordinances:
      (1)   ATM sign. Signs incorporated into and designed as part of an
automatic teller machine (ATM) shall be exempt, provided the sign is limited to
the term "ATM" and the financial institution's name and logo.
      (2)   Ancillary signs. Three or less ancillary signs when:
         (a)   No trespassing signs less than four square feet;
         (b)   Placed on the door or exterior wall or window of the premises;
and
         (c)   No larger than four square feet in total sign area.
      (3)   Art and murals. Art and murals, provided such signs do not contain
any commercial messaging. Murals within the Urban Core, UC zoning district
shall be exempt provided that the mural is not on a primary facade.
      (4)   Athletic field signs. Signs located on the field side of
scoreboards and fences of athletic fields provided each sign does not exceed 32
square feet in area.
      (5)   Flags. Flags shall be permitted without a permit ensuring they not
exceed 15 square feet, but not including painted or printed images of flags
otherwise constituting a sign.
      (6)   Ghost signs. Ghost signs or rehabilitated ghost signs.
      (7)   Government signs.
         (a)   Any traffic sign erected at the authorization of either the
county, state, or federal government.
         (b)   Any sign providing emergency notifications on a temporary basis
lasting no more than 90 days erected at the authorization of the county, state,
or federal government.
         (c)   Any sign erected by the city pursuant to and in the discharge of
any governmental function.
         (d)   Public notices and other signs erected by government agencies or
utilities.
         (e)   All government signs other than those listed in this division
(C)(7)(a) through (d) of this section shall be subject to the permitting
requirements of this chapter.
         (f)   All government signage is exempt from any fee charged related to
permits issued.
      (8)   Grave markers, statues, or sculptures. Grave markers, statues, or
sculptures that are not commercial in nature.
      (9)   Holiday signs. Holiday signs, as defined in this chapter, provided
that they are installed no more than 35 days prior to the holiday for which
they are customarily dedicated. Such signs shall be removed no later than 15
days after the holiday for which they are customarily dedicated.
      (10)   Interior signs. Signs located within a structure and not visible
from a public or private street.
      (11)   Mailboxes and addresses.
         (a)   Addresses and names printed in a standard size on a mailbox
provided that the address information on the side of a residence or business
shall not exceed four square feet.
         (b)   Street markings indicating address information only containing
address information painted on curbsides which shall not exceed four square
feet.
      (12)   Menu board. Any permanently mounted accessory sign displaying the
items for sale of a drive-in or drive-through restaurant shall be allowed
provided that:
         (a)   A maximum of two menu boards are permitted per drive aisle of a
drive-through establishment.
         (b)   The menu board shall not exceed 50 square feet.
         (c)   The audio component of a menu board is limited to communication
between customers and employees, and may not exceed a volume of five decibels
over ambient sound as measured from the nearest property line.
      (13)   Plaques. Plaques, tablets or names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any surface of when such sign is attached flush to the
building or commemorative plaques or monuments placed by historical
organizations.
      (14)   Private traffic control signs. Signs on private property
containing no advertising that direct the movement of traffic, warn of
obstacles or overhead clearances, or control parking, including entrance and
exit signs provided they do not exceed six square feet in area and shall not
exceed four feet in height. Signs in the PI, REC district shall not be limited
in area or height.
      (15)   Property identification signs. Any sign erected at the entrance of
acreage or residential property that identifies the property by name or by name
of the owner.
      (16)   Railway signs. Any sign on property owned by a railroad placed or
maintained in reference to the operation of the railway.
      (17)   Recreational signs. Any sign approved by the city in a city park
or city recreational area.
      (18)   Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs in the Urban Core (UC) and Mixed
Use (MU) districts shall not require a permit or advance approval but shall
conform to the following requirements:
         (a)   The sign shall be removed after business hours;
         (b)   The sign may not contain changeable letters on tracks;
         (c)   The sign shall be properly anchored or weighted against the
wind;
         (d)   The sign placement shall maintain a minimum sidewalk clearance
width of four feet to provide accessibility;
         (e)   The sign shall be no larger than eight square feet per side and
no taller than five feet.
      (19)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs as described in § 156.G.006,
Temporary Signs.
      (20)   Transit shelter sign. Authorized signs attached to a transit
shelter sign shall be exempt from any permit as long as the sign does not
exceed 12 square feet. All signs shall be non-electrical. Only one sign/sign
face per shelter shall be allowed.
      (21)   Utility pole banners. Banners on utility poles in the public
right-of-way approved by the Director of Public Works.
      (22)   Utility and hazard signs. Safety signs, such as warnings of high
voltage, explosives, hazardous materials and other dangerous situations.
      (23)   Vehicle signs. Signs applied directly onto the body of a car,
truck, bus, trailer, or another vehicle if such vehicle is operated in the
normal course of a business and such vehicle is not used primarily to display
such sign.
   (D)   Nonconforming signs. Refer to § 156.K.005, Nonconforming Signs.
   (E)   Code compliance.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   All signs and sign structures requiring electrical connections
must meet all requirements set by the City Electrician and applicable codes and
ordinances of the city.
         (b)   The construction, installation, erection, anchorage, and
maintenance of all signs shall be subject to the applicable codes and
ordinances of the city.
      (2)   Wind load requirements. Signs erected or placed in accordance with
this section shall withstand wind load pressures as specified in the
International Building Code.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.G.003 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. This section identifies sign types and characteristics,
materials, design elements, and locations that are prohibited in the city.
   (B)   Prohibited sign types and characteristics.
      (1)   Abandoned signs;
      (2)   Damaged or broken signs;
      (3)   Wall signs on single-family or duplex units, except that one wall
sign not exceeding one square-foot shall be permitted on each single-family
dwelling or duplex unit;
      (4)   Wall, pylon, or monument signs that functions as an advertising
sign, except as expressly provided in this article;
      (5)   Signs that obstruct the view of bicyclists or motorists using any
street, approach to any street intersection, or which interferes with the
effectiveness of or obscures any traffic sign, device, or a signal;
      (6)   Signs with flashing or intermitted lights or lights or reflective
devices of changing degree in intensity or color that do not comply with §
156.G.005, Sign Illumination;
      (7)   Portable signs except as permitted in §
156.G.006, Temporary Signs, of this article;
      (8)   Vehicular signs; and
      (9)   All off-premise advertising signs and other signs not expressly
permitted by this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Prohibited design elements. The following design elements, regardless
of sign type, are prohibited:
      (1)   Traffic hazards. Signs that interfere with, obstruct the view of,
or may be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because
of its position, shape, or color;
      (2)   Safety or health. Signs that constitute a hazard to safety or
health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair, or maintenance;
      (3)   Confusion. Signs that use the words "stop," "look," "go slow,"
"caution," "danger," "warning," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character
in a manner that interferes with, misleads, or confuses pedestrians or traffic;
      (4)   Glare. Signs that are illuminated with lights that cause a glare
into or upon surrounding property or that distract operators of vehicles or
pedestrians on a public right-of-way;
      (5)   Lighting. Signs that contain reflectors, lights, or illuminations
that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity or
color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation;
      (6)   Moving parts. Except for changeable copy signs that otherwise
comply with the requirements of this section, signs that have visible moving,
revolving, or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind,
achieved by electrical or mechanical means;
      (7)   Nuisance. Sound, smoke, heat, or odor emitters;
      (8)   Back-lit awnings. Awnings that are back-lit and/or made of plastic
or vinyl, excluding substitute materials;
      (9)   Unfinished wood. Unfinished wood support structures, except that
stake signs may use unfinished stakes; and
      (10)   Bare or flashing lights. Bare light bulbs and flashing lights,
except on holiday displays which are exempted from regulation by §
156.G.002(C), Signs Not Requiring a Permit.
   (D)   Prohibited sign locations. A sign, regardless of sign type, is
prohibited from being in the following locations:
      (1)   Closed businesses. Signs that advertise a business or product that
is no longer in existence;
      (2)   Blocked ingress or egress. Signs that prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window, fire escape, or any other exit way required by
the Building Code or Fire Code of the city or by any other ordinance;
      (3)   Signs in right-of-way. Any permanent signs and supports that are
located on the public right-of-way, except permanent signs and supports
required by a governmental authority. The public right-of-way includes, but is
not limited to, public streets, alleys, medians, and parkways.
      (4)   Street intersections. Signs that are erected or maintained at the
intersection of streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision
of the intersection;
      (5)   Roof signs. Signs that are placed on the roof of any building;
      (6)   Outdoor amenities. Snipe signs or signs attached to or located upon
outdoor exposed amenities such as trees, street signs, or utility poles that
are visible from any street;
      (7)   Vehicles. Signs that are painted on or attached to a motor vehicle
unless:
         (a)   The vehicle is operable and has current registration and tags;
         (b)   The sign is an accessory sign;
         (c)   The vehicle is legally parked within a parking space; and
         (d)   The display of the sign is incidental to the vehicle use.
      (8)   Encroachment. Except for marquee signs, projecting signs, and
hanging signs that comply with the standards of §
156.G.004, Permanent Signs, signs that are located on, or project or extend
over, any public right-of-way or other public property;
      (9)   Semis and storage. Signs that are painted on or attached to semi-
trailers, shipping containers, or portable storage units except for the brand
name of the semi-trailer, container, storage unit; and
      (10)   Consented locations. Signs that are placed on private or public
property without the consent of the owner or authorized agent thereof.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.G.004 PERMANENT SIGNS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to freestanding signs, attached
signs, and to other signs that are intended for display for more than a
temporary time period.
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   All freestanding signs must be permanently installed in locations
designated in the sign plan, and may not exceed the allowable dimensions of
this section.
      (2)   All attached signs must be affixed to a building wall, within the
designated sign area, and may not exceed the allowable dimensions of this
section.
      (3)   No permanent sign shall be located in any public utility easement
nor within five feet of any underground public utility.
      (4)   Additional sign area and height is achievable if a Master Sign Plan
is approved for an eligible property pursuant to Subsec. 156.J.003.4, Master
Sign Plan.
   (C)   Unlisted signs. Signs that are not listed in this section are
prohibited as permanent signs.
   (D)   Allowed sign types by district. Table 156.G.004-1, Allowed Sign Type
by District, identifies on-premise signs allowed by zoning district. The key
for the sign types table is as follows.
Table 156.G.004-1
Allowed Sign Type by District
Sign Type Residential Districts Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Districts
          AG, RR, RL, RM, RH    MU UC, UC-HD GC PI, REC GI
Table 156.G.004-1
Allowed Sign Type by District
Sign Type         Residential Districts Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Districts
                  AG, RR, RL, RM, RH    MU UC, UC-HD GC PI, REC GI
Permanent Attached Signs
Awning            --                    P  P         P  P       P
Canopy (Attached) --                    P  P         P  P       P
Hanging           --                    P  P         P  P       P
Marquee           --                    P  P         P  P       P
Projecting        --                    P  P         P  P       P
Wall              P                     P  P         P  P       P
Window            P                     P  P         P  P       P
Permanent Freestanding Signs
Access            P                     P  P         P  P       P
Canopy            --                    P  --        P  P       P
(Freestanding)
Directory         --                    P  P         P  P       P
Menu Board        --                    P  P         P  P       P
Monument          P                     P  P         P  P       P
Pylon (or Pole)   --                    P  --        P  P       P
NOTES: "--" = Not Permitted; "P"=Permitted
 
   (F)   Allowed attached permanent signs. All permanently attached signs shall
follow the standards established in
Table 156.G.004-2, Allowed Attached Permanent Sign Types.
Table 156.G.004-2
Allowed Attached Permanent Signs
Zoning District Residential Districts Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Districts
                AG, RR, RL, RM, RH    MU UC, UC-HD GC PI, REC GI
Table 156.G.004-2
Allowed Attached Permanent Signs
             Residential   Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Districts
Zoning       Districts
District     AG, RR, RL,   MU          UC, UC-HD  GC         PI, REC  GI
             RM, RH
Awning Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2731.png]
Number       --            1 per building front or per storefront for a multi-tenant
Allowed                    building
Maximum Area --            5 s.f. per linear ft. of awning or canopy length
Minimum      --            8 ft. above grade
Clearance
Illumination --            External
Sign Permit  --            Yes
Required
Canopy (or Over-Canopy) Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2733.png]
                                                  1 per
                                                  building
                           1 per building front   front or            1 per building
Number                     or per storefront for  per        Not      front or per
Allowed      --            a multi-tenant         storefront Limited  storefront for
                           building               for a               a multi-tenant
                                                  multi-              building
                                                  tenant
                                                  building
                           75% of      50% of     75% of     100% of  75% of canopy
Maximum Area --            canopy      canopy     canopy     canopy   width
                           width       width      width      width
Minimum
Height (copy --            2                      6          6        6
above sign)
                                                  External   External External or
Illumination --            External or Internal   or         or       Internal
                                                  Internal   Internal
Sign Permit  --            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes
Required
Other        --
Standards
Hanging Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2735.png]
Number       --            1 per building                    1 per entrance
Allowed
Maximum Area --            6 s.f.                            10 s.f.
Maximum      --            8 ft. above grade
Height
Illumination --            Yes, indirect light only
Other                      1.   Not extend within 2 ft. of the curb line.
Standards    --            2.   May be suspended under a marquee sign or under a
                           canopy or awning.
Sign Permit  --            Yes
Required
Marquee Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2737.png]
Number       --            1 per street-facing facade
Allowed
Maximum Area --            50 s.f. per side; 100  25% of wall to which it is attached
                           s.f. total
Maximum                    4 ft. from lowest point of marquee to highest point,
Height       --            excluding any ornamentation supported directly by the
                           marquee
Minimum      --            8 ft. above grade
Clearance
Illumination --            Down lighting only; only the changeable copy area may be
                           internally illuminated
Other Signs  --            If used, then a wall sign is prohibited on same facade
Other                      1.   May not project more than 6 ft. from the building;
Standards    --            may require an encroachment permit.
                           2.   Sign may be on up to three sides of a marquee.
Sign Permit  --            Yes
Required
Projecting Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2739.png]
                                       1 per
                                       building
                                       or 1 per
Number                     1 per       20 ft. of
Allowed      --            establishme building   1 per establishment
                           nt          frontage
                                       if
                                       multiple
                                       occupants.
                           1 s.f. for each linear
Maximum Area --            foot of building       16 s.f.
                           frontage
                                       No more
                                       than half
Maximum                                the
Distance                               distance
from                                   from the
Building     --            4 ft.       building   4 ft.
Wall to                                facade
Farthest                               into the
Part of Sign                           public
                                       right-of-
                                       way
Minimum      --            8 ft. above sidewalk or walkway and 20 ft. above adjacent
Clearance                  public or private street
Minimum
Clearance,   --            14 ft. above street
Vehicular
Way
Illumination --            Internal or External (down lighting only)
Other Signs  --            The area of a projecting sign is included in the total
                           allowable area regulated under Wall Signs.
Sign Permit  --            Yes
Required
Wall Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2741.png]
             Home-Base d
             Business: 1
Number       per           No maximum number, subject to aggregate area restrictions.
Allowed      establishment
             Group Living:
             1 per premise
                           Total sign
                           area shall
                           not exceed                                 Total sign area
                           1.5 s.f.    Total sign area shall          shall not
                           for each    not exceed 1.5 s.f.            exceed 1.5 s.f.
                           foot of     for each foot of      No       for each foot
Maximum Area 1 s.f.        linear      linear frontage; a    maximum  of linear
                           frontage; a 2nd wall sign shall   area     frontage; a 2nd
                           2nd wall    not exceed 0.5 s.f.            wall sign shall
                           sign shall  per linear frontage.4          not exceed 0.5
                           not exceed                                 s.f. per linear
                           0.5 s.f.                                   frontage.4
                           per linear
                           frontage.
Maximum      The eaveline or the bottom of the    The eaveline or building parapet
Height       second story window sill, whichever  wall
             is lower.
                                       Yes,
Illumination No            Yes         External   Yes
                                       Only
Sign Permit  Yes
Required
Other Signs  --
             1.   No wall sign shall project more than 18 inches from the building
             wall.
             2.   No wall sign or its supporting structure shall cover any window or
Other        part of a window.
Standards    3.   In the UC district, wall signs shall have a texture or depth to
             distinguish them from the wall.
             4.   Buildings having a setback from the street of at least 150 feet
             will be permitted to have two square feet for every one linear foot of
             primary wall frontage.
Window Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/IMAGES/0-
0-0-2743.png]
                           Residential: 1 per
Number       1 per         dwelling unit;         1 per window
Allowed      dwelling unit Nonresidential: 1 per
                           window
                           Residential: 10% of
             10% of window window area or 2 sq.
             area or 2     ft., whichever is      30% of window area, or 16 sq. ft.,
Maximum Area s.f.,         less; Nonresidential:  whichever is less
             whichever is  15% of window area, or
             less          9 sq. ft., whichever
                           is less
                           Residential: No
                           Nonresidential: Yes,   Yes, Indirect or internal lighting;
Illumination No            Indirect or internal   light shall be turned off when off-
                           lighting; light shall  business hours
                           be turned off when
                           off-business hours
             If used, then
Other Signs  a wall sign   --
             is not
             permitted
Sign Permit  No            Yes
Required
 
   (G)   Allowed freestanding permanent signs. All permanent freestanding signs
shall follow the standards established in Table 156.G.004-3, Allowed
Freestanding Permanent Signs.
Table 156.G.004-3
Allowed Freestanding Permanent Signs
Land Use            Residential        Mixed-Use and Nonresidential Districts
                    Districts
Zoning District (in AG, RR, RL, RM, RH MU UC GC PI, REC GI
the city Limits)
Table 156.G.004-3
Allowed Freestanding Permanent Signs
Land Use     Residential Mixed-Use and Nonresidential Districts
             Districts
Zoning
District (in AG, RR, RL, MU        UC       GC         PI, REC   GI
the city     RM, RH
Limits)
Access Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2745.png]
Number       No more than 3 per principal use
Allowed
Maximum Area 4 s.f. per sign       6 s.f. per sign
Minimum/
Maximum      1 ft/4 ft.
Height
Minimum      --
Setback
Illumination Internal or External
Sign Spacing No two directional signs hung from separate poles shall be located
             within 5 feet of each other.
             1.   All such signs located on corner lots or intersections and
             greater than 3 feet in height shall not be placed inside the sight
Other        triangle as described in Subsection 156.B.008.a, Measurements.
Standards    2.   There shall be no more than 4 total directional sign poles at
             any road intersection.
             3.   More than 1 sign may be hung from the same pole.
Sign Permit     No
Required
Canopy Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2747.png]
Number       --          1 per street frontage
Allowed
Maximum Area --          40% of the canopy fascia face per street-facing side
Minimum/
Maximum      --          Shall not extend above the canopy fascia board
Height
Illumination --          Internal or external
Other                   1.   Color branding shall be permitted and shall not
Standards                count towards the aggregate sign total.
Directory Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2749.png]
Number       --          1 per property with a multi-tenant building
Allowed
Maximum Area --          2 s.f. per linear foot of street frontage; maximum 100
                         s.f.
Maximum      --          10 ft.
Height
Minimum      --          0 ft.
Setback
Illumination --          Internal or External
Sign Permit  --          Yes
Required
Other                    1.   The bottom portion of the sign shall rest flush
Standards               against the ground, allowing no space between the
                         ground and the bottom of the sign structure.
Monument Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2751.png]
                                                       1 per
                         1 per     1 per    1 per      entrance,
Number       --          property  property property   not more  1 per property
Allowed                  street    street   street     than 2    street frontage
                         frontage  frontage frontage   total
                                                       signs
                                            < 200 ft.
                                            of street
                                            frontage =
Maximum Area --          50 s.f.   50 s.f.  50 s.f. >  200 s.f.  75 s.f.
(per sign)                                  200 ft. of
                                            street
                                            frontage =
                                            75 s.f.
Maximum      --          6 ft.              25 ft.               35 ft.
Height
Minimum      --          10 ft.
Setback
Illumination --          Internal or External
Other Signs  --          If used, then a Pylon Sign shall not be allowed
Sign Permit  --          Yes
Pylon or Pole Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2753.png]
Number       --          1 per     --       1 per      1 per     1 per frontage
Allowed                  frontage           frontage   frontage
                         20 s.f./
                         1 s.f.             35 s.f. /
Maximum Area             per                1 s.f. per
(Per Sign                linear             linear ft. 48 s.f.   120 s.f. per
Panel/       --          ft. of    --       of street  per sign  sign
Cumulative )             street             frontage;
                         frontage;          250 s.f.
                         35 s.f.            maximum
                         maximum
Maximum      --          25 ft.    --       30 ft.     20 ft.    30 ft.
Height
                         8 ft.
                         above
                         grade and
                         20 ft.
                         above
Maximum                  adjacent           8 ft. above grade and 20 ft. above
Clearance    --          drive     --       adjacent drive aisle, if edge of
                         aisle, if          sign is within one foot of aisle
                         edge of
                         sign is
                         within 1
                         ft. of
                         aisle
Minimum      --          10 ft.    --       10 ft.               10
Setback
                         Internal           Internal             Internal or
Illumination --          and       --       or                   External
                         external           External
                                            The width
                                            of the
                                            base of              The width of
                                            the                  the base of the
                                            foundation           foundation( s)
Other                                       ( s) of              of the sign
Standards    --          --        --       the sign             shall be a
                                            shall be a           minimum of 60%
                                            minimum of           of the width of
                                            60% of the           the sign fence.
                                            width of
                                            the sign
                                            fence.
                         If used,           If used,
                         no                 then a               If used, then a
Other Signs  --          monument  --       Monument             Monument Sign
                         sign is            Sign is              is not allowed
                         allowed            not
                                            allowed
Sign Permit  --          Yes       --       Yes                  Yes
TABLE NOTES:
ft. = Feet;
s.f. = Square feet
 
   (H)   Additional standards in the Urban Core (UC) district.
      (1)   Generally. In addition to all applicable standards set forth within
this article, all permitted signs within the UC district shall comply with the
following:
         (a)   The sign shall be a secondary design element to the building
upon which they are placed and/or the surroundings they are placed within; or
         (b)   Signs shall fit the architectural details of a building they are
placed on and relate to the architecture in at least the material, shape, or
color.
      (2)   Prohibited sign treatment. The following treatment of any sign type
permitted in the UC district shall be prohibited:
         (a)   Interior box-lit signs;
         (b)   Flat signs with no depth;
         (c)   Flat signs that do not compliment the architecture of the
building. The sign shall be all in the same plane; or
         (d)   Vacuum formed signs.
      (3)   Materials. Signs must be made from one or more of the following
materials:
         (a)   Wood, such as solid cedar, cypress, white oak, and walnut.
Plywood, pressboard, or other wood materials are not allowed.
         (b)   Steel or stainless steel;
         (c)   Glass;
         (d)   Aluminum;
         (e)   Channel letters;
         (f)   Wrought iron;
         (g)   High-density urethane (sign foam);
         (h)   Half-inch or three-quarter-inch acrylic;
         (i)   Half-inch or three-quarter-inch PVC board with layers;
      (4)   Bracketing. All bracketing and support materials for signs shall
fit the original architectural style of the building or enhance the design of
the sign. Sign pins are exempt.
      (5)   Illumination. In addition to the requirements established in Table
156.G.004, the following illumination standards shall apply to signs in the UC
district:
         (a)   Interior lit signs must only be channel letters or have halo
illumination.
         (b)   Exterior lights must be gooseneck or appropriate to the original
architecture of the building.
         (c)   Florescent lights shall be prohibited.
         (d)   Lights emitting white light shall be prohibited.
         (e)   No wires shall be visible from the public right-of-way.
      (6)   Wall signs. Wall signs in the UC district shall have a texture or
depth to distinguish them from the substrate they are placed upon. Individual
letters and/or logos must have different depths. Twenty percent minimum of the
sign must meet these criteria.
   (I)   Awnings and marquees. In addition to the standards established in this
section, the following standards shall be met for awning and marquee sign types
in all zoning districts where permitted:
      (1)   Extension standards. Any awning or marquee extending over any
public street or thoroughfare shall be constructed by either the following
methods:
         (a)   Constructed on steel beams projecting through the street wall of
the structure or building and capable of supporting the weight of such canopy
or marquee and an additional live load weight of 60 pounds per square foot; or
         (b)   Solidly anchored against the street wall of such building or
structure on steel plates bolted through the wall and hung by rigid rods
anchored through such street wall and attached to the extended portion of such
canopy or marquee and capable of carrying the weight thereof and an additional
live load weight of 60 pounds per square foot.
      (2)   Anchored. Awnings shall be attached to framework securely anchored
to the street wall of the building or structure in a manner approved by the
Building Official.
      (3)   Public right-of-way. Any marquee or awning permitted to extend over
any public street or thoroughfare shall conform to the following:
         (a)   It shall not extend in one section more than 25 feet along the
line of the street.
         (b)   It shall provide a minimum clearance above the sidewalk of the
lowest part thereof of not less than seven feet.
         (c)   It shall not extend beyond the street line nearer than 18 inches
to a vertical extension of the curb line.
         (d)   The construction of any marquee or awning from a street wall and
extending over any portion of a public sidewalk or thoroughfare shall be liable
for injury to any person using such public sidewalk underneath or adjacent to
the canopy, marquee, or awning resulting from any faulty construction,
maintenance or dangerous condition of the marquee or awning and shall hold the
city harmless for such injury.
   (J)   Advertising signs. Signs commonly referred to as billboards.
      (1)   Structures shall be limited to two faces per sign, shall not exceed
30 feet in height and 300 square feet in area. Advertising structures shall be
constructed of metal or other durable materials. Poles made of wood shall not
be considered acceptable.
      (2)   The minimum distance between advertising signs shall be 500 feet
when adjacent to Highway 30 and 300 feet on other streets, whether on the same
side of a street or on opposite sides of a street.
      (3)   Advertising signs shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
Highways 14 and 30 and Iowa Avenue. Setbacks from other streets shall be 30
feet. Where any advertising sign is directly adjacent to lots with buildings,
the setback shall be no less than the building structure, but no sign shall be
required to have a setback greater than 50 feet.
      (4)   No advertising sign shall be permitted within 100 feet of any
residential zoning district boundary.
      (5)   Advertising signs may be permitted in the following areas of the
city: GC or GI districts adjacent to Highway 30 and Iowa Avenue and GC or GI
districts adjacent to Highway 14 south of Southridge Road or north of Riverside
Cemetery specifically on the west side of Highway 14.
      (6)   Advertising signs may be electronic provided they comply with
division (K)(3)(b) and (c) of this section.
      (7)   Some signs may be subject to Iowa DOT approval.
   (K)   Changeable copy. Changeable copy centers (CCC) may be permitted as an
electronic message center or manual changeable copyreader. These CCCs shall be
used as an integral part of marquee signs, menu board signs, monument signs, or
pylon signs subject to the applicable standards of this section (See Figure
156.G.004-1, Changeable Copy Center Design Requirements), including the
following design requirements:
      (1)   Enclosure. Electronic message centers or manual changeable copy are
permitted as part of a sign if they are enclosed on all sides with a finish of
brick, stone, stucco, powder-coated metal, or anodized aluminum. The enclosure
shall extend a minimum of six inches from the perimeter of the electronic
message center in all directions. Gaps between the changeable copyreader board
and the surround are permitted to accommodate locks and hinges for a cover for
the changeable copy area, but only to the extent necessary for such locks and
hinges to operate.
      (2)   Size and proportions. Changeable copy centers square footage shall
not exceed the maximum sign area permitted for that sign type within the zoning
district where the proposed sign is to be located with the following
requirements or limitations for the changeable copy:
         (a)   Menu board sign. If a menu board sign is not visible from a
residential property or a public or private street, 100% of the copy area may
be electronic.
         (b)   Marquee sign. The lesser of 100 square feet or 40% of the sign
area of a marquee sign; or
         (c)   Other sign types. The lesser of 100 square feet or the maximum
permitted sign area of a monument sign, or pylon sign.
         (d)   Remainder of sign copy. The balance of the sign area shall
utilize permanent letters or symbols.
         (e)   Combination of CCC types. No sign structure that includes a
manual changeable copy sign may also include an electronic message center, and
vice-versa.
      (3)   Electronic message center locational requirements.
         (a)   Electronic message centers shall be:
            1.   Located no closer than 100 feet to a residential dwelling
unit;
            2.   Prohibited in the UC-HD, Urban Core-Historic District, with
the exception of permitted marquee signs; and
            3.   Permitted in the UC, MU, GC, PI, REC and GI zoning districts
subject to the standards in divisions (K)(3)(b) and (c) below.
            4.   Be limited to one such sign per lot.
         (b)   Electronic message centers shall not:
            1.   Blink, rotate, move, chase, flash, glare, strobe, scintillate,
or in any fashion be distracting to the traveling public or the public in
general;
            2.   Include audio, pyrotechnic, or bluecasting (Bluetooth
advertising) components;
            3.   Be included on or used as portable or temporary sign.
         (c)   Electronic message centers shall:
            1.   Not be limited by color;
            2.   Contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one
position with no more illumination than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light if
a malfunction occurs; and
            3.   Include an automatic dimmer that dims the sign at dusk or
during low-light conditions.
      (4)   Manual changeable copy.
         (a)   Manual changeable copyreader boards are only permitted on
monument signs, pylon signs or marquee signs.
         (b)   Manual changeable copy message centers, including their frames
shall be the lesser of 100 square feet or the maximum permitted sign area of a
monument sign or pylon sign. The balance of the sign area shall utilize
permanently affixed letters or symbols.
         (c)   Lettering of manual changeable copy signs shall be of a single
style and shall be of uniform color and size.
 
Figure 156.G.004-1
Changeable Copy Center Design Requirements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2755.png]
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15097, passed 12-20-2024)
§ 156.G.005 SIGN ILLUMINATION.
   (A)   Generally. The standards in this section establish the permitted level
of illumination for individual sign types in §
156.G.004, Permanent Signs, and the level and type of illumination allowed
(internal illumination, external illumination, or halo lit).
   (B)   Color. Illumination shall be in white light only.
   (C)   Electrical service. When electrical service is provided to a sign, all
such electrical service shall be permanently installed in accordance with the
city's Electrical Code, and shall be placed underground.
   (D)   Glare. All lighting shall be arranged so that there will be no glare
directed or reflected toward adjacent properties or constitute a hazard to the
safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a street.
   (E)   Illumination. Internal or external illumination of signs is permitted
as follows:
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Externally illuminated signs may be illuminated by either
ground-mounted lights or wall-mounted light bars.
         (b)   Internally illuminated signs may include halo lighting, neon, or
other sources that do not exceed the brightness or flashing light standards
below.
         (c)   All signs shall not exceed 0.3-foot candles over ambient light
conditions.
      (2)   Flashing lights. Signs with flashing, blinking, or traveling lights
shall have light bulbs that do not exceed 350 Lumen each.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.G.006 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. The signs described in this section may be installed or
modified without a sign permit and not counted in the total square footage of
signage allowed on any particular property or site, provided that the sign
otherwise complies with the Building Code and with all applicable regulations
of this Zoning Ordinance and the following requirements:
      (1)   The temporary signage permitted by this section shall be regulated
by the base zoning district and by number, size, height, location, duration of
signs placed on a property on a temporary basis;
      (2)   All temporary signs must be made of durable materials and shall be
well-maintained;
      (3)   Lighting shall only be from ambient, external illumination;
      (4)   The party posting the temporary sign is solely responsible for
obtaining the permission of the property owner before posting their temporary
sign; and
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator has the authority to remove any temporary
signage that does not meet any and all of the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Allowed signs. Table 156.G.006-1, Allowed Temporary Signs, sets out:
      (1)   The temporary sign types allowed in each zoning district; and
      (2)   The standards applicable to each sign type.
   (C)   Unlisted signs. Signs that are not listed in Table 156.G.006-1 are
prohibited as temporary signs.
Table 156.G.006-1
Allowed Temporary Signs
          Residenti al       Mixed-Use and Non-Residential Example Image
Sign Type Districts          Districts
          AG, RR, RL, RM, RH MU UC GC PI, REC GI
Table 156.G.006-1
Allowed Temporary Signs
           Residenti Mixed-Use and Non-Residential
           al        Districts                      Example Image
Sign Type  Districts
           AG, RR,                      PI,
           RL, RM,   MU      UC GC      REC GI
           RH
Balloon Sign
Number     --        --      -- 1       --  1
Allowed
Maximum    --        --      -- 50 s.f. --  50 s.f.
Area
Maximum    --        --      -- 20 ft.  --  20 ft.
Height
Illuminati --        --      -- Ambient --  Ambient
on                              Only        Only    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Maximum                                             bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
Days Sign                                           IMAGES/0-0-0-2757.png]
May be     --        --      -- 15 days --  15 days
Displayed
(Cycle)
Maximum
Cycles per --        --      -- 4       --  4
Calendar
Year
Banner Sign
                     1 per street frontage for a
Number               single tenant building; 1 per
Allowed    --        business in a multi-tenant
                     building, subject to
                     separation requirements
Maximum    --        48 sq. ft. 100 sq. ft.
Area
Maximum              Attached: Below eave line or
Height     --        parapet wall; Ground Mounted:
                     5 ft.
Illuminati --        Ambient Only                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
on                                                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
Minimum    --        25 feet from other temporary   IMAGES/0-0-0-2759.png]
Separation           signs
Maximum    --        30 days
Days Sign
May be
Displayed
(Cycle)
Maximum
Cycles per --        12
Calendar
Year
Feather Sign
                     1 per
                     50 ft.
                     of
                     street
                     frontag    1 per 50 ft. of
Number     --        e with  -- street frontage
Allowed              a max.     with a max. of 3    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                     of 3       per street frontage bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
                     per                            IMAGES/0-0-0-2761.png]
                     street
                     frontag
                     e
Maximum
Area       --        24 s.f. -- 24 s.f.

Maximum    --        8 ft.   -- 8 ft.
Height
Minimum    --        --      -- --
Setback
Illuminati --        Ambie   -- Ambient Only
on                   nt Only
Maximum
Days Sign
May be     --        30 days -- 30 days
Displayed
(Cycle)
Maximum
Cycles per --        4       -- 4
Calendar
Year
Freestanding Development Sign
Number     1 per lot            2 per street
Allowed                         frontage
Maximum    48 s.f. per sign
Area
Maximum    8 ft.
Height
Minimum    --                   5 ft. between signs [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Separation                                          bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
Minimum    10 ft.            -- 10 ft.              IMAGES/0-0-0-2763.png]
Setback
Maximum    Sign shall be removed upon project
Days Sign  completion, issuance of a Certificate of
May be     Occupancy, transfer of ownership of
Displayed  subdivided lots or after six months of
(Cycle)    inactivity on a project or development.
Maximum
Cycles per --
Calendar
Year
Other      A freestanding development sign is
Signs      prohibited from a property that already
           has a permanent freestanding sign
L-Frame/H-Frame Sign
Number     1 per street frontage
Allowed
Maximum    9 s.f.
Area
Maximum    6 ft.
Height
Minimum    6 feet; 20 ft. from an intersection
Setback1
Illuminati Ambient only                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
on                                                  bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
Maximum                                             IMAGES/0-0-0-2765.png]
Days Signs
May be     180 days
Displayed
(Cycle)
Maximum
Cycles Per 2
Calendar
Year
Yard Sign
Number     No maximum number;   One Every 30 ft;
Allowed    see next row for     Max. of 5 signs
           maximum area
Maximum    6 s.f. per side      9 s.f. per side
Area
Maximum    4 ft.                4 ft.
Height
Minimum    --
Setback                                             [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Illuminati Ambient only                             bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
on                                                  IMAGES/0-0-0-2767.png]
Maximum
Days Signs
May be     30 days
Displayed
(Cycle)
Maximum
Cycles Per --
Calendar
Year
 
   (D)   Portable signs. Portable signs may be located in any nonresidential
zoning district on a temporary basis through issuance of a sign permit subject
to the following requirements:
      (1)   Maximum size. Signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in area;
      (2)   Maximum height. Signs shall not exceed six feet in height;
      (3)   Public right-of-way. Portable signs shall not be located in any
public right-of-way;
      (4)   Duration. One portable sign shall be permitted on any zoning lot
for a period of not more than 60 days in any calendar year.
      (5)   Off-premises signs. Off-premises advertising is prohibited.
      (6)   Other standards.
         (a)   Portable signs may not be adapted for use as permanent signs.
         (b)   All portable signs being displayed on the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance are subject to the above regulations and shall be removed
within 30 days unless authorized in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.G.007 INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Installation.
      (1)   Identification. Every permitted sign shall display in a conspicuous
place on the sign, in letters no less than one inch in height, the date of
erection, the permit number, the name of the sign manufacturer and installer,
and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used.
      (2)   Anchoring. Signs shall not be suspended by chains or other devices
that will allow the sign to swing, due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored
to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear on supporting members or
connections.
      (3)   Supports. Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign
design. Angle irons or wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from
public view to the extent technically feasible.
      (4)   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be self-supporting
structures and be permanently attached to sufficient foundations.
      (5)   Attached signs. Attached signs must derive their principle and
total support from the building to which they are attached.
      (6)   Use of fill under monument signs. Mounds or berms may be used to
elevate permanent monument signs, provided that the mound or berm elevates the
base of the sign not more than three feet above the natural grade at the
location of the sign.
      (7)   Electrical switch. The sign shall be equipped with a switch that
prevents electricity from flowing to the sign in order to promote safety during
maintenance.
      (8)   Inspection request. After any sign requiring a permit is
constructed or erected, the sign contractor performing the work or service
shall notify the Building Official for final inspection of the sign.
   (B)   Inspection. The Building Official or Zoning Administrator has the
right to visit any site where a sign is erected or is being erected, installed,
converted, relocated, enlarged, or modified in the city for the purpose of
making any inspection necessary.
      (1)   If the Zoning Administrator finds a sign to be non-conforming, the
Zoning Administrator shall cause notice in writing to be given the owner of the
sign or the owner of the building to which it is attached to at once remove the
sign.
      (2)   If such owner neglects or fails to comply therewith, the Building
Official or Zoning Administrator may cause the sign to be removed and the
expense thereof to be assessed against the owner of the building or sign and
collected as other special taxes.
      (3)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
subject to a fine that shall be set by resolution.
      (4)   Any fines issued or actions taken by the Zoning Administrator under
this subsection may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, whose decision is
subject to judicial review pursuant to I.C.A. § 414.15. Removal of a sign shall
be stayed during such appeal unless the sign presents a danger to public
safety.
   (C)   Maintenance. Signs that do not have a permit, or are not maintained as
set out in this section, are subject to the provisions set out in this
division.
      (1)   Message. Signs shall display messages. Signs that do not display a
message for a period of more than 90 days are "abandoned signs," which are
prohibited subject to § 156.G.003, Prohibited Signs.
      (2)   Upkeep of ground around sign. The area within a ten-foot radius of
the base of a sign shall be kept free of weeds, rubbish, or flammable waste or
material.
      (3)   Supports and other hardware. Structural supports, braces, bolds,
clips, supporting frames and fastenings of a sign shall be kept in good repair
and safe condition, including replacement of defective parts, so that the sign
is securely fastened or anchored to a building wall, structural framing, or
other foundation.
      (4)   Paint and finishes. Paint and other finishes shall be maintained in
good condition. Peeling finishes shall be repaired. Signs with running colors
shall be repainted, repaired, removed, or replaced if the running colors were
not part of the original design.
      (5)   Corrosion and rust. Permanent signs and sign structures shall be
finished and maintained to prevent corrosion and rust. A patina on copper
elements is not considered rust.
      (6)   Level position. Signs that are designed to be level shall be
installed and maintained in a level position.
      (7)   Materials. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and
securely attached to framework, with supports made of masonry, wood, metal, or
other material of equivalent strength.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE H - OUTDOOR LIGHTING
§ 156.H.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide regulations for
outdoor lighting that will:
      (1)   Minimum levels. Permit the use of outdoor lighting that does not
exceed the minimum levels specified for nighttime safety, utility, security,
productivity, enjoyment, and commerce;
      (2)   Off-site impacts. Minimize adverse off-site impacts of lighting
such as light trespass, and obtrusive light;
      (3)   Light pollution. Curtail light pollution, reduce skyglow and
improve the nighttime environment for astronomy;
      (4)   Night lighting. Help protect the natural environment from the
adverse effects of night lighting from gas or electric sources; and
      (5)   Energy conservation. Conserve energy and resources to the greatest
extent possible.
      (6)   UL listed. All lighting, luminaires as the 2020 NEC calls them,
shall be UL listed for the purpose they are intended for, shall not be modified
in any way and shall conform to Article 410 of the 2020 NEC, NFPA 70.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards of this article apply to the following
development activities:
      (1)   New development. New residential, nonresidential, or mixed-use
development or change in use from residential to nonresidential or mixed-use;
      (2)   Increase in intensity. Increase in apartment units, manufactured
home pads, gross floor area, or impervious surface by 20% or more, cumulatively
over a five-year period; or
      (3)   Change in use. Change in use requiring additional parking spaces.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following are not regulated as by this article:
      (1)   Right-of-way. Lighting within the public right-of-way for the
principal purpose of illuminating streets or roads;
      (2)   Emergency services. Temporary lighting used by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency services;
      (3)   Monuments, art, and statutes. Lighting for public monuments, art,
and statuary;
      (4)   Repairs. Repairs to existing luminaires not exceeding 25% of total
installed luminaires;
      (5)   Signs. Lighting solely for signs, which is regulated by Article G,
Signs; and
      (6)   Underwater. Underwater lighting in swimming pools and other water
features.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.H.002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. Outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance shall not exceed the footcandle (fc) values in
Table 156.H.002-1, Illumination Standards, and
Table 156.H.002-2, Parking Lot Lighting.
 
Table 156.H.002-1
Illumination Standards
                 Maximum        Maximum        Maximum         Average
                 Footcandle     Footcandle     Footcandle      Permitted
Zoning Districts adjacent a     Adjacent to a  Adjacent a      Horizontal
                 Residential    Nonresidential Public Right of Footcandles1
                 Property Line1 Property Line1 Way1
All values are stated in footcandles (fc)
AG, RR, RL, RM,  0.2            0.2            0.5             0.2
RH
MU, UC, GC, PI,  0.5            2.0            1.0             5.0
REC
GI               0.5            1.0            1.0             2.0
Table Notes:
1.   Horizontal footcandles are measured horizontal from the surface of the
property by holding a light meter parallel to the ground approximately one
foot off the surface.
 
   (B)   Nuisance prohibited. Outdoor lighting shall be deflected, shaded, and
focused away from abutting properties and shall not be a nuisance to such
abutting properties.
   (C)   Parking lot lighting. Parking facilities, including structured and
open parking lots, spaces, drive aisles, entrances, and stairways must meet the
illumination standards set out in
Table 156.H.002-2, Parking Lot Lighting. Light fixtures must be designed and
installed to prevent glare from being cast outside of any parking structure or
parking lot, and shall not exceed the limits stated in
Table 156.H.002-1, Illumination Standards.
 
Table 156.H.002-2
Parking Lot Lighting
Standard                                               Footcandle Requirement1
Minimum Horizontal Illuminance1                        0.2 fc
Average Horizontal Illuminance1                        2.0 fc
Uniformity Ratios (Horizontal Illumination) Average to 4:1
Minimum
Maximum to Minimum Ratio                               20:1
Table Notes:
1.   Measured on the parking surface, without any shadowing effect from parked
cars or trees.
 
   (C)   Canopy lighting. Canopy lighting for uses that have sheltered outside
work or service areas, such as vehicle gas and fueling stations, must recess
all luminaries into the canopy so that they cannot be viewed off-site from an
eye height of four feet (to protect automobile drivers from glare).
   (D)   Wall pack lighting. Any project that proposes the use of wall pack
lighting on the perimeter of the property shall be required to prepare an
exterior lighting plan for review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
   (E)   Outdoor recreation facilities.
      (1)   Average permitted horizontal footcandle exemption. Illumination
levels for sports facilities may exceed the maximum permitted horizontal
footcandle requirements and shall be:
         (a)   Designed to be no higher than recommended for the appropriate
class of play, as defined by the current version of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) publication IES RP-6-15; and
         (b)   Comply with the maximum footcandles adjacent to residential and
nonresidential property lines standards established in
Table 156.H.002-1, Illumination Standards.
      (2)   Shielding. Fixtures used for non-aerial sports shall be fully-
shielded. Fixtures used for aerial sports, such as baseball and softball shall
be shielded to the full extent possible while also allowing the minimum of
vertical illuminance needed to track the ball.
      (3)   Certification. Lighting systems for outdoor recreational facilities
shall be designed and certified by an engineer registered in the state as
conforming to all applicable restrictions of this Zoning Ordinance before
construction commences.
   (F)   Prohibitions. The following are prohibited:
      (1)   Vehicular safety. Any fixed light not designed for roadway
illumination that produces incident or reflected light that could impair the
operator of a motor vehicle;
      (2)   Searchlights. The installation, use, or maintenance of beacons or
searchlights;
      (3)   Building facade lights. Lights that are mounted on the ground or
poles for the purpose of illuminating a building facade; and
      (4)   Building outline lighting. Exposed strip lighting or neon tubing
used to illuminate building facades or outline buildings or windows or
flickering or flashing lights installed in like fashion, except for temporary
decorative lighting.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.H.003 LIGHT SOURCES.
   (A)   Generally. All lighting shall be shielded so the source of
illumination (bulb or direct lamp image) is not visible from the property line.
This reduces glare and interference with boundary streets and adjacent
properties. No lamp shall extend past the housing of a light fixture.
   (B)   Light fixture type.
      (1)   Light fixtures shall be:
         (a)   "Full cut-off" fixtures that limit lighting that is visible or
measurable at the property line;
         (b)   Of constant intensity;
         (c)   Reflected or shielded so as not to:
            1.   Be of excessive brightness;
            2.   Cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or drivers;
            3.   Create any public or private nuisance; or
            4.   Unreasonably interfere with an adjacent property owner's right
to enjoy their property.
      (2)   "No cut-off" fixtures, may be used only for decorative purposes,
provided:
         (a)   They have light fixtures that produce no more than 1,500 lumens
(approximately equal to a 100-watt incandescent bulb);
         (b)   They use energy-efficient bulbs, such as light-emitting diode
(LED) or compact fluorescent (CFL).
 
Figure 156.H.003-1
Types of Light Fixtures
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bc8e8b7fc8bb35dc31dac035fed32ed293248cfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2769.png]
 
   (D)   Cut-off requirements. (See
Figure 156.H.003-1, Types of Light Fixtures.)
      (1)   Full cut-off. Except as otherwise allowed, all lighting (including,
but not limited to vehicle use areas, canopies, security, walkway, landscaping,
signs, outdoor display areas, and building) shall have 100% of its output below
90 degrees from a vertical line through the fixture.
      (2)   Adjacent to residential use or district. All lighting fixtures that
are mounted on a building wall facing a property line adjacent to a residential
property line or public right-of-way boundary shall be fitted with a "house
side shielding" reflector on the side facing the residential property line or
public right-of-way.
      (3)   Flags and statutes. Light fixtures used to illuminate flags,
statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall
use a narrow cone beam of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated
object.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.H.004 LIGHTING PLACEMENT AND HEIGHT.
   (A)   Standards for specific uses and site features.
      (1)   Awnings. Awnings or canopies used for building accents over doors
and windows shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from underneath or
behind the awning) unless the awning material is entirely opaque.
      (2)   Canopies. Areas under a canopy shall be designed so as not to
create glare off-site. Acceptable methods include one or both of the following:
         (a)   A recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either
recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy that provides
a full cutoff or fully-shielded light distribution; or
         (b)   A surface-mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that
provides a full cutoff or fully-shielded light distribution.
      (3)   Sports and performance venues. Lighting fixtures for outdoor sports
areas, athletic fields, and performance areas shall be equipped with an
existing glare control package (e.g., louvers, shields, or similar devices) and
aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or
performance area.
      (4)   Wall pack lights.
         (a)   Wall packs on the exterior of the building shall be fully
shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-
site) to direct the light vertically downward and be of low wattage (100 watts
or lower).
         (b)   Wall pack light sources visible from any location off-site are
prohibited.
   (B)   Maximum fixture height.
      (1)   Freestanding fixtures. No freestanding light fixture shall be
greater than 25 feet in height, except as set out in §
156.H.002(E), Outdoor Recreation Lighting.
      (2)   Fixtures mounted on residential buildings and accessory structures.
Fixtures that are mounted on residential buildings or accessory structures
shall not be located higher than 16 feet or above the lowest point of the roof
eave, whichever is lower.
      (3)   Fixtures mounted on nonresidential buildings. Fixtures that are
mounted on nonresidential buildings shall not be located above the highest
point of the roofline of any building.
      (4)   Full cut-off fixtures. Full cut-off fixtures shall have a maximum
height of 30 feet.
      (5)   No cut-off fixtures. No cut-off fixtures:
         (a)   Shall have a maximum height of 20 feet; and
         (b)   Are not permitted on any side of a building that faces or abuts
a residential property line.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE I - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BODIES
§ 156.I.001 CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Generally. The City Council has all powers conferred upon it by the
City of Marshalltown Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State of Iowa. With
respect to decision-making pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance, in addition to
the authorized acts of the Code of Ordinances, the City Council will exercise
the powers set out in this section.
   (B)   Approvals. The City Council shall have the authority to make final
decisions on the development review applications denoted in Table 156.J.002.12-
1, Development Review Summary Table. In addition, the City Council shall have
the authority to approve, adopt, or amend:
      (1)   Plans and programs for the development and redevelopment of the
city, including but is not limited to, amending the text and maps of the
Comprehensive Plan or other plans from time to time;
      (2)   The city's Capital Improvement Plan (CIP);
      (3)   Policies or procedures to facilitate implementation of planning
programs;
      (4)   Proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions as required by the
city; and
      (5)   Any other action not delegated to any other board or commission as
the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance and the goals and objectives of the city, provided
such action is not contrary to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or
state law.
   (C)   Appeals. The City Council shall hear and decide appeals from decisions
of the Plan and Zoning Commission after a public hearing, as set out in §
156.J.002, Common Review Procedures.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.I.002 PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. The Plan and Zoning Commission is authorized by I.C.A.
Chapter 414, City Zoning, and shall be established and function according to
Chapter 150, Planning, of the city's Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Plan and Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to make recommendations to the City Council and BOA or make final
decisions on the development review applications denoted in Table 156.J.002.12-
1, Development Review Summary Table.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.I.003 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Established. This section establishes a Board of Adjustment (BOA),
with membership, qualifications, and terms of office in accordance with and
controlled by the provisions of I.C.A. Chapter 414.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The BOA shall have the authority to make final
decisions on the development review applications denoted in Table 156.J.002.12-
1, Development Review Summary Table.
   (C)   Membership. The Board shall consist of five members serving without
compensation, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council
for a term of five years; excepting that, when the Board shall first be
created, one member shall be appointed for a term of five years, one for a term
of four years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of two years and
one for a term of one year. Not more than two members of the Board shall be
members of the Plan and Zoning Commission.
   (D)   Vacancy. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for
the unexpired portion of the term. Should any member be absent from the city or
become incapacitated, or disqualified, the Mayor shall appoint a substitute to
serve as a member of the Board with the same powers and authority as the
regular member of the Board until the regular member has returned or is able to
serve on the Board.
   (E)   Special uses. Requests for special uses shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary by the
Board of Adjustment.
   (F)   Meetings and procedures.
      (1)   Time and place. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chair and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chair or, in
their absence, the acting Chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
      (2)   Record keeping. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Board and shall be a public record.
      (3)   Role of Secretary of the Board. A city representative shall serve
as Secretary of the Board and keep its records.
      (4)   Relations to other city boards. The Board shall have the power to
call on any municipal department or officer for assistance in the performance
of its duties, and it shall be the duty of any such department to render such
assistance as may reasonably be required.
      (5)   Rules of procedures. The Board shall adopt, from time to time, such
rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the power
and authority granted it by the provisions of this chapter or any state law.
      (6)   Quorum and necessary vote. The concurring vote of three members of
the Board shall be necessary to decide any appeal, exception, or variation upon
which the Board is authorized by this chapter to render a decision.
      (7)   Decisions. The Board shall render its decisions without
unreasonable delay.
   (G)   Jurisdiction. The Board shall have the following powers and authority:
      (1)   Appeals. To hear and decide an appeal where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   Exceptions. To grant an exception in the following instances:
         (a)   In the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot or tract held in a single ownership after the effective
date of this chapter;
         (b)   In the determination that the actual street layout on the ground
varies from the street layout as shown on the District Map;
         (c)   In the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for
railroads or public utility purposes;
         (d)   In the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has
been damaged by explosion, fire, Act of God or a public enemy, to the extent of
more than 50% of its fair market value, where the Board finds some compelling
necessity requiring a continuance of the non-conforming use and that the
primary purpose in continuing the non-conforming use is not to continue a
monopoly;
         (e)   In the waiving or reduction of the parking and loading
requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the
building is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of the parking or
loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable
hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an
advantage or convenience;
         (f)   In the permitting of land within 300 feet of a multiple dwelling
to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multiple
dwelling;
         (g)   In the determination of whether an industry should be permitted
within the GI, General Industry, because of the methods by which it would be
operated and because of its effect upon uses in surrounding districts; and
         (h)   In the extension or expansion of a non-conforming use on the
same or adjoining property to provide parking for employees and for handicapped
persons.
      (3)   Variances (general). To authorize upon appeal in specific cases
such variance from the terms of an ordinance as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
      (4)   Variances (area, dimensional, numeric). To authorize on appeal, in
specific cases, such variance from the terms of an ordinance with respect to
the area, dimensional, or other numerical limitations as will not be contrary
to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement
of the provisions of the ordinance will result in practical difficulties to the
property owner in making a beneficial use of the property allowed by the zoning
ordinance, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and
substantial justice done.
      (5)   Special use permits. To authorize a new special use to be
established or for an existing special use to intensify, expand, or convert to
another special use.
   (H)   Appeals. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, officer,
department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment may seek review of such decision by a court of record in the
manner provided by the laws of the state and particularly by I.C.A. Chapter
414.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.I.004 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Generally. The Zoning Administrator is a member of the city staff who
is ultimately responsible for processing an application to a final decision (in
case of administrative review applications) or making a recommendation to
another review body (in case of all other applications) designated by the city
shall administer and enforce this chapter.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority
to make recommendations or final decisions on the development review
applications denoted in Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.I.005 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Administrator
shall appoint a Floodplain Administrator to administer and enforce the relevant
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and other appropriate sections of Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 44, Emergency Management and Assistance,
pertaining to floodplain management.
   (B)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to ensure
that the provisions of this subchapter will be satisfied;
      (2)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to ensure
that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local
governmental agencies;
      (3)   Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the state’s
Department of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation
of a watercourse;
      (4)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of floodplain management
provision within this Zoning Ordinance;
      (5)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the City Council of
potential conflicts;
      (6)   Shall require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on
the community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM), when a regulatory floodway has
not been designated unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
      (7)   May, under the provisions of CFR Title 44, Chapter 1, Section
65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the city's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that
the city first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.I.006 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Powers and duties relative to matters in this Zoning Ordinance. The
Building Official shall have the authority to make final decisions on the
development review applications denoted in Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development
Review Summary Table.
   (B)   Powers and duties relative to matters outside of this Zoning
Ordinance. In addition to the powers and duties set forth above, the Building
Official shall perform duties as outlined in the remainder of the city's Code
of Ordinances.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE J - DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 156.J.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
Subsec. 156.J.001.1 Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to consolidate and standardize the city's
development review procedures.
Subsec. 156.J.001.2 Applicability.
   (A)   Generally. The sections of this article apply to all development
activity that requires a recommendation or final decision from city staff or a
council, commission, or board denoted in Article I, Development Review Bodies.
   (B)   Types of procedures. There are three types of development procedures
applicable to this Zoning Ordinance, including:
      (1)   Legislative. An application recommended by a commission, board, or
staff that requires public notice and a hearing, and a final decision by the
City Council is a legislative action.
      (2)   Administrative. These applications are decided by the Zoning
Administrator where no public notice or hearing is required. The decision is
made using clear and objective standards or approval criteria where no limited
discretion is necessary.
      (3)   Quasi-judicial. The Board of Adjustment (Board) reviews
applications for special use permits, appeals of administrative decisions,
variances, determines findings of fact, and may then approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an application. The decision of the Board is final and
subject only to appeal by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Sequence of development approval. Where more than one development
review application is required by this Zoning Ordinance in order to initiate,
continue, or complete a development on the same property, development review
bodies shall make final decisions in the following sequence. A development
review body shall make final decisions on:
      (1)   Legislative applications prior to final decisions on all other
applications;
      (2)   Quasi-judicial applications prior to final decisions on subdivision
or administrative applications; and
      (3)   Applications within the same category as Table 156.J.002.12-1,
Development Review Summary Table, assigns priority.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.J.002 COMMON REVIEW PROCEDURES.
Subsec. 156.J.002.1 Pre-Application Conference.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a pre-application conference is to familiarize
the applicant with the submittal requirements and review procedures, including
all applicable standards and any known constraints, hazards, or special
conditions associated with the subject property.
   (B)   Applications requiring a pre-application conference. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that require a pre-application conference.
   (C)   Scheduling. The conference shall be scheduled at least 15 days before
an application is due.
   (D)   Sketch plan. The applicant may submit a sketch plan as a basis for
discussion prior to or at the pre-application conference. The sketch plan shall
be of sufficient detail to accurately convey the concept, character, location,
parcel size, and the size and scale of the proposed development. The applicant
may submit additional materials at his or her discretion.
   (E)   Requested submittals. At or following the pre-application conference,
the Zoning Administrator may request that the applicant provide additional
materials at the time of application submittal as may be necessary to permit
the informed exercise of judgment under the decision criteria for the
application.
   (F)   Disclaimer. Outcomes of the pre-application conference shall not
imply, in whole or in part, any final decision on the application.
   (G)   Continuing review process. After the pre-application conference has
occurred, applications that require such conference may subsequently undergo
the processes established in Subsec. 156.J.002.3, Application Completeness.
Subsec. 156.J.002.2 Application and Fees.
   (A)   Applications and fees. Every development review application required
by this Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted in a format and with contents
established by the Zoning Administrator and shall include the corresponding
application fee that is established by the city Council.
   (B)   Applications subject to application filing and fees. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that require an application and fees.
   (C)   Authorization to initiate an application. Table 156.J.002.2-1,
Application Authorization, denotes those who are authorized to initiate each of
the application types.
 
Table 156.J.002.2
Application Authorization
                                                          Party Aggrieved by an
Application Type    Council or Commission Property Owner1 Administrative
                                                          Decision1
Legislative Review  Yes                   Yes             No
Applications
Administrative      No                    Yes             No
Review Applications
Quasi-Judicial      No                    Yes             Yes
Applications
TABLE NOTES:
"Yes" = Entity may initiate application | "No" = Entity may not initiate
application
   1.   Including his or her agent.
 
   (D)   Liens, taxes, assessments, and debts to public entities. No
application for a permit or approval will be processed for property that is the
subject of outstanding liens, delinquent taxes, delinquentassessments, or any
other delinquent debts, fines, or obligations to the city, county, a school
district, or other public-sector entity that provides services to the property.
   (E)   Representation of facts. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or
willfully misrepresent or fail to include any information required by this
Zoning Ordinance on any application. If development is approved upon an
application that contains misrepresentations or fails to contain material facts
required by the application, then the city shall place a stay or stop-work
order on the development or use, which shall remain in place until such time
that the approval body receives the required information to its satisfaction.
   (F)   Waiver of submittal requirements. The Zoning Administrator may waive
certain submittal requirements in order to tailor the requirements to the
information necessary to review a particular application.
   (G)   Deadlines. The Zoning Administrator may establish periodic application
submittal deadlines.
   (H)   Continuing review process. Submitted applications shall subsequently
undergo the processes established in Subsec.
156.J.002.3, Application Completeness.
Subsec. 156.J.002.3 Application Completeness.
   (A)   Generally. The application completeness review ensures whether or not
an application is sufficiently complete to be processed. After an application
is submitted, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application and
determine if:
      (1)   The application includes all required materials and information;
      (2)   Those parts of the application which are required to be prepared by
licensed professionals are, in fact, prepared by such professionals; and
      (3)   Any additional information that is necessary to demonstrate
compliance with all of the applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance or
that was identified as part of a pre-application conference.
   (B)   Applications requiring an application completeness review. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that require application completeness.
   (C)   Completeness does not equate to approval. A determination of
completeness does not mean that:
      (1)   During review, additional clarification or information will not be
needed;
      (2)   The application will receive a positive recommendation or positive
final decision from the applicable administrative body; or
      (3)   The contents of the submittal are accurate or that they comply with
the standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Incomplete applications.
      (1)   If the Zoning Administrator determines a submittal not to be
complete, the Administrator shall:
         (a)   Notify the applicant in writing with a list of all missing or
incomplete items; and
         (b)   Provide a maximum of ten business days for the applicant to
resubmit the missing or incomplete items.
      (2)   If the applicant does not resubmit the missing or incomplete items
within ten business days, the Zoning Administrator shall deem the submittal
null and void.
   (E)   Refunds. Fees for applications deemed incomplete and null and void are
non-refundable.
   (F)   Continuing review process. Complete applications shall subsequently
undergo the processes established in Subsec.
156.J.002.4, Staff Review.
Subsec. 156.J.002.4 Staff Review.
   (A)   Final decision or distribution. After completeness determination, the
Zoning Administrator shall, according to the review responsibilities of Table
156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table:
      (1)   Review and comment. Review the application and provide comments to
the applicant, which may include required revisions;
      (2)   Review and decide. Review and make a final decision on the
application; or
      (3)   Distribute. Distribute the application to city staff or outside
agency for recommendation or final decision.
   (B)   Applications requiring staff review and referral. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that require a staff review.
   (C)   Required revisions.
      (1)   Comments. During application review, the Zoning Administrator may
provide comments from city staff or outside agencies or other administrative
bodies, where applicable, to the applicant. The applicant shall revise and
resubmit the application with the requested changes.
      (2)   Resubmittal. Upon receipt of the resubmittal, the Zoning
Administrator may refer the application to agencies again if the changes
substantially affect the interests of the agency in ways not anticipated by the
agency's original comments, or require the agency's technical expertise for
appropriate review.
   (D)   Administrative recommendation or decision. Promptly after submittal of
a complete application that addresses the comments (or, after finding that no
revisions are required):
      (1)   Administrative applications. If the application is for a review
procedure addressed in §
156.J.004, Administrative Review Procedures, then the city staff member denoted
in Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table, shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the application, as appropriate. Applications
receiving approval may subsequently undergo the processes established in
Subsec. 156.J.002.10, Inactive or Expired Applications.
      (2)   Legislative and quasi-judicial applications. If, according to
Table 156.J.002.12-2, the application requires a public meeting or public
hearing prior to a final decision, then the applicable city staff member shall
forward a recommendation to the next administrative body who will consider it
for further recommendation or final decision.
   (E)   Common review criteria. In addition to all other applicable provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance, city staff and administrative bodies shall consider
the provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, when making a recommendation or a final
decision.
   (F)   Continuing review process. Applications requiring a public meeting or
hearing shall subsequently undergo the processes established in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
Subsec. 156.J.002.5 Common Review Criteria.
   (A)   Generally. In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions
or modifications, or deny an application, the applicable review bodies shall
consider the common review criteria denoted in
Table 156.J.002.5-1, Common Review Criteria Applicability. Additional review
criteria may apply and are enumerated in the specific review procedures within
this article.
   (B)   Applications subject to common review criteria. Table 156.J.002.5-2,
Review Steps, denotes the development review applications that are applicable
for the use of common review criteria.
Table 156.J.002.5-1
Common Review Criteria Applicability
Common Review Criteria All Applications1 Legislative   Quasi-Judicial
                                         Applications1 Applications
Table 156.J.002.5-1
Common Review Criteria Applicability
Common Review Criteria          All Applications1 Legislative   Quasi-Judicial
                                                  Applications1 Applications
The request complies with the
applicable standards of this
Zoning Ordinance, the City Code Yes               No            No
of Ordinances, and any
applicable county, state, or
federal requirements.
The request substantially
conforms to any associated
prior approval for the
development, including, but not Yes               No            No
limited to, a special use
permit, Master Development
Plan, or Site Plan.
The administrative body has
considered the recommendation   No                Yes           Yes
of staff.
The request is consistent with
applicable policies of the
Comprehensive Plan and
applicable utility plans and
capital improvements plans; or,
if it addresses a topic that is No                Yes           Yes
not contained or not fully
developed in the Comprehensive
Plan, the request does not
impair the implementation of
the Comprehensive Plan.
The request promotes the
purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance as established in §  No                Yes           Yes
156.A.002, Purposes, and in
other applicable purpose
statements in this chapter.
Adequate facilities, including
public or private utilities,
solid waste service, roads,     Yes               Yes2          Yes
drainage, and other
improvements are present or are
planned to be provided.
The request demonstrates
compatibility with surrounding
conforming and permitted land   No                Yes2          Yes
uses and structures and with
the general character of the
area.
TABLE NOTES:
"Yes" = Common review criteria applies for all applications.
"No" = Common review criteria does not apply for all applications.
   1.   Excluding appeals of administrative decisions.
   2.   Excluding Zoning Ordinance text amendment.
 
Subsec. 156.J.002.6 Public Notice.
   (A)   Generally. Public notice, if required, shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of this subsection. The content of notices shall be
according to the policies adopted by the city and as required by I.C.A. §
362.3.
   (B)   Required notice. Set out in Table 156.J.002.6-1, Required Notice, are
the required notices established for each type of application or procedure.
Administrative approvals and procedures do not require notice and therefore are
not listed in the Table. It shall be the policy of the city to give as full and
adequate notice as practicable to all interested persons and to the general
public, but the good-faith failure to mail notice to any person entitled in
this subsection, except as specified in Chapter 414, of the Iowa Code, shall
not be grounds for upsetting any action taken.
   (C)   Content of notice. The notice shall include:
      (1)   The date, time, and place of such hearing;
      (2)   A description of the contents of the matter to be heard; and
      (3)   The address or location of the property involved and to be
discussed at the public hearing.
   (D)   Setting hearing. For all matters properly brought before the Board of
Adjustment or the Plan and Zoning Commission for which a public hearing is
required by this Zoning Ordinance, the development review body charged with
conducting the public hearing shall, upon receipt of a completed application,
select a reasonable time and place for such hearing; provided, however, that
such time shall be not later than 60 days following the submission of the
subject application, unless the applicant shall agree to some later time.
 
Table 156.J.002.6-1
Required Notice
Review Procedure Application Type   Review Body  Publication  Posted
Legislative      Text Amendment     City Council Required     Not Required
Applications     Zone Change                     Required     Required
                 Special Use Permit              Required     Required
Quasi-Judicial   Variances          Board of     Required     Required
Applications     Appeals of         Adjustment
                 Administrative                  Not Required Not Required
                 Decisions
 
   (E)   Procedural requirements for notice.
      (1)   Contents. All notices shall contain, at minimum, the following
information:
         (a)   The name of the owner, applicant, engineer, architect, or other
parties involved;
         (b)   Lot, block, and address of the subject property, or, if none
apply, the general location based on the nearest street intersection;
         (c)   For variances, a reference to the Zoning Ordinance provision
that is the subject of the variance;
         (d)   The address, date, and time of the public hearing; and
         (e)   The necessary information for obtaining assistance for
physically impaired persons who wish to attend the hearing.
      (2)   Published notice. The Zoning Administrator shall arrange for notice
of a required public hearing to be published in one issue of an official
newspaper of general circulation in the city, as applicable and as required by
state law.
      (3)   Posted notice. Notice is given by a sign posted on the property in
one or more locations that are visible from a public street.
         (a)   Notice will read "Public Hearing" and provide Housing and
Community Development Office contact information.
         (b)   Post notice signs on each street frontage of a site under
consideration to inform the public of a proposed land use plan amendment or
zone change and the time and place of the public hearing. The sign shall be
black letters on a white sign board and dimensioned as established by the
Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   If multiple properties are under consideration, post signs at
least every 600 feet along each street frontage.
         (d)   It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that
the signs are maintained and visible from the street rights-of-way in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Failure to maintain the public
notice signs may be considered, along with all other facts and circumstances,
in determining whether the request is granted. Any person who removes a public
notice sign without the property owner’s consent shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
         (e)   Public notice signs must be erected no less than seven days
before the hearing and shall remain in place until the final hearing.
         (f)   Remove signs within seven days after a final decision has been
made.
   (F)   Constructive notice. Failure of a surrounding property owner to
receive notice of a hearing shall not affect the validity of the final
decision.
Subsec. 156.J.002.7 Public Meetings and Hearings.
   (A)   Generally. All meetings of the City Council, Plan and Zoning
Commission, and Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public except as
otherwise provided by the Iowa Open Meetings Law and Public Records Law set out
in I.C.A Chapters 21 and 22. However, not all decisions require public
hearings. Therefore, recommendations and decisions that are authorized by this
Zoning Ordinance are classified as requiring a "public meeting" or "public
hearing."
   (B)   Applications requiring public meetings and hearings. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that require public meetings and hearings.
   (C)   Joint meetings. Any public hearing required by this Zoning Ordinance
or the laws of the State of Iowa may be held jointly with any public hearing
required to be held by City Council or Plan and Zoning Commission, but not by
the Board of Adjustment. Such joint meetings may be held after public notice as
required by law.
   (D)   Consent agenda. The consent agenda may consist of all matters brought
before the City Council, Plan and Zoning Commission, and Board of Adjustment
for action that does not require a public hearing. All items on the consent
agenda shall be approved simultaneously by motion without comment or debate. An
item may be removed from the consent agenda prior to approval at the request of
any member of the Board, Plan and Zoning Commission, or City Council present at
the meeting, or by city staff. Items removed from the consent agenda shall be
considered on the regular agenda.
   (E)   Public hearings.
      (1)   Procedures. The City Council, Plan and Zoning Commission, and Board
of Adjustment follow Robert’s Rules of Order as set out in Section 2.04.030,
Robert’s Rules of Order, as amended from time to time, for the conduct of
public hearings. All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall
be governed by the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance pertaining to, and the
rules promulgated by, the body conducting the hearing. The following general
procedures shall be reflected in the adopted rules of procedure.
         (a)   Any person may appear at a public hearing, submit evidence, and
be heard.
         (b)   If a speaker represents an organization, the body conducting the
hearing may request written evidence of that person’s authority to speak on
behalf of the group in regard to the matter under consideration.
         (c)   Persons appearing at a public hearing shall identify themselves
and state their address and similar information about any organization they
represent.
         (d)   Citizens, applicants, and the city have the right to present
expert witnesses.
         (e)   The chairperson may impose a reasonable time limit on speakers
and may limit testimony that is irrelevant or redundant.
      (2)   Pre-hearing examination. At any time following the giving of notice
as required in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and upon reasonable request, any person may examine
the application and all other documents on file with the secretary of the body
holding the hearing pertaining to the matter subject to such notice. In
addition, any person shall be entitled to copies of such application and
documents upon reasonable request and payment of a fee as established from time
to time by the City Council to cover the cost of such copies.
      (3)   Right to submit written statements. Any person may at any time
prior to the commencement of a hearing, or during such hearing, or within such
time as may be allowed by the development review body following such hearing,
submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the application
being heard. Such statements shall be made a part of the public record of the
hearing.
      (4)   Representation. Persons appearing before the Board of Adjustment,
Plan and Zoning Commission, or City Council may appear in person, through an
online meeting platform when public hearings are held in such format, or
through a representative or agent. The representative or agent shall provide
satisfactory proof of his or her authority upon the request of the Board of
Adjustment, Plan and Zoning Commission, or City Council.
      (5)   Quorum. The number of members of the Board of Adjustment or Plan
and Zoning Commission is required in order to constitute a quorum is set out in
the applicable subsections of Article I, Development Review Bodies. The number
of members of the City Council that is required in order to constitute a quorum
is set out in I.C.A. § 380.4.
   (F)   Decisions.
      (1)   All decisions. Except when voice votes are authorized, a vote shall
be conducted in a manner that the public may know the vote of each person
entitled to vote.
      (2)   Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council decisions. The
following shall apply to applications as established in §
156.J.003, Legislative Review Procedures:
         (a)   Except where this Zoning Ordinance or state statutes provide
otherwise, official action requires the concurring vote of a majority of a
quorum present.
         (b)   Failure of the Plan and Zoning Commission to act within 30 days
shall be deemed a recommendation to the City Council to approve applications as
submitted.
         (c)   Within 60 days, or a period as may be agreed to by the
applicant, following the receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, or
the failure of the Commission to act as provided above, the Council shall:
            1.   By a duly adopted resolution, approve the application with or
without conditions to be accepted by the applicant as a condition of approval.
            2.   Refer the application back to the Commission for further
consideration of specified matters; or
            3.   Refuse to approve the application;
            4.   Failure of the Council to act within 60 days shall be deemed a
final denial of the application.
      (3)   Board of Adjustment decisions. In accordance with I.C.A. Chapter
414, official actions of the Board of Adjustment require the concurring vote of
three regular members of the Board.
Subsec. 156.J.002.8 Continuances and Withdrawals.
   (A)   Generally. Consideration of applications may be continued, or
applications withdrawn as provided in this subsection.
   (B)   Applications subject to continuance and withdrawal provisions. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that are eligible for continuances and withdrawals.
   (C)   Continuances.
      (1)   Request or motion to continue. Consideration of an application may
be continued upon motion of the City Council, Plan and Zoning Commission, or
Board of Adjustment or upon request of the applicant before a decision is made
on the application.
      (2)   Period of continuation. Should any item before the City Council,
Plan and Zoning Commission, or Board of Adjustment be tabled in anticipation of
information or events to occur prior to rendering a decision, such tabling
shall be for not longer than the second meeting following the meeting at which
the time was tabled.
Subsec. 156.J.002.9 Successive Applications.
   (A)   Generally. It is the policy of the city not to hear successive
applications for a substantially similar application after an application is
denied. The limitations of this subsection prevent the consideration of
successive applications.
   (B)   Applications eligible for successive applications. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that are eligible for successive applications.
   (C)   Second applications without new grounds barred. Whenever any
application, appeal, or other request has been denied on its merits, a second
application, appeal, or other request seeking essentially the same relief shall
not be brought unless, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator or
development review body before which it is brought, substantial new evidence is
available or a mistake of law or fact significantly affected the prior denial.
   (D)   New grounds to be stated. Any second application shall include a
detailed statement of grounds justifying consideration of the application.
   (E)   Summary denial with or without hearing. Second applications may be
denied summarily, and without hearing, on a finding that no grounds appear
which warrant a new hearing. In any case where an application is set for
hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting
reconsideration of the merits of the application prior to being allowed to
offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such grounds are established, the
application may be summarily dismissed.
   (F)   Exception.
      (1)   One year. Any second application filed more than one year after the
final denial of a prior application shall be presumed to be based on new
grounds and shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application has
been filed.
      (2)   Final denial. Final denial shall be considered the occurrence of
the later of the following events:
         (a)   Thirty days from the date of denial by the Board, Council, or
Commission; or
         (b)   The date of entry of any final ruling or decision by the highest
court which the Board and Council's denial is appealed to; or
         (c)   The date of any voluntary dismissal of any appeal of the Board
and Council's denial; or
         (d)   In all other circumstances the Board, Council, and Commission
shall determine, in its sole discretion, the date of final denial.
Subsec. 156.J.002.10 Inactive or Expired Applications.
   (A)   Generally. Applications for development approval and permits must be
diligently pursued by the applicant.
   (B)   Applications subject to inactive and expired application provisions. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that are subject to inactive and expired application provisions.
   (C)   Expiration of inactive applications.
      (1)   Application. When an action by the applicant is required for
further processing of an application (e.g., submittal of supplementary
documentation), the application shall become void six months after the date
that the action is requested if:
         (a)   The applicant fails to take action; or
         (b)   The applicant fails to request an extension of time pursuant to
division (D), Extension of Time, below.
      (2)   Development approval. When an action by the applicant is required
for further processing of an application for development approval, the
application shall become void six months from receipt of the application if the
application has remained dormant during that period where no activity has
occurred toward the completion of the application where changes or corrections
are required or where instruments or documents requested or required is not
forthcoming within that period from the property owner or authorized agent.
      (3)   PUD approval. In the event the first development phase has not
commenced within two years after the date of rezoning, or if subsequent phases
are delayed more than two years beyond the indicated development schedule, the
applicant shall file appropriate information detailing the reasons for the
delay. The Zoning Administrator shall review the circumstances and prepare a
report recommending appropriate action to be taken concerning the PUD. The Plan
and Zoning Commission and Council shall review the matter, and may:
         (a)   Continue the PUD zoning with revised time limits;
         (b)   Require that appropriate amendments be made or action taken to
comply with this section;
         (c)   Continue with PUD zoning for part of the area, with or without
revised time limits, and initiate rezoning of the remainder to an appropriate
district; or
         (d)   Initiate rezoning of the entire parcel to an appropriate
district, provided, unless subjected to a comprehensive planning analysis, the
rezoning is not to a zone more restrictive than the one applied immediately
prior to the rezoning to PUD.
      (4)   Refunds. No refunds of application fees will be issued to
applicants whose applications expire pursuant to this subsection.
   (D)   Extension of time. The time for expiration of an application may be
extended by up to six months upon written request of the applicant before the
end of the period set out in division (C), Expiration of Inactive Applications,
above.
   (E)   Effect of expiration. Applications that expire shall automatically
become null and void, closed, and discarded without further notice or activity
by the city. Any application, will be treated as a new application, subject to
requirements in effect at the time of the most recent submittal, and with new
fees.
Subsec. 156.J.002.11 Approval Extension.
   (A)   Generally. Applicants shall diligently pursue completion of
development projects. Accordingly, this subsection voids unapproved
applications for legislative, administrative, and quasi-judicial applications
that become stale due to inaction by the applicant. In addition, this
subsection allows for an extension of the life of such stale applications and
of the expiration deadlines established in Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development
Review Summary Table, for approved applications that may expire due to
inactivity of the applicant.
   (B)   Applications subject to approval extension. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, denotes the development review applications
that are subject to approval extension provisions.
   (C)   Extension of time.
      (1)   Request. Prior to the expiration of an approved application or
unapproved stale application, the applicant may request in writing an extension
of the expiration date of up to six months.
      (2)   Amendments. If the City Council amends this Zoning Ordinance or
adopts other applicable regulations during the period of time when the
application was stale, the application shall:
         (a)   Not be subject to compliance to the new regulations until the
original application is considered to be voided; and
         (b)   Become subject to the new regulations and ordinances if the
period of time to request an extension lapses.
      (3)   Expiration of extension. Approved applications or unapproved stale
applications shall expire after the six-month extension lapses if the Zoning
Administrator determines that the applicant is not actively pursuing action to
complete the development or address comments.
Subsec. 156.J.002.12 Development Review Summary Table.
   (A)   Generally. Procedures for obtaining development review approval
pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance are summarized in this section.
   (B)   Applications and procedures. Each application required by this Zoning
Ordinance is spelled out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table, below.
Table 156.J.002.12-1
Development Review Summary Table
Development  Submittal             Review Responsibilities        Applicable
Application  Timing    Expiration1 Recommendati on Final Decision Standards
(Reference)
ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS: Require final decisions in which city staff
apply the standards in this Zoning Ordinance. Administrative applications
typically require objective analysis by city staff and may involve the
exercise of very limited discretion.
Table 156.J.002.12-1
Development Review Summary Table
Development    Submittal                  Review Responsibilities  Applicable
Application    Timing        Expiration1  Recommendati  Final      Standards
(Reference)                               on            Decision
ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATIONS: Require final decisions in which city staff apply
the standards in this Zoning Ordinance. Administrative applications typically
require objective analysis by city staff and may involve the exercise of very
limited discretion.
               In order to
               make a
               limited
               modifi-cation
               to a site
Site Plan      plan that has 365 days     Zoning Administrator     --
(156.J.004.1)  already been
               approved but
               that has not
               received a
               Certificate
               of Occupancy
               Prior to
               erecting,
               altering, re-
               placing, re-
Building       locating, re-
Permit         building, re- 180 days     Zoning        Building   --
(156.J.004.2)  pairing, or                Administrator Official
               re-storing a
               principal or
               accessory
               building or
               structure
               Prior to
               initiating or
               continuing
               any
               development
               or
Floodplain     substantial
Development    improvement   90 days      Floodplain Administrator §
Permit         within a                                            156.C.006
(156.J.004.3)  regulatory
               floodplain as
               shown on a
               Flood
               Insurance
               Rate Map
               (FIRM)
                             The use
                             associated
                             with the
                             sign is
                             abandoned;
                             The sign is
                             removed or
               Prior to      abandoned;
               constructing, or
               installing,   The sign is
               placing,      not
Sign Permit    relocating a  completely   Zoning Administrator     Article G
(156.J.004.4)  sign, or      constructed,
               modifying a   installed,
               sign's        placed,
               dimensions or changed,
               illumination  relocated,
                             or attached
                             within 180
                             days from
                             the date of
                             the sign
                             permit
                             issuance
               Prior to or
               con- current
               with
Master Sign    submittal of
Plan           a Site Plan,  2 years      Zoning Administrator     Article G
(156.J.004.5)  Planned Unit
               Development
               Plan, or sign
               permit
               Upon
Certificate of completion of
Occupancy      construction  None         Building Official        --
(156.J.004.6)  or before a
               change in
               occupancy
               In order to
               adjust a      Same as
Administrative numeric       application
Adjustment     standard in   being        Zoning Administrator     --
(156.J.004.7)  this Zoning   modified
               Ordinance by
               up to 10%
               Prior to
               establish-ing
Temporary Use  a temporary                                         §
Permit         use related   180 days     Zoning Administrator     156.C.008
(156.J.004.8)  to a public
               or commercial
               event
               Prior to
Limited Use    establish-
Permit         ing,          180 days     Zoning Administrator     §
(156.J.004.9)  changing, or                                        156.C.004
               expanding a
               limited use
               Prior to or
               concurrent
Floodplain     with                                                §
Variance       submittal of  180 days     Floodplain Administrator 156.C.006
(156.J.004.10) a Floodplain
               Development
               Permit
LEGISLATIVE APPLICATIONS: Require final decisions that establish or change the
way the use, design, or development of land will occur on a site-specific,
city-wide, or intermediate scale. Elected and appointed administrative bodies
make final decisions based on general considerations of fostering and
preserving the public health, safety and general welfare, including the city's
fiscal well-being. Such final decisions are characterized by the exercise of
broad discretion.
Text Amendment Prior to                   Zoning                   --
(156.J.003.1)  amending ZO                Administrator
               Prior to
               establish-ing
               or expanding
               a use or      None         1st: Zoning   City
Zone Change    residential                Administrator Council    --
(156.J.003.2)  density                    2nd: PZC
               prohibited in
               the current
               zoning
               district
               Concurrent
               with or
               subsequent to
Master         a zone change
Development    application   2 years      Zoning        PZC        Article D
Plan           and prior to               Administrator
(156.J.003.3)  plats, plans
               or permits
               for a mixed-
               use center
QUASI-JUDICIAL APPLICATIONS: Require final decisions that establish the way
design or development will occur on specific sites in manners that either vary
from the standards of this Zoning Ordinance or that are contested by an
aggrieved party. The Board of Adjustment makes final decisions based on
findings of fact and analysis of how specific provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan apply to the site. Such final decisions
are characterized by exercise of discretion.
               Prior to the
Special Use    operation of               1st: Zoning
Permit         any land use  180 days     Administrator            §
(156.J.005.1)  that is                    2nd: PZC                 156.C.005
               designated as
               a special use
               Prior to or
               con- current
               with                                                Article B,
Variance       submittal of  180 days     Zoning                   Article D,
(156.J.005.2)  a Site Plan,               Administrator            Article E,
               Building                                            Article F
               Permit, or                               BOA
               Sign Permit
               Within 30
               days after a
               final
               decision by
Appeal of      the Zoning
Administrativ  Admin-        None         Zoning                   --
e Decision     istrator or                Administrator
(156.J.005.3)  Building
               Official on a
               matter
               addressed in
               this ZO
KEY: "ZO"= Zoning Ordinance; "PZC" = Plan and Zoning Commission; "BOA" = Board
of Adjustment
TABLE NOTES:
   1.   Measured from the date of approval. Expiration occurs if the applicant
does not diligently pursue completion of the project or the subsequent
required approval. See Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications.
 
   (C)   Review steps. 
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, summarizes the review procedures involved
in the development proposal process.
Table 156.J.002.12-2
Review Steps
General                    Legislative         Quasi-Judicial
Review      Administrative
Procedures  Applications   ZO Text   All Other Written        Variance Appeals
(Subsection                Amendment           Interpretation
Reference)
Table 156.J.002.12-2
Review Steps
General                      Legislative     Quasi-Judicial
Review        Administrative
Procedures    Applications   ZO Text   All   Written        Variance Appeals
(Subsection                  Amendment Other Interpretation
Reference)
Pre-
Application   No             No        Yes   No             No       Yes
Conference (
156.J.002.1)
Applications
and Fees (    Yes            No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
156.J.002.2)
Application
Completeness  Yes            No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
(
156.J.002.3)
Staff Review
(             Yes            Yes       Yes   Yes            Yes      Yes
156.J.002.4)
Common Review
Criteria (    Yes            Yes       Yes   Yes            Yes      Yes
156.J.002.5)
Public Notice
(             No             Yes       No    No             Yes      Yes
156.J.002.6)
Public
Meetings and  No             Yes       Yes   No             Yes      Yes
Hearings (
156.J.002.7)
Continuances
and           No             No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
Withdrawals (
156.J.002.8)
Successive
Applications  No             No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
(
156.J.002.9)
Inactive or
Expired
Applications  Yes            No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
(
156.J.002.10)
Approval
Extension (   Yes            No        Yes   No             Yes      Yes
156.J.002.11)
KEY:
"Yes" = Common Review Procedure Required; No = Common Review Procedure Not
Required
 
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.J.003 LEGISLATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURES.
Subsec. 156.J.003.1 Text Amendment.
   (A)   Generally. The text of this Zoning Ordinance may warrant amendment
from time to time. In these instances, this subsection establishes the process
to change the text of this ZO.
   (B)   Applicability. This section is applicable to text amendments initiated
by the Plan and Zoning Commission, City Council, or any other staff or
decision-making body set out in Article I, Development Review Bodies. A text
amendment may transform a legally nonconforming situation into a conforming
one. However, no text amendment shall be for the sole purpose of curing a
violation of any part of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Decision criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
modifications, or deny a text amendment, the review bodies shall consider
provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Impact mitigation. The proposed amendment helps to mitigate adverse
impacts of the use and development of land on the natural or built
environments, including, but not limited to, mobility, air quality, water
quality, noise levels, stormwater management, wildlife protection, and
vegetation; or will be neutral with respect to these issues;
      (2)   Changing condition. The proposed amendment is necessary to address
a changing condition that was not anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan or this
Zoning Ordinance; and
      (3)   Strategic objectives. The proposed amendment advances the strategic
objectives of the City Council, such as fiscal responsibility, efficient use of
infrastructure and public services, and other articulated city objectives.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall make a
recommendation on the proposed text amendment to the City Council, who shall
subsequently conduct a public hearing before making final action to approve,
approve with modifications, or deny the proposed text amendment.
      (2)   Public notice and public hearing. The required public notice and
public hearing as denoted in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
      (3)   Non-substantive amendments. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
this subsection, the City Council may, by resolution, without being required to
comply with any public notice requirement per either state law or Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Meetings and Hearings:
         (a)   Correct spelling or punctuation errors;
         (b)   Modify cross-references (because another area of the city's Code
of Ordinances has been moved or amended);
         (c)   Correct cross-reference errors; and
         (d)   Other matters determined by the City Attorney to be non-
substantive.
      (4)   Substantive amendments. The Plan and Zoning Commission shall review
and conduct a public hearing on any substantive amendment prior to making a
recommendation to the City Council.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of a text amendment shall take effect
upon the effective date of the ordinance approving the amendment.
Subsec. 156.J.003.2 Zone Change.
   (A)   Generally. A zone change changes the zoning district of a property on
the Official Zoning Map from one zoning district to another.
   (B)   Applicability. A zone change (map amendment) may be initiated by the
owner of the property to be rezoned or their authorized agent or
representative, the City Council, or the Plan and Zoning Commission (PZC). Zone
change applications by property owners and their agents or representatives
shall be submitted on a form approved by the Administrator.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a zone change, the review bodies shall consider provisions
of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Property dimensions. The dimensions of the subject property to
accommodate reasonable development that complies with the requirements of this
ZO, including parking, open space, and buffering requirements;
      (2)   Need. The pace of development and the amount of vacant land
currently zoned for comparable development in the vicinity of the subject
property;
      (3)   Hardship. A comparison of the hardship to the applicant with the
relative gain to the public health, safety, and welfare;
      (4)   Consistency. The proposed zone change is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan or Future Land Use Map and increase the likelihood of
advancing the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan Land
Use Map, or another adopted area plan, including but not limited to
redevelopment plans;
      (5)   Compatibility. The range of uses allowed by the proposed zoning
district will be compatible with the properties in the immediate vicinity of
the subject property;
      (6)   Suitability. The suitability of the subject property for the zoned
purposes;
      (7)   Changed conditions. The character of the surrounding area is
transitioning or being affected by other factors, such as traffic, a new
school, adjoining uses, or environmental issues; and
      (8)   Support. Nearby property owners are in support of, or do not
oppose, the proposed map amendment.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review proposed
zone change and give a report to the PZC. The PZC shall hold a public hearing
and make a recommendation to the City Council, who shall subsequently conduct a
public hearing before making final action to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the proposed zone change.
      (2)   Public notice and public hearing. The required public notice and
public hearing as denoted in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
   (E)   Effect of approval. A zone change is recorded as follows:
      (1)   Legal description. The ordinance shall include a legal description
of the area rezoned and a map of the same;
      (2)   Record. The City Clerk will maintain a record of all ordinances
that change the zoning classification of real property; and
      (3)   Map update. The Zoning Administrator shall update the Official
Zoning Map to reflect the new zoning district for the subject property.
Subsec. 156.J.003.3 Master Development Plan.
   (A)   Generally. A Master Development Plan provides a layout for a large-
scale, multi-phased, or mixed-use development.
   (B)   Applicability. Plan approval is required to illustrate the nature and
character of development, including:
      (1)   Context. The context of the proposed development relative to
adjacent development and the proposal for transitioning and buffering such
development;
      (2)   Location, scale, and design. The locations and types of
residential, nonresidential, and mixed land uses; their scale and design
relationships; and methods to ensure compatibility between the various uses and
adjacent lots;
      (3)   Density. Minimum and maximum gross densities, block sizes, lot
patterns, and heights of residential uses;
      (4)   Intensity. Maximum gross floor areas, building coverage, and
heights of nonresidential and mixed uses;
      (5)   Parking and circulation. The proposed parking and circulation
plans;
      (6)   Streets. The patterns, functional classifications, and cross-
sections of streets within and adjacent to the development, along with the
network of pedestrian and bicycle improvements;
      (7)   Common open space. General locations, means of continuity and
connectivity, and the extent of common open spaces and amenities;
      (8)   Environmental protection. Areas of environmental protection and
preservation, including floodplains; and
      (9)   Phases. Phases and timing of development.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a Master Development Plan, the review bodies shall consider
the provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Site layout. The subject property is laid out in an efficient
manner relative to the natural and built environments and designed to achieve
the aims of a compact, highly walkable environment;
      (2)   Building form and massing. The placement, arrangement, size, and
relationships of buildings relative to streets, pedestrian and civic spaces,
and one another create an urban environment;
      (3)   Walkability. The connections within and between buildings, civic
spaces, parking areas, transit stations and stops, and to surrounding
development; the presence of amenities and other pedestrian improvements; and
the proximity of origins and destinations both internal and external to the
development are such that walking and bicycling are safe and viable modes of
transportation;
      (4)   Undeveloped space. Together with the developed areas, the
undeveloped spaces devoted to natural resource preservation, buffering of uses,
and for passive and active use are connected and continuous throughout the
development;
      (5)   Complete streets and parking. The streets are designed for multiple
purposes, including vehicular movement, on-street parking, and safe use of
pedestrians and bicyclists, and the parking is well-distributed and designed to
preserve an urban streetscape;
      (6)   Phasing. The development is phased in a manner that assures an
adequate mixture of residential and nonresidential land uses and allows for
transition from the early phases to completion, relating to the intensity of
uses and parking; and
      (7)   Quality design. The design of buildings and hardscape and landscape
areas help to establish visual interest, aesthetic appeal, and a unique
identity for the development, including as key considerations human-scale
amenities, integration of civic spaces for public interaction, and protection
from the environmental elements.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review and make
a recommendation on the proposed Master Development Plan to the PZC, who shall
subsequently conduct a public hearing before making final action to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the proposed Master Development Plan.
      (2)   Public notice and public hearing. The required public notice and
public hearing as denoted in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
      (3)   Time frame. Approval of a Master Development Plan shall be valid
for the period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications, and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Upon approval, all subsequent plats, plans, and
permits shall clearly demonstrate consistency and conformance with the adopted
Master Development Plan. Requested modifications of the plan shall be according
to Subsec. 156.J.004.6, Administrative Adjustment.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.J.004 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURES.
Subsec. 156.J.004.1 Site Plan.
   (A)   Generally. Approval of a site plan ensures that proposed development
complies with all applicable standards of this Code. A site plan is not
required for the construction of single-family (attached or detached) and
duplex dwellings or for any emergency activity that is immediately necessary
for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.
   (B)   Applicability. All new development, redevelopment, and substantial
improvement or expansion of multifamily, manufactured home parks,
nonresidential, and mixed-use development requires site plan review and
approval prior to the issuance of permits that allow for land clearing, site
grading, and construction.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a Site Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall consider
provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Prior approvals. Compliance with any prior approvals and all
applicable development, design and transition standards of this ZO;
      (2)   Comprehensive Plan. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and all
other applicable adopted plans;
      (3)   Access. Adequate provision of pedestrian, transit and traffic
access and on-site circulation;
      (4)   Parking and loading. Sufficient space to accommodate required off-
street parking and loading/unloading zones;
      (5)   Design. The location, arrangement, size, and design of buildings,
lighting, signs, landscaping and bufferyards that conform to the standards of
the applicable district(s);
      (6)   Scale. An appropriate scale of the proposed use(s) in relation to
one another and those on adjacent properties;
      (7)   Adequate level of service. An adequate level of service of existing
or proposed public facilities;
      (8)   Nuisances. Sufficient protection for adjacent properties against
noise, glare, unsightliness, or other objectionable features;
      (9)   Access, circulation, and parking. Adequate, safe, and convenient
arrangement of access, pedestrian circulation, bicycle facilities, roadways,
driveways, transit access (as appropriate), off-street parking and stacking and
loading spaces.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. On receipt of a completed application for a
Site Plan, the Zoning Administrator, together with other departments and
referral agencies, as appropriate, shall review the plan to determine its
compliance with the applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and any
conditions of an approved conditional use or variance. The Zoning Administrator
shall determine if the proposed site plan satisfies the site plan approval
criteria and if so, approve, approve with conditions or deny the site plan.
      (2)   Time frame. Approval of a Site Plan shall be valid for the period
of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Upon approval of a Site Plan, the applicant may
proceed with requests for other required approvals and permits.
Subsec. 156.J.004.2 Building Permit.
   (A)   Generally. A building permit authorizes construction that conforms to
the standards and requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and the city's Building
Code.
   (B)   Applicability. A building permit is required before construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, significant improvement, use
and occupancy, removal or demolition of any building or structure and certifies
that such work complies with the construction standards in the Building Code.
   (C)   Review criteria. The Building Official may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a building permit based on findings that:
      (1)   Generally. All requirements of the Building Code, this Zoning
Ordinance, including Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, and all other applicable portions of the
city's Code of Ordinances have been met; and
      (2)   Other required findings. The following have been accomplished:
         (a)   All required improvements have been accepted by the City
Engineer;
         (b)   The building has legal access to a dedicated public street;
         (c)   The building is located on a legally subdivided lot; and
         (d)   The building and lot conform, or will conform, to all
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Application. Each application for a building permit shall contain
or be accompanied by plans showing the following information:
         (a)   Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon;
         (b)   Size and location of existing buildings, if any;
         (c)   Location and dimensions of the proposed new, enlarged, or
altered building or structure; and
         (d)   Other information or documentation as the Building Official may
lawfully deem necessary or appropriate to determine conformance with this ZO.
      (2)   Review and decision. The Building Official may approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application and is authorized to certify that work
complies with the construction standards of the Building Code.
      (3)   Time frame. Approval of a building permit shall be valid for the
period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Upon approval of a building permit, the applicant
may proceed with construction.
Subsec. 156.J.004.3 Floodplain Development Permit.
   (A)   Generally. The approval and issuance of a floodplain development
permit is required for any development within or modification of a flood hazard
district.
   (B)   Applicability. A floodplain development permit is required to:
      (1)   Plat. File a plat for subdivision within a flood hazard district;
      (2)   Modification. Modify a special flood hazard district; or
      (3)   Development. Develop or construct structures and improvements
within a special flood hazard district.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a floodplain development permit, the Zoning Administrator
shall consider provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria and § 156.C.006, Flood Hazard Districts,
together with the following:
      (1)   Danger to life and property. The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   Susceptibility to flooding. The susceptibility of the proposed
facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
      (3)   Sweeping of materials. The danger that materials may be swept onto
other lands to the injury of others;
      (4)   Compatibility. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
and anticipated development;
      (5)   Access. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   Cost of public services. The costs of providing governmental
services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of
streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
      (7)   Floodwaters. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action
expected at the site, where applicable, are manageable;
      (8)   Necessity of water. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable;
      (9)   Alternative locations. The availability of alternative locations,
not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   Comprehensive Plan. The relationship of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Plan for that area.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Application. Application for a floodplain development permit shall
contain or be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations and existing and
proposed structures in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
      (2)   Public notice. If the project requires approval of a FEMA Certified
Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to construction, then public notice to the
affected property owners and residents shall be required as detailed by the
National Flood Insurance Program requirements. In a non-FEMA floodplain, a
proposed floodplain impact matching or exceeding that of the CLOMR
requirements, shall require the same public notice of affected property owners
and residents.
      (3)   Review and decision. The Floodplain Administrator shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application for a floodplain development
permit.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a floodplain development permit shall be
valid for the period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the site
plan shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive or Expired Applications.
      (5)   Denials. If a floodplain development application is denied, the
Floodplain Administration shall inform the applicant, in writing, of the
specific reasons for disapproval.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Generally. Approval of a floodplain development permit authorizes
an applicant to obtain all required elevation or other required certificates
and proceed with development.
      (2)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor (as appropriate)
registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor
elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished
in compliance with the provisions of this article, prior to the use or
occupancy of any structure.
Subsec. 156.J.004.4 Sign Permit.
   (A)   Generally. A sign permit authorizes the placement of a permitted
permanent or temporary sign.
   (B)   Applicability. A sign permit is required to construct, install, place,
relocate, replace, attach, or modify dimensions, illumination characteristics
or sign panels for all permitted signs set out in §
156.G.004, Permanent Signs, and §
156.G.006, Temporary Signs, other than those that are exempt in §
156.G.002, General Requirements and prohibited in §
156.G.003, Prohibited Signs.
   (C)   Review criteria. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a sign permit considering provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria and based on findings that the permit
application complies with any conditions established with the approval of a
site plan or with the standards set out in
Article G, Signs.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review. The Zoning Administrator shall examine the plans and
specifications and the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected.
      (2)   Building Official review. An application for a sign permit
requiring a building permit shall be referred by the Zoning Administrator to
the Building Official. The Building Official shall examine the plans and
specifications to determine compliance with the adopted building code as a
condition of granting the sign permit.
      (3)   Decision. Upon receipt of comments, the Zoning Administrator may
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a sign permit. The
Zoning Administrator may grant approval with conditions only to the extent that
such conditions specify the actions necessary to bring the application into
complete compliance with this ZO.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a sign permit shall be valid for the period
of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (5)   Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect the sign to
ascertain whether the structure is secure and in conformance with the permit
application.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of a sign permit shall authorize the
applicant to construct, install, place, relocate, replace, attach, or modify
the sign that is subject to the permit.
Subsec. 156.J.004.5 Master Sign Plan.
   (A)   Generally. Approval of a Master Sign Plan by the Zoning Administrator
allows for:
      (1)   Unified design. A unified presentation of signage throughout
parcels proposed for development;
      (2)   Flexibility. Flexibility to provide for unique environments; and
      (3)   Efficiency. Prompt and efficient administrative approval of signs
pre-approved by the PZC.
   (B)   Applicability. A master sign plan may be submitted for the following:
      (1)   Single use. A single-use development that exceeds 100,000 square
feet of gross floor area;
      (2)   Multi-tenant. A multi-tenant development that exceeds 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area; or
      (3)   Mixed-use. A mixed-use center.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a Master Sign Plan, the review bodies shall consider
provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, and it will result in a substantially
improved, comprehensive, and unified plan compared to what is allowed through
strict compliance with
Article G, Signs.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review and
render a final judgment on the proposed Master Sign Plan.
      (2)   Time frame. Approval of a Master Sign Plan shall be valid for the
period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications, and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Future compliance. Upon approval of a Master Sign Plan, permitting
of individual signs shall be based on compliance with the standards set out in
the Master Sign Plan for the parcel proposed for development.
Subsec. 156.J.004.6 Certificate of Occupancy.
   (A)   Generally. A Certificate of Occupancy certifies compliance with all
applicable provisions of this ZO, the Building Code, and all other pertinent
city regulations.
   (B)   Applicability. A Certificate of Occupancy is required upon completion
of construction, alteration, or expansion of a building or structure or prior
to installation of permanent utilities or a change in use. No building may be
occupied in the city without a Certificate of Occupancy permit.
   (C)   Review criteria. The Building Official may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a Certificate of Occupancy based on findings that:
      (1)   Generally. All requirements of the Building Code, this ZO,
including Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, and all other applicable portions of the
city's Code of Ordinances have been met; and
      (2)   Site plans. All terms and conditions of site plan approval have
been met.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Application. Application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be
submitted in concert with an application of a building permit.
      (2)   Zoning compliance. Application for zoning compliance shall be
deemed to be an application for a Certificate of Occupancy, as applicable.
      (3)   Review and decision. The Certificate of Occupancy shall be
approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Building Official
following the completion of construction. If a Certificate of Occupancy
application is denied, the Building Official shall inform the applicant, in
writing, of the specific reasons for disapproval.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a sign permit shall be valid for the period
of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (5)   Temporary certificate. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be
issued before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided
the pertinent portion or portions shall be occupied safely and the Building
Official sets a time period not exceeding nine months during which the
temporary Certificate of Occupancy is valid.
      (6)   Partial certificate. The Building Official may issue a partial
Certificate of Occupancy for part of the building, structure, or lot prior to
the occupancy of the entire building, structure, or lot, provided that such
portions of the building structure, or lot are in conformity with the site plan
terms and conditions, applicable provisions of this ZO, the Building Code, and
all other pertinent city regulations. However, partial certificates of
occupancy shall not be issued for single-family (attached or detached)
dwellings or duplex dwellings.
      (7)   Records. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Official, with a copy furnished upon request of any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building.
   (E)   Effect of approval. A Certificate of Occupancy certifies compliance
with applicable building codes and laws and indicates a condition suitable for
occupancy.
Subsec. 156.J.004.7 Administrative Adjustment.
   (A)   Generally. An administrative adjustment may allow small changes or
modifications to certain standards of a proposed development that may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Applicability. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor
modifications of any numeric standard in this Zoning Ordinance up to a maximum
of 10% when there are practical difficulties in applying the development
standards for a project that otherwise complies with the standards of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an administrative adjustment, the Zoning Administrator
shall consider provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Maximum percentage. The requested adjustment does not exceed 10% of
the minimum requirements.
      (2)   Hardship. The hardship, if any, under which the adjustment is
sought, was not created by the owner or occupant of the subject property, nor
was it suffered as a result of a violation of this Zoning Ordinance or any
other applicable code of the city;
      (3)   Minimum necessary. The adjustment shall be the minimum necessary to
grant relief from a demonstrated hardship; and
      (4)   Adjoining property. The adjustment shall not substantially impair
the permitted use or development of adjoining property.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
application and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (2)   Time frame. Approval of an administrative adjustment shall be valid
for the period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of an administrative adjustment enables
the applicant to proceed in securing all other required approvals and permits.
An administrative adjustment provides no assurance of subsequent approvals of
other requests for administrative adjustments.
Subsec. 156.J.004.8 Temporary Use Permit.
   (A)   Generally. A temporary use permit determines the appropriateness of
temporary activities at a specific location and establishes standards necessary
to ensure its suitability for the area proposed and compatibility with
adjoining and adjacent land uses.
   (B)   Applicability. A temporary use permit is required before establishing
or installing any temporary use designated as requiring a permit as set out in
§
156.C.008, Temporary Uses and Structures.
   (C)   Review criteria. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a temporary use permit based on Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, and findings that the proposed temporary
use or structure conforms to the standards set out in §
156.C.008, Temporary Uses and Structures, and other applicable requirements in
this Zoning Ordinance and the city's Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review. The Zoning Administrator shall examine the application and
plans and the premises upon which the proposed temporary use is to be
conducted.
      (2)   Building Official review. An application for a temporary use permit
requiring electrical service shall be referred by the Zoning Administrator to
the Building Official. The Building Official shall examine the plans and
specifications to determine compliance with the adopted electrical code as a
condition of granting the temporary use permit.
      (3)   Decision. Upon a determination of compliance with this Zoning
Ordinance and other applicable codes, the Zoning Administrator may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a temporary use permit shall be valid for
the period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of a temporary use permit authorizes the
activities on the property that is subject to the permit. Permit issuance does
not authorize establishment or an extension of any permanent use nor
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure.
Subsec. 156.J.004.9 Limited Use Permit.
   (A)   Generally. A limited use permit verifies that a limited use, as
denoted in
Table 156.C.003-1, Use Table, complies with the requirements of this ZO,
particularly the requirements of §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards. A limited use permit may be issued
simultaneously with building permits or other required administratively
reviewed permits.
   (B)   Applicability. A limited use permit is required in order to establish,
change, or expand a limited use.
   (C)   Review criteria. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a limited use permit considering provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria and based on findings that the permit
application complies with its associated specific standard in §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall examine the
application and plans and the premises upon which the proposed limited use is
to be conducted. Upon a determination of compliance with this Zoning Ordinance
and other applicable codes, the Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application.
      (2)   Time frame. Approval of a temporary use permit shall be valid for
the period of time set out in in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (3)   Termination. Any of the following shall terminate the right to
operate a limited use:
         (a)   Change in use. Changing to a use permitted by right;
         (b)   Discontinuance. Discontinuing the limited use for a period of at
least 12 months; or
         (c)   Violation. Violating or failing to comply with the approved
limited use permit after reasonable notice has been given by the city.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Issuance of a limited use permit authorizes the
filing and processing of an application for any required permits or approvals,
including, but not limited to, a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or
sign permit. A limited use permit does not authorize the establishment or
extension of any other use nor the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
relocation, or demolition of any building or structure.
Subsec. 156.J.004.10 Variance, Floodplain.
   (A)   Generally. A floodplain variance provides limited relief from the
requirements of §
156.C.006, Flood Hazard Districts Standards, where strict application of a
particular requirement would create an unnecessary hardship by preventing the
use and development of land in a reasonable manner that is otherwise allowed
under this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   No increase in flood level. No floodplain variance shall be granted
for any development within any designated floodway which would result in any
increase in the 100-year level. Consideration of the effects of any development
on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of
development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
      (2)   Lower flood protection. In cases where the floodplain variance
involves a lower level of flood protection for buildings than what is
ordinarily required by this ZO, the applicant shall be notified in writing over
the signature of the Floodplain Administrator that:
         (a)   The issuance of a floodplain variance will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for every $100
of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
   (C)   Review criteria.
      (1)   Generally. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a floodplain variance, the Floodplain Administrator shall
consider the provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
         (a)   Increase in base flood elevation. Variances shall not be issued
within any designated floodway if any increase in base flood elevation would
result;
         (b)   One-half acre or less. Variances may be issued for new
construction and substantial improvements on lots of one-half acre or less
which are contiguous to, and surrounded by, existing development constructed
below the base flood elevation, provided:
            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
            2.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, or conflict with this Zoning
Ordinance or the other ordinances in the city's Code of Ordinances.
         (c)   Minimum necessary relief. Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief
considering the flood hazard.
      (2)   Affirmative findings. In order to approve a variance, the final
decision-making body shall make affirmative findings on all of the applicable
decision criteria.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Obligation of applicant. It is the obligation of an applicant, who
bears the burden of proof, to present facts about the circumstances which would
justify a variance in a convincing fashion so that the Floodplain Administrator
may be satisfied that the request meets or exceeds the applicable review
criteria described in division (C), above.
      (2)   Review and decision. The Floodplain Administrator shall review and
render judgment on requests for floodplain variances.
      (3)   Alleged error. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in
the enforcement or administration of the requirements of §
156.C.006, Flood Hazard Districts Standards, in accordance with Subsec.
156.J.005.3, Appeal of Administrative Decision.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a floodplain variance shall be valid for
the period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications, and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (5)   Notice of decision. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy
of the decision to the applicant within ten days of the rendered judgment.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Particular variation. Issuance of a variance shall authorize only
the particular variation that is approved in the variance request. A variance
shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership.
      (2)   Other approvals. Development authorized by the variance shall not
be carried out until the applicant has secured all other development approvals
required by this ZO. Approval of a variance does not guarantee that the
development shall receive subsequent approval for other development review
applications unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Zoning
Ordinance or any other applicable provisions are met.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 156.J.005 QUASI-JUDICIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES.
Subsec. 156.J.005.1 Special Use Permit.
   (A)   Generally. A special use permit is to determine if the Board of
Adjustment should authorize a new special use to be established or for an
existing special use to intensify, expand, or convert to another special use.
   (B)   Applicability. A special use permit is required before establishing
any use designated as a special use as in § 156.C.003-1, Use Table or before
converting a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use pursuant to the
provisions in §
156.C.005, Special Use Permit Standards.
   (C)   Review criteria. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a special use permit, the BOA shall consider the provisions
of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
      (1)   Concentration. The special use does not create an unwanted
concentration of similar special uses that is likely to discourage permitted
uses by making the vicinity less desirable for them.
      (2)   Location. There is no practicable alternative location where the
use is permitted by right within the general vicinity of the parcel proposed
for development, or, if such a location exists, the proposed location is
comparable or more favorable in terms of:
         (a)   Providing a needed community service;
         (b)   Providing a critical mass of related and mutually supportive
land uses that promote quality economic development and opportunity;
         (c)   Providing a balance of land uses, ensuring that appropriate
supporting activities, such as employment, housing, leisure-time, and retail
centers are in close proximity to one another; and
         (d)   Making more efficient use of public infrastructure.
      (3)   Affirmative findings. In order to approve a special use permit, the
final decision-making body shall make affirmative findings on all of the
applicable decision criteria.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
proposed special use permit and give a report to the Plan and Zoning
Commission. The PZC shall make a recommendation to the BOA, which shall
subsequently conduct a public hearing before taking final action to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the proposed special use permit.
      (2)   Public notice and public hearing. The required public notice and
public hearing as denoted in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
      (3)   Time frame. Approval of a special use permit shall be valid for the
period of time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications, and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (4)   Notice of decision. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy
of the decision to the applicant within ten days of the BOA's decision.
   (E)   Effect of approval. The issuance of a special use permit shall not
authorize the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving
of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation,
filing, and processing of an application for any permits or approvals which may
be required by the city, including, but not limited to, a building permit,
certificate of occupancy, and subdivision approval.
Subsec. 156.J.005.2 Variance.
   (A)   Generally. A variance provides a means by which relief may be granted
from unforeseen applications of this Zoning Ordinance that create unnecessary
hardships or practical difficulties.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   When required. A variance is required to approve a deviation from
the standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Prohibitions and exceptions. Some requests for relief are not
within the jurisdiction of the Board, and are therefore, either prohibited or
not subject to this section. The prohibited requests are:
         (a)   Use. Variances that would allow a use in a district in which the
use is prohibited or which would constitute a change in district boundaries;
         (b)   Limited use or special use. Variances that would modify any
requirements that are set out in §
156.C.004, Limited Use Standards and §
156.C.005, Special Use Standards;
         (c)   Nonconformities. Variances that would have the effect of making
existing nonconforming structures, site improvements, parking, or landscaping
conforming;
         (d)   Conditions of approval. Variances from the terms of one or more
conditions of approval imposed by a development review body described in
Article I, Development Review Bodies. Modifications to conditions of approval
shall be sought from the body that granted the approval.
         (e)   City's Code of Ordinances. Variances that would modify any
requirements within the city's Codes of Ordinance, including but not limited to
the Building Code.
         (f)   Other laws or regulations. Variances to state or federal laws
are prohibited unless such authority is expressly granted to the city.
   (C)   Review criteria.
      (1)   Generally. In determining whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the
provisions of Subsec.
156.J.002.5, Common Review Criteria, together with the following:
         (a)   Not self imposed. The granting of the variance is not based on a
hardship which is self-imposed;
         (b)   Not based on cost. The hardship is not based solely on the cost
of complying with the regulation, but is based on the particular physical
surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the subject property;
         (c)   Unique circumstances. The hardship is based on circumstances
that are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and not
circumstances common to other properties;
         (d)   Minimum necessary relief. The variance requested is the minimum
necessary that will make possible a permitted use of the land, building, or
structure;
         (e)   Commonly enjoyed rights. A literal interpretation of the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other residents of the district in which the property is
located; and
         (f)   Not a special privilege. Granting the variance will not confer
on the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other lands or
structures in the same district.
      (2)   Affirmative findings. In order to approve a variance, the Board of
Adjustment shall make affirmative findings on all of the applicable decision
criteria.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Obligation of applicant. It is the obligation of an applicant, who
bears the burden of proof, to present facts about the circumstances which would
justify a variance in a convincing fashion so that the BOA may be satisfied
that the request meets or exceeds the applicable review criteria described in
division (C), above.
      (2)   Review and decision. The Zoning Administrator shall review and make
a recommendation on the variance application to the BOA, who shall subsequently
conduct a public hearing before making final action to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the variance.
      (3)   Public notice and public hearing. The required public notice and
public hearing as denoted
in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec. 156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and
Hearings.
      (4)   Time frame. Approval of a variance shall be valid for the period of
time set out in
Table 156.J.002.12-1, Development Review Summary Table. Thereafter, the permit
shall expire or be granted an extension as set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.10, Inactive and Expired Applications, and Subsec.
156.J.002.11, Approval Extension.
      (5)   Notice of decision. The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy
of the decision to the applicant within ten days of the BOA's decision.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Particular variation. Issuance of a variance shall authorize only
the particular variation that is approved in the variance request. A variance
shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership.
      (2)   Other approvals. Development authorized by the variance shall not
be carried out until the applicant has secured all other development approvals
required by this ZO. Approval of a variance does not guarantee that the
development shall receive subsequent approval for other development review
applications unless the relevant and applicable portions of this Zoning
Ordinance or any other applicable provisions are met.
Subsec. 156.J.005.3 Appeal of Administrative Decision.
   (A)   Generally. An appeal of an administrative decision provides a vehicle
for appeal of any final decision of the Zoning Administrator, Building
Official, or Floodplain Administrator on an application set out in §
156.J.004, Administrative Review Procedures.
   (B)   Applicability. An application for an appeal may be submitted when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by an administrative official in the administration of this
ZO, which is not subject to a quasi-judicial or appeal process by any other
board or the PZC or City Council.
   (C)   Review criteria.
      (1)   Generally. The BOA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official
and, to that end, shall have all of the powers of the administrative official
from whom the appeal is taken. The appeal shall specifically indicate which
approval criteria are the basis for the appeal.
      (2)   New evidence. The BOA shall not consider new evidence that was not
available to the administrative official.
      (3)   All decisions. An appeal of an administrative decision may be
reversed or affirmed, in whole or in part, or modified based on findings by the
BOA making the final decision that:
         (a)   The administrative decision was appropriate considering the
written record of the case and the evidence presented; and
         (b)   The decision reflects the requirements contained in this ZO.
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Notice of appeal. Within 30 calendar days from the date of a final
decision of an administrative official, an application for an appeal may be
submitted, in writing, by any person aggrieved by a decision or by any official
or department of the city affected by the decision. In the notice, the
appellant (applicant) shall set out all grounds for the appeal. In no event
shall the appeal be heard later than 60 days after the submittal of a complete
application.
      (2)   Burden of proof. The BOA shall presume the appealed final decision
to be valid. The appellant (applicant) shall present sufficient evidence and
have the burden to justify a reversal or modification of the decision being
appealed.
      (3)   Public notice and public hearing. The BOA shall conduct one or more
public hearings, as necessary, to receive evidence and testimony and to decide
an appeal. All public hearings and public notice required as denoted in
Table 156.J.002.12-2, Review Steps, shall be conducted in conformance with the
procedures set out in Subsec.
156.J.002.6, Public Notice, and Subsec.
156.J.002.7, Public Meetings and Hearings.
      (4)   Vote. The concurring vote of three members of the BOA shall be
necessary to reverse or modify the requirement, decision or determination
subject to the appeal.
      (5)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal from an order, requirement, decision
or determination shall stay all proceedings unless the Zoning Administrator
certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
   (E)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   Final decision. The BOA shall have the final decision-making powers
of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
      (2)   No variance. A decision on an appeal of an administrative decision
cannot grant or issue a variance.
      (3)   Flood boundary. A decision may support, reverse or remand an order
or determination of a boundary of the special flood hazard area.
Subsec. 156.J.005.4 Unnecessary Hardship.
   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
unnecessary hardship to the applicant.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15095, passed 11-11-2024; Ord. 15104,
passed 6-23-2025)
ARTICLE K - NONCONFORMITIES
§ 156.K.001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Generally. This article sets out equitable rules for the continuing
use, occupation, and conversion of nonconformities. A nonconformity occurs when
existing development within the city may become affected by the application of
new regulations. This change may cause existing uses, structures, lots, signs,
and site improvements to not strictly comply with this Zoning Ordinance, even
though they complied with the regulations in effect at the time they were
permitted and constructed.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to:
      (1)   No expansion. Ensure that nonconforming uses do not expand;
      (2)   Protection. Protect conforming uses from nuisances that may be
associated with nonconformities;
      (3)   Encourage conformance. Encourage property owners of nonconformities
to alter a nonconforming use, structure, lot, sign, or site improvement into
one that complies with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance;
      (4)   Elimination. Eliminate substantially damaged or abandoned
nonconformities whose degrees of incompatibility with adjacent lands uses are
high; and
      (5)   Balance. Balance the city's objective to eliminate nonconformities
with a landowner’s right to maintain and make use of a nonconformity.
   (C)   Applicability. The regulations of this article govern uses,
structures, lots, signs, and site improvements that came into existence legally
but that do not conform to one or more requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
These are referred to as nonconformities. Nonconformities are permitted to
continue without immediate retrofit or removal until significant site or land
use changes are proposed.
   (D)   Major and minor nonconforming uses and structures. Nonconforming uses
and structures are classified as major or minor, as follows:
      (1)   Major. Major nonconforming uses or structures are those that the
Zoning Administrator finds have the following characteristics to such an extent
that they should, over time, be eliminated:
         (a)   Generation of nuisances;
         (b)   Incompatibility with adjacent properties;
         (c)   Incompatibility with the Comprehensive Plan; or
         (d)   Generation of substantiated criminal complaints.
      (2)   Minor. Minor nonconforming uses or structures are those not
classified as major nonconformities.
      (3)   Conversion. Refer to §
156.K.007, Conversion of Nonconformities, for provisions related to changing a
minor nonconformity to a conforming use or structure.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.002 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Generally. A nonconforming use is a use of land that was lawfully
established (e.g., it was allowed and issued a permit, if a permit was required
at the time the use was established) on a parcel or lot before the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance, that is no longer allowed after the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance. Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance may also
create nonconforming uses. The following uses are nonconforming uses:
      (1)   "Limited uses" as listed in the Use Table established in §
156.C.003, Use Table, but were lawfully established without a limited use
permit. For these uses, the nonconforming use status may be removed by
obtaining a limited use permit set out in Subsec.
156.J.004.9, Limited Use Permits;
      (2)   Uses that do not meet the requirements of Article C, Use Standards;
and
      (3)   Uses that were lawfully established within a floodplain or
floodway, but are no longer permitted in the floodplain or floodway.
   (B)   Classifications of nonconforming uses. There are two types of
nonconforming uses: major nonconforming uses and minor nonconforming uses. The
classification of the nonconforming use affects whether or not it can be
converted to a conforming use.
      (1)   Major nonconforming uses.
         (a)   Discontinuance. Discontinuance of a major nonconforming use for
a period of six consecutive months constitutes abandonment of the use,
regardless of the owner’s intent. A major nonconforming use shall not be re-
established on the property after it is abandoned unless the City Council
approves a zone change in accordance with Subsec.
156.J.003.2 that makes the prior use conforming.
         (b)   Expansion, enlargement, or increases. A major nonconforming use
shall not be expanded, enlarged, extended, increased, or moved to occupy an
area of land or building that was not used or occupied on the effective date of
this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment that made the use nonconforming.
         (c)   Structures. No structures containing a major nonconforming use
shall be enlarged unless the major nonconforming use is permanently
discontinued.
      (2)   Minor nonconforming uses.
         (a)   Discontinuance. Discontinuance of a minor nonconforming use for
a period of 12 consecutive months constitutes abandonment of the use,
regardless of the owner's intent. A minor nonconforming use shall not be re-
established on the property after it is abandoned unless the property owner
converts the nonconforming use to a conforming use in accordance with §
156.K.007, Conversion of Nonconformities, prior to the end of the 12-month
period.
         (b)   Expansion and/or extension. No minor nonconforming use shall be
expanded or extended in such a way as to:
            1.   Occupy any open space or landscaped area that is required by
this Zoning Ordinance;
            2.   Exceed pervious cover, intensity, or height limitations of the
zoning district in which the use is located;
            3.   Occupy any land beyond the boundaries of the property as it
existed on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance;
            4.   Displace any conforming use in the same building or on the
same property; or
            5.   Increase the area of floodplain (if present) that is directly
impacted by the use.
         (c)   Nonconforming residential uses. A nonconforming residential use
shall not be expanded in scope or area, except that construction of an attached
or free-standing private garage is allowed in accordance with the requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance and the district in which the use is located,
including, but not limited to:
            1.   Height;
            2.   Setback;
            3.   Gross floor area; and
            4.   Building coverage.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.003 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Generally. A building or structure is classified as nonconforming if
it was lawfully constructed before the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance
(or amendment hereto) and does not conform to the height, yard, density,
intensity, building scale, or design standards that are applicable to the same
type of building or structure in the zoning district in which the building or
structure is located. Such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Increase in nonconformity prohibited. No such structure may be
enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
      (2)   Movement of structure. Should any on-site structure, in whole or in
part, be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after
it is moved.
      (3)   Minimum floor area. A residential dwelling unit having a lesser
floor area at the time of the passage of this Zoning Ordinance than the minimum
floor area required for the district in which it is located shall not be
construed to be nonconforming.
   (B)   Repairs and alterations. Routine maintenance, including necessary non-
structural repairs, paint, finish, and incidental alterations to a
nonconforming structure is allowed without having to bring the nonconformity
into compliance.
   (C)   Damage and reconstruction. If a major or minor nonconforming structure
is damaged, partially destroyed, or deemed to be unsafe the structure may be
restored to its original dimensions provided that:
      (1)   The original nonconformity is not enlarged, increased, or extended;
      (2)   A building permit is obtained for repairs within six months of the
date the building was damaged;
      (3)   For a major nonconforming structure, the construction is commenced
within six months after obtaining the required building permits;
      (4)   For a minor nonconforming structure, the construction is commenced
within 12 months after obtaining the required building permits;
      (5)   For a major nonconforming structure, the damage or destruction does
not exceed 50% of the gross floor area (GFA) of a nonconforming structure or
50% of the replacement cost of the structure; and
      (6)   For a minor nonconforming structure, the damage or destruction does
not exceed 75% of the GFA of a nonconforming structure or 75% of the
replacement cost of the structure.
   (D)   Existing nonconforming structures in a regulated floodplain or
floodway. It is the intent of the city that no permanent buildings or
structures be located or substantially improved in a regulated floodplain or
floodway and that existing nonconforming structures shall be removed upon
abandonment. As such, a property with an abandoned nonconforming structure in a
regulated floodplain or floodway shall not be eligible for any development
review approval until the property owner removes the abandoned nonconforming
structure.
   (E)   Nonconforming density. Buildings on lots with nonconforming density
may be expanded or extended as may be allowed by this Zoning Ordinance, but
such expansions or extensions shall not create additional dwelling units.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.004 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Generally. A nonconforming lot is a lot that was lawfully created
before the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or amendments this Zoning
Ordinance that no longer complies with the lot width, lot area, or access
requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Combination of lots to increase conformity.
      (1)   Combination. Where a property owner owns one or more lots abutting
a nonconforming lot of record, the lots shall be combined to create fully
conforming lots prior to any other development application submittal for the
property. Or, if full conformity is not possible, they shall be combined if the
combination will increase the degree of conformity.
      (2)   No combination. A property owner is not required to combine lots
pursuant to division (B)(1), above, if:
         (a)   The combination of lots would not address the nonconformity;
         (b)   The combination of lots would disrupt the lot pattern of the
street, for example, by creating an internal through on a street segment that
does not include any other through lots;
         (c)   Two or more of the lots are developed with principal buildings,
and the combination of lots would require that one or more of the buildings be
torn down or the property undergo a zone change in order to comply with this
Zoning Ordinance; or
         (d)   The combination of lots would result in regularly shaped lots
being combined into a single lot with an irregular shape, such as a flag lot.
   (C)   Construction on nonconforming lots of record. A nonconforming lot of
record that cannot be combined with another lot in accordance with division (B)
of this section may be built upon if, as of the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance:
      (1)   Permitted use. The use is permitted in the zoning district in which
the lot is located;
      (2)   Sufficient width. The lot has sufficient width on a public street
to provide access that is appropriate for the proposed use; and
      (3)   Setbacks and height. All setbacks and height requirements are met,
except that the Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction of required
setbacks of up to 10%, in accordance with Subsec.
156.J.004.7, Administrative Adjustment, provided that the Zoning Administrator
finds that the reduction does not allow a building that would be larger than a
building that would be permitted on the minimum conforming lot in the zoning
district.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.005 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Generally. Any permanent sign located within the city limits on the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance that does not conform to the provisions
of
Article G, Signs, is a nonconforming sign, provided it also meets the following
requirements:
      (1)   Authorized by a sign permit prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance; or
      (2)   If no sign permit was required under applicable law for the sign in
question, the sign:
         (a)   Was in all respects in conformity with the applicable law (or
there was no applicable law) immediately prior to the effective date; or
         (b)   Had legal nonconforming status at such time.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Notification. If the Zoning Administrator finds a sign to be
nonconforming, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice to the
owner of the sign or the owner of the building to which it is attached.
      (2)   Registration. The owner or entity in control of the property on
which a nonconforming sign is located shall be required to register such signs
with the city, at no fee, and otherwise comply with all requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance relating to nonconforming signs.
      (3)   Damage or destruction. If a nonconforming sign is damaged or
destroyed by any means and the repair or reconstruction cost, whichever is
applicable, equals or exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the sign at the
time of the damage, it shall be removed or brought into compliance with this
Zoning Ordinance.
      (4)   No message. If a nonconforming sign does not display any message
for a period of six months, it shall be removed or brought into conformance
with this Zoning Ordinance.
      (5)   Removal. If a nonconforming sign is removed for any reason, it
shall not be replaced unless the replacement sign conforms to this Zoning
Ordinance.
      (6)   Danger. A nonconforming sign that the Building Official determines
to be a danger to public safety due to damage or wear shall be removed and
shall not be replaced unless the replacement sign conforms to this Zoning
Ordinance.
      (7)   Removal of certain prohibited signs. Signs made of materials
identified in §
156.G.003(C), Prohibited Sign Elements, and placed in locations identified in §
156.G.003(D), Prohibited Sign Locations, shall be removed within 30 days after
the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.
      (8)   New sign installation. The installation of any new sign is
prohibited on a site while a nonconforming sign remains in use.
      (9)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs that are not in compliance with §
156.G.006, Temporary Signs, shall be removed within 30 days after the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.006 NONCONFORMING SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. A nonconforming site improvement is a development activity
on sites improved during the process of development, redevelopment, or
improvement. Over time, such development activities will have the effect of
removing the majority of nonconforming site improvements in the jurisdiction of
this Zoning Ordinance. The following site improvements are nonconforming if
there were lawfully established but do not meet the standards of
Article D, Building and Site Design Standards:
      (1)   Building exterior material or design;
      (2)   Parking, loading, or stacking areas or driveways;
      (3)   Development landscaping or bufferyards; and
      (4)   Outdoor lighting.
   (B)   Nonconforming driveway.
      (1)   Continuance. Any nonconforming driveway access is permitted to
continue as a nonconforming driveway until:
         (a)   Additional access. Any additional driveway is constructed for
the subject property or for the unified development of which it is a part; or
         (b)   Repaving or reconstruction. The driveway requires reconstruction
or repaving.
      (2)   Termination. If the criteria in this division (B), Nonconforming
Driveway, are met, the nonconforming driveway shall no longer be permissible,
and the Zoning Administrator shall require driveway access to meet the
requirements of
Article D. The Zoning Administrator may block any such nonpermissible driveways
after notice is mailed to the property owner of record.
   (C)   Other nonconforming site improvements. No other nonconforming site
improvement may be modified except to bring the site improvement into greater
compliance with the requirements on
Article D.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.K.007 CONVERSION OF NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards by which
minor nonconforming uses and structures (See §
156.K.001, Purpose and Applicability) can be made "conforming" through a public
hearing process. In many instances, minor nonconforming uses and structures are
integral parts of the city's fabric, that is, its character and function, so
their continuing existence promotes the city's policy objective of protecting
its neighborhoods. In these instances, the classification "nonconformity" and
resulting restriction on investment may not be what the community desires. As
such, the use may be made conforming pursuant to this article in order to
remove the potential stigma that may be associated with the "nonconforming"
designation.
   (B)   Procedure. An owner of a minor nonconforming use or structure may
apply for a special use permit pursuant to Subsec.
156.J.005.1, Special Use Permits, which has the effect of making the
nonconforming use or structure conforming. The criteria for limited use
approval are set out in division (D) below.
   (C)   Exclusions. This procedure does not apply to nonconforming lots, which
may be buildable in accordance with the standards for nonconforming lots set
out in §
156.J.004, Nonconforming Lots.
   (D)   Criteria for approval. A special use permit approval may be granted to
make a nonconforming building, structure, or use conforming, if, in addition to
the criteria for approval of a limited use permit set out in Subsec.
156.J.005.1, Special Use Permits, and §
156.C.005, Special Use Standards, all of the criteria of this section are
satisfied.
      (1)   Approval criteria. The use, as conducted and managed, has minimal
nonconformities and has been integrated into the neighborhood's (or zoning
district's if it is not in or adjacent to a residential neighborhood) function,
as evidenced by the following demonstrations:
         (a)   The neighborhood residents regularly patronize or are employed
at said use (for nonresidential uses in or abutting residential neighborhoods);
         (b)   Management practices eliminate nuisances such as noise, light,
waste materials, unreasonably congested on-street parking, or similar
conflicts;
         (c)   There is no material history of complaints about the use (a
history of complaints is justification for denying the conditional use permit,
unless the conditions of the permit will eliminate the sources of the
complaints); or
         (d)   The use has been maintained in good condition and its
classification as a nonconformity would be a disincentive for such maintenance.
      (2)   Conditions. The Board of Adjustment (BOA) may impose conditions
relative to the expansion of bufferyards, landscaping and landscape areas, or
other site design provisions, or other limitations necessary to ensure that, as
a conforming use, the use will not become a nuisance. Such conditions may
relate to the lot, buildings, structures, or operation of the use.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Uses that comply with the terms of a special use
permit issued in accordance with this section are converted from "legally
nonconforming uses" to "conforming uses" by virtue of the issuance of the
permit.
      (1)   Written approval. Special use permit approvals shall be provided to
the applicant in writing and may be recorded by the applicant at the
applicant's expense.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE L - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
§ 156.L.001 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
municipal infractions punishable as provided in §
10.999(B) of this Code of Ordinances including but not limited to the
imposition of civil penalties and/or requests for injunctive relief. After a
written notice of such violation, each day a violation is permitted to exist
beyond the expiration of the time designated on said notice shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper actions
or proceedings in the name of the city, to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct or abate such violations, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land, and/or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about said premises.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
ARTICLE M - WORD USAGE
§ 156.M.001 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   General. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in
this Zoning Ordinance shall be construed such that the true intent of the City
Council may be fully implemented.
   (B)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is
a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      (1)   "Day" means a calendar day.
      (2)   "Month" means a calendar month.
      (3)   "Year" means a calendar year.
   (C)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires a city employee
to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the
employee to delegate a subordinate to perform the required act or duty, unless
the terms of the provision specify otherwise.
   (D)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   (E)   Text, tables, and illustrations. In case of any difference of meaning
or implication between the text of this ZO and any illustrations, the text
shall control. In case of a conflict between the text and a table, the text
shall control. In case of a conflict between a table and an illustration, the
table shall control.
   (F)   References to governmental authority. Where this Zoning Ordinance
references a local, state, or federal regulation or publication, the reference
is to the most recent edition or version, unless otherwise noted. If the
referenced document has been repealed and not replaced by another regulation or
publication, the requirement of compliance is no longer in effect.
   (G)   Examples. The use of the terms "including," "such as," or similar
language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all
possibilities.
   (H)   Additional rules of construction.
      (1)   The terms "shall," "will," or "must" are mandatory and are
synonymous. The term "may" is discretionary.
      (2)   The term "and" indicates that all items being referred to are
connected, inclusive, and applicable. The term "or" indicates that one or more
of the items being referred to shall apply.
      (3)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in
the present tense include the future tense and vice-versa.
      (4)   Words used in the plural number include the singular and vice-
versa.
      (5)   "Person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, and
an incorporated association of persons such as a club.
      (6)   The term "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or
"structure" includes any part of the building. A structure is however not
necessarily a building.
      (7)   The term "lot" includes plots and tracts.
      (8)   The terms "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied."
      (9)   Words not defined in this Zoning Ordinance but defined in any other
parts of the city's Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to have the meaning
provided in the city's Code of Ordinances. Words not defined in this Zoning
Ordinance or in any other part of the city's Code of Ordinances shall have the
most appropriate meaning provided in a dictionary in common usage.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.M.002 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
ADA = Americans with Disabilities Act
ADU = Accessory Dwelling Unit
AG = Agricultural
ATM = Automatic Teller Machine
BOA = Board of Adjustment
CCC = Changeable Copy Center
CFR = Code of Federal Regulations
CLOMR = FEMA Certified Letter of Map Revision
DAS = Distributed Antenna Systems
EIFS = Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems
EPA = U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FAA = Federal Aviation Administration
fc = Footcandles
FCC = Federal Communication Commission
FEMA = Federal Emergency Management Administration
FIRM = Flood Insurance Rate Map
ft = feet
GC = General Commercial
GFA = Gross Floor Area
GI = General Industrial
IAC = Iowa Administrative Code
IESNA = Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
LEED = Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
MU = Mixed-Use
PI = Public and Institutional
PUD = Planned Unit Development
PZC = Plan and Zoning Commission
REC = Recreational
RH = High-Density Residential
RL = Low-Density Residential
RM = Medium Density Residential
RR = Rural Residential
s.f. = square feet
SWECS = Small Wind Energy Conversion System
UC = Urban Core
U.S. = United States of America
VUA = Vehicle Use Areas
ZO = Zoning Ordinance
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 156.M.003 DEFINITIONS.
   Supplemental Definitions
   A
   ACCESSORY. As applied to use or structure, means customarily subordinate or
incidental to, and on the premises of such use or structure. The words "on the
premises of" mean on the same lot or on the contiguous lot in the same
ownership.
   ACCESSORY LIVING UNIT. A portion of a detached single-family dwelling unit
to include such incidental and subordinate facilities necessary to accommodate
either relatives, nontenant employees, or no more than two persons.
   ACREAGE. A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds
and not a lot of any recorded subdivision plat.
   ADDITION. Any construction which increases the area of cubic content of a
building or structure. The construction of walls which serve to enclose
completely any portion of an existing structure, such as a porch, shall be
deemed an addition within the meaning of the chapter.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator as designated by resolution of the
City Council.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE/VIDEOSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines and other
periodicals and/or videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual
reality devices or any other similar media that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas" or are intended
for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons.
   ADULT BUSINESS. A use category containing uses that regularly emphasize an
interest in matter relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of
patrons.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Adult bookstore/video store;
adult mini-motion picture theater; adult motion picture theater; adult store; a
business providing adult entertainment or any other establishment, including
without limitation any adult modeling studio; adult cocktail lounge; or adult
nightclub; and other uses meeting the definition of day care according to the
Zoning Administrator that regularly emphasizes an interest in matter relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for
the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales related to the primary use; concession; food
preparation and dining facility; and minor utilities.
   ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A building or structure where care and supervision
are provided on a regular schedule for disabled adult persons and/or senior
citizens for less than 24 hours per day.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Dancing, modeling or other live performances if the
performers' performance is characterized by an emphasis on specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities, or is intended for the sexual stimulation
or titillation of patrons. Also includes the showing of films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, photographic reproductions, virtual reality devices,
internet sites or files transmitted over the internet, or other medial that are
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for
the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons.
   ADULT MERCHANDISE. Magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, movies,
photographs, slides, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices or other
similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or are intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons.
Also includes toys, novelties, instruments, devices or paraphernalia either
designated as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or
designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs and
lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use for sadomasochistic practices.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of
less than 50 persons used for presenting material for observation by patrons
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting material for observation by patrons
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   ADULT STORE. An establishment having adult merchandise as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade.
   AG. Agricultural zoning district.
   AGRICULTURAL AND ANIMAL-RELATED SERVICE. A use category that contains uses
related to the commercial production, storage, processing, marketing,
distribution or export of floricultural, horticultural, or viticultural crops
and the small-scale keeping and treatment of animals.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Community garden; floriculture,
horticulture, row and field crops, viticulture, or orchard; kennel; plant
nursery, greenhouse, and landscaping business; stable, private and
noncommercial; veterinary clinic; veterinary hospital; and other uses meeting
the definition of agricultural and animal-related according to the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office; barn, silo,
stable (private) or other agricultural storage; buildings associated with
agricultural uses being pursued on site; greenhouse; minor utilities; parking
and storage of operable farm vehicles and farm machinery; and roadside stand.
   AIRPORT OR HELIPORT. An area of land or water used for the landing and take-
off of aircraft.
   ALL-WEATHER SURFACE. An improved surface that is constructed of four inches
of concrete, asphalt, graded stone, grass-crete pavers, uni-stone pavers, or
other paving materials approved by the City Engineer.
   ALLEY. Any passage or way open to public travel, affording generally a
secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
   ALTER. Any change to a sign or its supporting structure, including a change
in size, height, or location. The term ALTER shall not apply to the change of
message on signs designed to have periodic changes in message, such as
changeable copy signs.
   ALTERATION. Any material change in the floor area, use, adaptability or
external appearance of an existing structure.
   ALTERNATIVE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. With regard to wireless telecommunications,
any structure currently used primarily for something other than supporting a
wireless telecommunications facility.
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign or part of a sign that is designed to rotate, move,
flutter, spin, scroll, or to have a similar appearance of rotating, moving,
fluttering, spinning, and scrolling.
   ANTENNA. A whip, panel, disc, rod, dish, or similar device used for
transmission or reception of telecommunications.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE APARTMENT.
   APPURTENANT OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Accessory structures not to exceed 200
square feet.
   ARCHERY/FIREARMS RANGE (INDOOR). A facility for archery or the discharging
of firearms for the purposes of target practice.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. Residential facilities with 90% occupancy by
persons 60 years or more of age that provide rooms, meals, personal care and
supervision of self-administered medication.
   B
   BANK OR CREDIT UNION. A federally- or state-chartered establishment that is
engaged in business as a bank or credit union.
   BANNER. A sign of flexible material affixed to a framework or flat surface.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. This is a regulatory standard that is also referred to as the "100-
year" flood.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) for zones AE, AH, A1-30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, and AR/AO
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1%
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASE STATION. A wireless telecommunications facility; such facility may
consist of radio transceivers; antennas; coaxial, fiber optic, or other cables;
a regular and back-up power supply; and other associated electronics and
technology. Such facilities are sometimes referred to as base transceiver
stations. Base stations may also be structures that currently support or house
any of the technology listed in this definition or other associated equipment
that constitutes part of a base station in any technological configuration,
including distributed antenna systems and industrial microcells.
   BASEMENT. A story at least one-half its height below grade. A basement is
not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES. See SHORT-TERM RENTAL.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (BOA). The City of Marshalltown Board of Adjustment
(BOA) who, in accordance with Chapter 414, City Zoning, I.C.A. § 414.7, Board
of Adjustment, may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of this Code in harmony
with its general purposes and intent and in accordance with the general and
specific rules contained in this Code, and who may also provide that any
property owner aggrieved by an action of the city may petition to modify the
regulations and restrictions of this Code.
   BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A single detached dwelling, where the property
owner or property lessee/operator resides on the premises, and where for
compensation and by prearrangement, for definite periods, lodging and/or meals
are provided for three persons to a maximum of ten persons. The resident
property owner or resident property lessee, who operates the boardinghouse or
rooming house, shall be responsible for making an application for any required
special use permit.
   BOAT OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OUTDOOR STORAGE. A facility where boats, other
watercraft, and recreational vehicles are stored outdoors.
   BUILDING AREA. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been
provided.
   BUILDING. Any structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING SETBACK. The minimum distance a building must be set back from the
street line.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance
between the nearest portion of any building, excluding any uncovered porches,
steps, patios, fences, etc., and similar fixtures.
   BUILDING, COMMUNITY. A building for social, educational, cultural, and
recreational activities for a neighborhood or community, provided any such use
is not operated primarily for commercial gain.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the floor closest
to curb grade to the level of the highest point of the roof surface, if the
roof is flat or inclines not more than one inch vertical to one foot
horizontal, or the mean level between the eaves and the highest point of the
roof if the roof is of any other type.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building which contains the principal use of the lot
on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building.
   BUILDING, PUBLIC. A building owned (or leased) by a governmental agency and
used for governmental functions.
   BUILDING OR DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTOR. Facilities for building, heating,
plumbing, or electrical contractors, and related storage facilities. The site
may include an unenclosed portion upon which a contractor maintains an area
used to store equipment and other materials customarily used in the trade
carried on by the contractor. This definition excludes temporary contractor
storage associated with the site of an on-going construction project.
   BUS SHELTER. A structure located at a designated transit stop designed
primarily for the shelter of transit bus passengers.
   BUSINESS GARDEN. A home-based business, where areas of a parcel are managed
and maintained by individuals residing on the same parcel or adjoining parcels
under the same ownership, used to cultivate fruits, vegetables, herbs, or
flowers for sale purposes. This definition does not include cultivation only
for personal consumption or use. (See article BB, business gardens for
operating regulations.)
   C
   CAMOUFLAGE. With regard to wireless telecommunications facilities, a way of
painting, mounting, or locating related equipment so it is not readily apparent
to the casual observer. Camouflaged wireless telecommunications facilities are
often collocated, utilize flush mounted antennas and related equipment, are
painted to match the color of the support structure, or hidden from view by
things like parapet walls. Camouflaging equipment is not equivalent to
concealing equipment.
   CANOPY. A fixed shelter of any material and of any length projecting from a
building and supported by columns or posts from the ground. Also known as an
"awning."
   CAR WASH. A facility for the washing or cleaning of vehicles. A car wash may
be:
      (1)   A bay or a group of bays with each bay to accommodate one vehicle
only where a person uses a high-pressure hose to wash the vehicle by hand;
      (2)   An automated conveyor or drive-through bay that allows washing a
vehicle while moving through the structure.
   CARNIVAL. An establishment with amusement activities; merry-go-rounds,
ferris wheels and similar types of amusement rides; booths for the conduct of
games of skill; food dispensing facilities; and sideshows; that are temporarily
conducted outdoors and not within a theater, auditorium, gymnasium or other
permanent building.
   CEMETERY, COLUMBARIUM, MAUSOLEUM, OR MEMORIAL PARK. Uses intended for the
burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes or to commemorate the
dead without burial taking place on-site.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or part of a sign that is designed so that
characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or surface of the sign.
   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A regularly operating service arrangement for two or
more children under the age of 13, where, during the absence of a parent or
guardian, a person or organization has agreed to assume responsibility for the
supervision and well-being of a child for less than a 24-hour period, in a
facility that is not the residence of the provider or of any of the children in
care. A nursery school shall be considered to be a child day care center.
   CIRCUS. An event with a variety of shows, including, but not limited to,
animal acts, feats of physical skill, and performances by entertainers such as
jugglers or clowns, which is temporarily conducted out-of-doors and not within
a theater, auditorium, gymnasium or other permanent building.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are
admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians practicing
medicine, dentistry or psychiatric treatment.
   CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which
is customarily carried on as a business.
   COASTAL A ZONE. Flood hazard areas that have been delineated as subject to
wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3 feet.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street that brings traffic from local residential
(minor) streets to major streets.
   COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY. A public or private institution providing full-time
or part-time education beyond the high school level and including any lodging
rooms or housing for students or faculty.
   COLLOCATE. With regard to wireless telecommunications facilities, the act of
locating wireless telecommunications facilities on any existing support
structure.
   COMMISSION. The city Plan and Zoning Commission.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A private or public facility for cultivation of fruit,
flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or family.
   CONCEALED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Any wireless tele-
communications facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an
existing structure or any new support structure designed so that the purpose of
the facility or support structure for providing wireless telecommunications
services is not readily apparent to a casual observer. Examples include but are
not limited to: bell towers, clock towers, faux trees, flag poles, minarets,
monuments, parapets, religious symbols, smoke stacks, steeples, or structures
intended as art.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and comment as
to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with
the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of
special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood
insurance rate map or flood insurance study.
   CONSUMER MICROCELL. With regard to wireless telecommunications, a signal
booster that is marketed and sold to the general public for use without
modification. These types of devices do not require professional installation
and are used for personal use by individuals to improve coverage in a home,
car, boat, recreational vehicle and other related areas.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A small commercial shopping facility designed as a
component of the neighborhood or district in which it is located.
   CONVENTION CENTER. A facility used for business or professional conferences
and seminars, exhibitions, and entertainment events.
   CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. An establishment providing housing and care for
individuals legally confined for violations of law.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement.
   CURB GRADE. The elevation of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the midpoint of such frontage. Where no curb exists, the City
Engineer shall establish such curb grade for the existing or proposed street in
accordance with the existing street grading plans of the city.
   D
   DAY CARE. A use category containing principal uses that provide care,
protection, and supervision for at least two children or adults on a regular
basis away from their primary residence. Care is typically provided to a given
individual for fewer than 24 hours each day, although the facility may be open
24 hours each day.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Adult day care center; child day
care center; pre-school; and other uses meeting the definition of day care
according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage; food
preparation and dining facility; minor utilities; and recreation facility.
   DENSITY. The total number of dwelling units divided by the area in acres of
all land within a development dedicated to residential uses, including
residential lots and buildings and the streets, parking areas, landscape areas,
parks and open space serving the residential uses.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS). A wireless telecommunications facility; a
system or network of spatially separated antennas connected to a common
transport medium (i.e. coaxial, fiber optic, or other cable) to a signal
source, such as a base station or an external antenna capable of connecting to
a base station wirelessly. Such systems/networks commonly have three primary
components: remote communications nodes, each having at least one antenna for
transmission and/or reception; a high capacity signal transport medium, which
is either underground or aerial; and a central communications hub to propagate
and/or convert, process or control signals transmitted and received through the
nodes. DAS may also include additional equipment such as amplifiers, remote
radio heads, signal converters, power supplies, and other related equipment.
   DOMESTIC ABUSE, HOMELESS, OR YOUTH SHELTER. An establishment used for the
reception and temporary care of persons who, by some circumstances, are without
safe and proper shelter.
   DORMITORY. A building used as a group living quarters for students or
members of a religious order.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces supported by the same structure and
diverge from a common edge by an internal angle of no more than 45 degrees.
Signs with faces diverging from an angle more than 45 degrees shall be
considered multiple signs.
   DT. Downtown zoning district.
   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY (same as DRIVE-IN). Any portion of a building or
structure from which customers can receive a service or obtain a product while
in their motor vehicle. Regulated as a subordinate use to a principle use,
regardless of the nature of the principle use.
   DRIVEWAY. That space specifically designated and reserved on the site for
the movement of vehicles from one site to another or from a site to a public
street.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.
   DWELLING, APARTMENT. A building comprised of at least five or more dwelling
units, not separated by a property line, within which each unit may not have a
minimum of two outside walls and where each unit is designed for one family or
occupancy. as described by the specific zoning district.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX. Two connected dwelling units totally separated from each
other without openings where each is designed for one family or occupancy as
described by the specific zoning district.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLEX. A type of attached multiple dwelling containing three
or four attached dwelling units in one building with each unit having a minimum
of two outside walls and sharing one or more walls with an adjoining unit or
units. Each dwelling unit has direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
These dwellings can be designed and constructed to permit individual and
separate ownership of lots and dwellings or combinations of dwelling units and
where each is designed for one family or occupancy as described by the specific
zoning district.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. Two attached single-family dwellings
located on two separately platted lots that share a common fire-rated wall
without openings along the interior lot line and where each is designed for one
family.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A building occupied by or designed for
occupancy by one family or occupancy as described by the specific zoning
district building located on a single lot, designed exclusively for one family
and entirely separated from any other dwelling by setbacks on all sides.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE. Unless otherwise specified within a zoning district, a
townhouse is one of a series of at least three attached dwelling units, not to
exceed eight, for rent or sale, separated from one another by common walls and
property lines without openings from basement floor to roof and having varied
but compatible elevations, and with not more than two abutting dwelling units
having the same front yard setback. The lots, utilities and other improvements
for each "townhouse" would be designed to permit individual and separate
ownership of such lots and dwelling units.
   DWELLING, UNIT. A single enclosed area providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. Unless otherwise specified, dwelling
units shall be for nontransient occupancy of 30 days or more. The term does not
include recreational vehicles, one or more rooms located within a building and
forming a singular unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping and dining purposes. A dwelling unit shall have customary
kitchen facilities. An efficiency apartment unit is defined as a dwelling unit.
Dwelling units which will be occupied for predetermined periods of time of more
than one month in succession shall be termed nontransient dwelling units.
   E
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific
purpose.
   EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES. A use category containing public and private schools
at the elementary, middle, or high school level that provide basic academic
education. Also includes colleges and other institutions of higher learning
that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree usually
in a campus selling.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: College or university; training
facility or vocational school; public schools or private school elementary,
middle, or high school; and other uses meeting the definition of educational
facilities according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Assembly hall; associated office
and storage; athletic facilities; auditorium or theater; before- and after-
school day care; concession; dormitory; food preparation and dining facility;
laboratory; library; medical clinic; minor utilities; and recreation facility.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. An electronic message center is a sign that is
capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be
electronically changed by remote or automatic means. Such a sign is not a
changeable copy sign.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR. A use category containing uses varying in size,
providing daily or regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an
indoor setting.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Archery/firearms range (indoor);
axe throwing lounge; bar or tavern; bingo hall; body art service; bowling
center; convention center; dance club or dance hall; fitness gym; gymnastic,
dance, or martial arts facility; microbrewery or micro-distillery; movie or
other indoor theater; pool hall; skateboard or trampoline park; skating rink;
swimming pool (indoor); tennis or racquetball facility (indoor); and other uses
meeting the definition of indoor entertainment according to the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales related to the primary use; concession; food
preparation and dining facility; minor utilities; and swimming pool, indoor.
   ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR. A use category containing uses providing daily or
regularly scheduled recreation-oriented activities in an outdoor setting.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Amphitheater; amusement park;
animal racing or training; campground; fairgrounds or rodeo grounds; farmers
market, outdoor; flea market, outdoor; golf course, driving range or mini-golf
course; paintball facility; recreational vehicle park; stadium, arena, running
track or ball field; track, vehicle race; and other uses meeting the definition
of outdoor entertainment according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales related to the primary use; concession; food
preparation and dining area; minor utilities; and single dwelling unit for
caretaker.
   ENTRY/EXIT SIGN. A wall or freestanding sign not exceeding four square feet
in area. If such sign is a freestanding sign, the height may not exceed four
feet.
   EQUIPMENT CABINET. With regard to wireless telecommunications, a cabinet,
shed, shelter, or other structure, where equipment is housed to support
wireless telecommunications services.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A public or private institution or a place of business.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of the insurance program, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975 for FIRMs effective before that date.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as "existing structures" and
"pre-FIRM" structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before
November 3, 1989. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as "existing
structures."
   F
   FACADE, FRONT. The principal frontage of a building which, by either
aesthetic attention, main entry and egress, or the longitudinal dimension of
the structure, becomes the primary frontage.
   FACADE, REAR. That portion of a building which is, by either service area,
secondary entry and egress or the facade directly opposite the front facade of
the structure, the reverse frontage of the building.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or
a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who need not be
related by blood or marriage living together in a dwelling unit. FAMILY
specifically includes all persons living in "family homes" or "elderly family
homes" as those terms are defined under, respectively, I.C.A. §§ 231A.1 and
414.22.
   FAMILY DAY HOME, MAJOR. A child day care program offered in the residence of
the provider or the home of any of the children in care for five through 12
children under the age of 13, exclusive of any children who reside in the home,
when at least one child receives care for compensation.
   FAMILY DAY HOME, MINOR. A child day care program offered in the residence of
the provider or the home of any of the children in care for one through four
children under the age of 13, exclusive of any children who reside in the home,
when at least one child receives care for compensation.
   FARM PRODUCT. Fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, grains, legumes, nuts,
eggs, honey, flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products (including meat,
milk, yogurt, cheese and other dairy products), and seafood.
   FARM PRODUCT, VALUE-ADDED. Any product processed from a farm product, such
as baked goods, jams and jellies, canned vegetables, dried fruit, syrups,
salsas, salad dressings, flours, coffee, smoked or canned meats or fish,
sausages, or prepared foods.
   FARMERS MARKET. An outdoor market where at least 75% of the items for sale
are farm products or value-added farm products.
   FEATHER SIGN. A lightweight sign mounted along one edge on a single and
vertical pole structure, which may resemble a feather, sail, bow, or teardrop.
Feather signs are animated signs.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION AND OFFICES. Any building wherein the primary
occupation is concerned with such state regulated businesses as banking,
savings and loans, loan companies and investment/securities companies.
   FIRST-ROW BUILDING. A multiple-family building or buildings that are part of
a complex of multiple-family buildings and that are closest to the street from
which primary access to the complex takes place.
   FLAG. A piece of cloth or similar material, typically oblong or square,
attached by one edge to a pole or rope.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign that includes lights that flash, blink, or turn on and
off at less than five second intervals.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map
(DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A report by FEMA that examines, evaluates and
determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING.
      (1)   A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source; or
         (c)   Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in
division (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and
flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in division (1)(a) of this definition.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any
point within the community.
   FLOOR AREA. The gross horizontal areas of all floors, including basements,
cellars and attics (but not such areas within a building which are used for
parking), measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building.
   FLOORPLATE. The horizontal land area occupied by a building at finished
grade including projections and overhangs.
   FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A single detached dwelling being occupied by
persons who are members of a fraternity, sorority, association or group
chartered for social, educational, religious or service purposes.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in
the watershed.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. Any non-portable sign supported by a fence, wall, or by
upright structural members or braces on or in the ground and not attached to a
building.
   FUNERAL HOME. A building used for the preparation of corpses for burial or
for cremation which may also be used for funeral services.
   G
   GARAGE, STORAGE, OR PARKING. A building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for storage or motor-driven vehicles.
   GC. General Commercial zoning district.
   GI. General Industrial zoning district.
   GOLF COURSE. An outdoor area designed for playing the game of golf and
improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a
country club or other clubhouse, a driving range, putting greens, and shelters
as accessory uses.
   GOVERNMENT FACILITIES. A use category containing offices, storage,
maintenance, and other facilities for the operation of local, state, or federal
government.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Detention center, jail or
prison, publicly-owned and operated; emergency services, police or fire
station; post office; utility office and other uses meeting the definition of
government facilities according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated storage; day care for
children of employees; dormitory; fleet maintenance; food preparation and
dining facility; fueling facility; medical clinic for employees or inmates;
meeting space; minor utilities; and recreation facility.
      (3)   Governmental institutions; other governmental uses, such as
community centers, parks and playgrounds; provided, that any new building shall
be located at least 50 feet from any adjoining property line, including right-
of-way lines.
   GROUP HOME. A property used for the residential care of tenants who are
mentally or physically ill, wards of the state or any other similar group
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
   GROUP HOUSING PROJECT. A group housing project shall consist of two or more
buildings located on a site where the building arrangement is such that the
property cannot be subdivided into conventional streets and lots that meet the
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 152 of this title.
   GROUP LIVING. A use category containing uses with residential occupancy of a
dwelling by a means other than found in household living typically providing
communal kitchen/dining facilities.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Boarding or rooming house;
dormitory or fraternity or sorority house; nursing home; and other uses meeting
the definition of group living according to the Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office; facilities for
treatment of sickness or injuries; food preparation and dining facility; minor
utilities; pool house; private community center; swimming pool; recreational
facility; and other miscellaneous household amenities.
   H
   HALFWAY HOUSES AND EX-OFFENDER REHABILITATION SERVICES. A property used to
temporarily house ex-offenders in a rehabilitation or transitioning period.
   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL. A use category containing uses engaged in the
manufacturing, assembly or processing of chemicals, animal products and metals;
the activities of which are likely to have characteristics that discourage
adjacency to residential uses. Factory production and industrial yards are
located here. Sales to the general public are rare.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include the manufacture, assembly or
processing of: Acid, acetylene gas, aircraft, alcoholic beverages (wholesale),
ammonia, asbestos and asbestos products, asphalt, automobiles or trucks,
batteries, bones, boxes or crates or pallets, brick or tile or terra cotta,
building materials, celluloid, cement, chalk, charcoal, chemicals, chlorine,
coffins, corrugated metal, cotton oil, creosote, disinfectant, dyes or inks,
fat, fertilizer, fireworks, gas, gelatin, glass, glue, graphite, grease,
gunpowder, gypsum, hemp, insecticide, lacquer, lard, lime, linoleum, machinery,
manufactured or mobile homes, metal, motors or engines, paint, paraffin,
petroleum, plaster of Paris, plastic, poison, porcelain, recreational vehicles,
railroad vehicles and equipment, rubber, salt, shellac, tallow, tar, tires,
trailers, turpentine, varnish, vinegar, wax, or yeast.
      (2)   Additional uses include: Arsenal; boiler works; bulk storage of
explosive or hazardous materials; concrete batching and asphalt processing and
manufacture; fertilizer storage; grain elevator; grain and feed manufacturing
building; incinerator for reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, refuse or
automobile bodies (non-governmental); railroad yard or repair shop; sawmill;
smelter; slaughtering, packaging or processing of animals; wrecking, junk or
salvage yard; and other uses meeting the definition of heavy industrial
according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales related to the primary use; day care for children of
employees; fleet maintenance; food preparation and dining facility; fueling
facility; medical clinic for employees; meeting space; minor utilities;
recreation facility; and single residential unit for caretaker.
   HEAVY VEHICULAR EQUIPMENT SALES, SERVICE, AND REPAIR. An establishment
engaged in the display, sale, leasing, rental, or repair of heavy equipment of
12,000 or more pounds gross vehicular weight.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC AREA. An area or existing site containing buildings or places in
which historic events occurred or having special public value because of
notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic
heritage of the community of such significance as to warrant conservation and
preservation.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental
to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes, and which is carried on
wholly within a main building or accessory building, other than business
gardens as defined and meets the requirements of §
156.C.007(G) for operating the business, employees outside of those who reside
on the premises, signage, and other requirements.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS (NO IMPACT). Any occupation that takes place within the
premises of a clear residential dwelling that has no outward impact on the
property, surrounding neighbors, changes the property in any way, does not
create additional traffic/parking that would normally be associated with a
residential dwelling, no signage, sound, odor, or nuisance of any kind.
   HOMESTAY. In a single-family detached, duplex, or townhouse dwelling unit,
the provision of a guest room or accommodation space within the principal
building that is suitable or intended for transient occupancy of a maximum of
four guests in the homestay at any one time for dwelling, sleeping, or lodging
purposes and is offered in exchange for a charge for the occupancy a maximum of
90 days per calendar year.
   HOSPITAL. A facility in which patients or injured persons are given medical,
surgical and/or psychiatric care on an inpatient or outpatient basis, or an
institution for the care of contagious or incurable diseases.
   HOTEL, OR MOTEL AND SIMILAR TRANSIENT HOUSING. A facility offering overnight
lodging accommodations to the general public and that may include additional
facilities and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment,
personal services, and recreational facilities. The office has a 24 hour
employee on site and daily rates, building or group of buildings which are
designed or intended to be used or hired out or weekly basis, primarily for
transient or temporary occupancy.
   HOUSEHOLD LIVING. A use category containing residential occupancy of a
dwelling unit by a household on a month-to-month or longer basis in structures
with self-contained dwelling units including kitchens.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Apartment; duplex; manufactured
home; single-family attached; single-family detached; townhouse; tri- or
quadraplex; and other uses meeting the definition of household living according
to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Business garden; chickens, keeping
of; child care; domestic storage; family day home, major or minor; minor
utilities; garage, attached or detached; home-based business; leasing office
for manufactured home park or apartment complex; model home with sales office
in model home; pool house; private community center; short-term rental or
homestay; swimming pool (private); and other miscellaneous household amenities.
   HOUSING. See DWELLING.
   I
   ILLEGAL SIGN. Any sign erected without a required permit or which otherwise
does not comply with any provisions of this article.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that is backlit, internally lighted, or indirectly
lighted.
   INDUSTRIAL MICROCELL. A wireless telecommunications facility; a standalone,
short range radio transceiver located in specific locations, either indoors or
outdoors, where there is often low signal quality and high demand for a
wireless telecommunications signal. Examples include but are not limited to
industrial signal boosters, repeaters, bi-directional amplifiers, and devices
specifically identified as microcells. Consumer microcells, such as femtocells,
for residential or household use or mobile use (i.e. vehicular, boat, etc.),
and equipment meeting the thresholds to be considered small cell facilities,
are excluded from this definition.
   INSTITUTION. A nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment whose
purpose is civic, educational, charitable, religious or philanthropic in
nature.
   J
   JUNK YARD. Any space or area or portion of lots used for the storage, sale,
keeping or abandonment of junk or waste materials, including used building
material, or for the dismantling, demolition, sale or abandonment of
automobiles and other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof.
   K
   KENNEL. A premise on which four or more dogs, six months or older, are kept.
This term includes privately-owned animal shelters.
   L
   LANDSCAPING. Living vegetation primarily used to enhance property
aesthetics, values, and/or to improve environmental conditions. Landscaping may
include grasses, shrubbery, trees, and other vegetation. Mulch and/or stone
shall be used only for the enhancement of vegetation. The use of mulch and/or
stone alone is not considered landscaping.
   LANDSCAPING ISLAND. An area that includes landscaping within a parking lot.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing
that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard
area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a land as defined by metes and bounds or structure is not
located in a special flood hazard area.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may
show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill
(LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been
elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer
exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for
this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance
with the community's floodplain management regulations.
   LETTERS OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective flood insurance
rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map
and establishes that a land as defined by meets and bounds or structure is not
located in a special flood hazard area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway
delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill
(LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been
elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer
exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for
this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance
with the community's floodplain management regulations.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. A use category containing uses engaged in the
manufacturing, assembly or processing of industrial, business or consumer
goods; usually from basic finished inputs such as metal, stone, glass, plastic,
or rubber. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses
perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come
to the site.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include manufacture or assembly of:
Appliances, artificial limbs, awnings, beds, blinds, boats, books, brooms,
buses, carpet, clothing or textiles or canvas, cosmetics, equipment, electrical
items, felt, hardware, ice, jewelry, medical, optical or dental instruments or
supplies, mirrors, medical instruments, musical instruments, perfume,
pharmaceuticals, shoes, shutters or shades, signs, and toys.
      (2)   Additional uses include: Bakery, wholesale; bottling or canning;
brewery; building and development contractors; bulk mailing service; clothing
or textile manufacturing; creamery; crematorium; engraver; exterminator
service; food processing; janitorial and building maintenance service;
maintenance and repair shop; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants;
metal plating; metal shop; printing, publishing, and lithography; repair of
scientific or professional instruments or electric motors; research and
development laboratory; smoking or processing of meat products (wholesale);
stone cutting; welding, tool repair or machine shop; woodworking, including
cabinet makers and furniture manufacturing; and other uses meeting the
definition of light industrial according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales related to the primary use; associated showroom; day
care for children of employees; fleet maintenance; food preparation and dining
facility; fueling facility; medical clinic for employees; meeting space; minor
utilities; recreation facility; single residential unit for caretaker; and
wholesale and/or retail sales.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use permitted
in this chapter, including one main building together with its accessory
buildings, and the yards and parking spaces required herein, and having its
principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. No
existing alley, public way, public land or area proposed for future street
(alley) purposes is included within the net area of a lot. On-site easements
are included in the land area of a lot.
   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of
the circuit court.
   LOT, NONCONFORMING. An otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform
to the minimum area or width requirements of this chapter for the district in
which it is located either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result
of subsequent amendments to this chapter.
   LOT, WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building
line.
   LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT. An approach to stormwater management that mimics a
site's natural hydrology as the landscape is developed.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface
next to the walls of a structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44 CFR § 60.3.
   M
   MACROCELL. Any wireless telecommunications facility not considered a
concealed wireless telecommunications facility, a consumer microcell, a small
cell facility, an industrial microcell, or a distributed antenna system.
   MAJOR STREET. A street shown as a major street on the city "master
transportation plan".
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure subject to federal regulation, which is
transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and
40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square
feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be
used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure.
   MANUFACTURED HOME (FLOODPLAIN). A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. An area designed, constructed, equipped, operated,
and maintained for the purpose of providing spaces for two or more manufactured
homes intended to be used as living facilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SALES AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Tse of land whereon the
primary occupation is the sale and ancillary service of manufactured homes.
This use shall not include storage of nonhabitable manufactured homes for a
period of time exceeding 90 days.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street generally paralleling and contiguous
to a major street designed primarily to promote safety by providing free access
to abutting properties and limited access to the major street.
   MARQUEE. A permanent structure projecting beyond a building wall at an
entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond a building wall
designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s FIRM
are referenced.
   MEDICAL FACILITIES. A use category containing uses providing medical or
surgical care to patients. Some uses may offer overnight care.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Acupuncture clinic; blood or
plasma center; chiropractor; drug, alcohol or psychiatric treatment center,
out-patient; hospice center; hospital; medical or dental office; and other uses
meeting the definition of medical facilities according to the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated helicopter landing
facility; associated office and storage; associated retail sales area related
to the primary use; classrooms; day care for children of employees or patients;
dormitory; fleet maintenance; food preparation and dining facility; minor
utilities; place of worship; pharmacy; and recreation facility.
   MICRO-MANUFACTURING. The retail or business-to-business production of
artisan goods that are produced in small quantities using small hand tools or
light machinery including, but not limited to, 3-D printers or computer
numerical control routers.
   MICRO-WIRELESS FACILITY. A small cell facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A structure containing separate storage spaces, which may be
of various sizes, leased or rented on an individual basis but not for human or
animal occupancy.
   MINOR STREET. A local residential street which provides access to building
sites, space for public utility lines and space for light and air.
   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A temporary establishment engaged in the retail sale of
prepared food for consumption, on site or offsite, from a movable vehicle,
portable structure, or pushcart.
   MU. Mixed-Use zoning district.
   MULTIPLE ESTABLISHMENT BUILDING. A commercial development with two or more
establishments on a single parcel of common ownership attached by common walls
or, if located in separate buildings, are interconnected by walkways and/or
access ways on one or more commonly owned or managed properties, providing
common parking facilities for all establishments, having multiple tenancy of a
single or several common structures, and otherwise presenting the appearance of
one continuous commercial area.
   N
   NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN. Freestanding sign located at the entrance of a
neighborhood or subdivision.
   NET DEVELOPMENT AREA. The total area of land in the MX-U development
designated on the master development plan for residential, nonresidential, or
open space uses, excluding streets.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after November
3, 1989, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with
applicable regulations of the city and maintained prior to the effective date
of this article and which fails to conform to current standards and
restrictions.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any lawful structure existing at the time of the
enactment or subsequent amendment of this chapter which does not conform to the
current zoning regulations prescribed in the district in which it is situated.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any lawful use existing at the time of the enactment or
subsequent amendment of this chapter which does not conform to the current
zoning regulations prescribed in the district in which it is situated.
   NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS. A home-based business for which all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The total number of on-site employees and clients does not exceed
the city occupancy limit for the residential property; and
      (2)   The business activities are characterized by all of the following:
         (a)   The activities are limited to the sale of lawful goods and
services;
         (b)   The activities do not generate on-street parking or a
substantial increase in traffic through the residential area;
         (c)   The activities occur inside the residential dwelling or in the
yard of the residential property; and
         (d)   The activities are not visible from a street adjacent to the
residential property.
   NURSING HOME. A home for the aged, or infirm, senile, chronically ill or
convalescent in which persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or
provided with food, shelter, treatment and care for compensation, but not
including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions.
   O
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that directs attention to an object, person,
product, institution, organization, business, service, event, or location
conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the parcel on which the
sign is located.
   OFFICE. A use category containing activities conducted in an office setting
and generally focusing on business, professional, or financial services.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include business and professional offices
or agencies for services such as: accounting, advertising, architecture, bill
collection, consulting, counseling, data processing, design, engineering,
investment or brokerage, law, real estate or insurance, sales, temporary
employment, or travel.
      (2)   Additional uses include: Bank or credit union; TV, recording, or
radio studio; and other uses meeting the definition of office according to the
Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated storage; day care for
children of employees; medical clinic for employees; minor utilities; food
preparation and dining facility for employees; recreation facility for
employees; and private telecommunication or transmission tower.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that directs attention to an object, person,
product, institution, organization, business, service, event, or location
conducted, sold, or offered on the parcel upon which the sign is located.
   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Land within a private development set aside, dedicated
and designed to protect natural environmental resources, to serve as a visual
amenity, and/or to provide recreational opportunities that is owned by a
property owners association and is designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development. Such land shall be primarily
naturally vegetated or landscaped, but may include limited paved areas, such as
sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, trails, and recreational courts. Such land shall
not include streets, street rights-of-way, driveways, parking areas,
structures, above ground public utilities, including stormwater management
facilities, or other improvements, except as may be approved for recreational
or historic preservation purposes in a development plan or site plan.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREA. An area for display of finished products actively
available for retail sale, rental, or lease. This definition does not include
products in shipping boxes, crates, on pallets, or other shipping containers,
which shall be considered outdoor storage, generally considered accessible to
the public that utilizes parking spaces or paved and/or graveled areas to
displays goods for sale, rental, or lease, except those areas counted as part
of the gross floor area for purposes of calculating required parking. Goods
include but are not limited to vehicles, recreation equipment, trailer sales,
heavy equipment, manufactured homes, industrialized buildings, agricultural
equipment, yard and landscaping equipment, and other similar products.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of any item outside of an enclosed structure
that is not accessible to the general public. This includes but is not limited
to garden supplies, building supplies, plants, materials stored in crates,
boxes, or shipping containers; lumber yards; pipe; contractor's equipment; and
other similar uses.
   OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS. A use category containing uses with bedroom and
bathroom units arranged for short-term stays of less than 30 days for rent or
lease.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Hotel, motel, or resort; and
other uses meeting the definition of overnight accommodations according to the
Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
meeting space; minor utilities; recreational facility; restaurant; and swimming
pool (public).
   P
   PARKING BAY. Multiple parking spaces arranged in single or double loaded
rows.
   PARKING, COMMERCIAL. A use category containing commercial facilities that
provide parking that is not accessory to a principal use, for which a fee may
or may not be charged.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Park-and-ride facility; parking
lot or structure, commercial; truck, tractor, trailer or bus storage or parking
yard, lot, or garage; and other uses meeting the definition of commercial
parking according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage; and
minor utilities.
   PARKING, OFF-STREET. Any on-site space specifically allotted to or required
for vehicle and bicycle parking.
   PARKING LOT. A defined area for the storage of operable motor-driven
vehicles and operable accessory vehicles. A parking lot includes all areas used
for parking, maneuvering, loading, driveways, travelways, and drive-throughs,
except public street ingress and egress.
   PARKING SPACE. The area required for parking one automobile which shall be a
minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet long, not including passageways.
   PARKING UNIT, PRIVATE. A self-contained and privately maintained area
accessed by a public street but allowing no through traffic routes and
providing such off-street parking as may be required under this chapter for the
building served. Said parking unit may be entered by a private drive from the
public street; provided, that such drive offers adequate ingress and egress for
emergency vehicles and otherwise complies with acceptable city standards.
   PARKS AND OPEN AREAS. A use category containing uses focusing on natural
areas consisting mostly of vegetation, passive or active outdoor recreation
areas, or community gardens, and having few structures.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Private club and golf course;
cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, or memorial park; dog park, publicly-owned;
park or playground; and other uses meeting the definition of parks and open
areas according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated retail sales area related to the primary use; boat launch;
concession; dining area; minor utilities; and recreation facility.
   PASSENGER TERMINAL. A use category containing facilities for the takeoff and
landing of airplanes and helicopters, and terminals for taxi, rail, or bus
service.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Airport; heliport; bus terminal;
transportation service facilities, including but not limited to those for:
taxicab, limousine, or bus; and other uses meeting the definition of passenger
terminal according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Associated office and storage; associated retail sales area related
to the primary use; concession; fleet maintenance; freight handling area;
fueling facility; and minor utilities.
   PI. Public and Institutional zoning district.
   PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT. A sketch of the site drawn to scale, showing the
dimensions and acreage of the property, and approximate location of buildings,
roads, parking areas and landscaping, the number of dwelling units or
commercial or other types of buildings and other information essential for
determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed, such as
pertinent site engineering data.
   PLANT NURSERY, GREENHOUSE, AND LANDSCAPING BUSINESS. A facility where plants
and landscaping materials are raised and/or sold. Such uses must be served by a
permanent building. These uses may include the storage of materials used for
installation of landscaping materials.
   PLAT. 
      (1)   A drawing, map or plan for a parcel of land or subdivision, or
rearrangement, revision or resubdivision of land.
      (2)   A map or drawing on which the proposed subdivision of land is
presented for approval and, when in final form, for recording.
   POLE SIGN. A sign that is attached to one or more freestanding poles. Pole
signs are freestanding signs.
   PORTABLE RESTROOM FACILITY. A movable restroom facility including but not
limited to single portable toilets, portable sinks, trailer-mounted toilets,
and restroom trailers that may include showers and tubs. Portable restroom
facilities, as defined herein, shall be considered accessory buildings.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. A large container, typically intended for transport
by large truck, train, or ship, that is used for the temporary storage and or
transport of personal property.
   POST-FIRM STRUCTURES. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred after November 3, 1989.
   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES. Compliance with the strict letter of the
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or
other dimensional provisions would create PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, unreasonably
prevent the use of the property for a permitted purpose, or render conformity
with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere
inconvenience is insufficient to justify a variance.
   PRE-FIRM STRUCTURES. A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before November 3, 1989.
   PREMISES. A parcel of land, together with any building or structures
occupying it.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An association organized and operated on a nonprofit basis for
persons who are bona fide members paying dues, with which the association owns
or leases premises, the use of which premises is restricted to such members and
their guests, and which manages the affairs of such association by and through
a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the
members. Food, meals and beverages may be served on such premises, provided
adequate dining space and kitchen facilities are available. This definition
includes country clubs.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICES. Offices limited to personal services customarily
performed by professionals such as doctors, dentists, architects, engineers,
lawyers, accountants, real estate agents, insurance agents and brokers, who are
not dependent on extensive on-site advertising.
   PROPERTY. Any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same collected together
for the purpose of subdividing.
   PUBLIC AREA. Any public place, public right-of-way, or parking lot or other
right-of-way open to use by the general public.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. A use category containing establishments where people
assemble for religious, philosophical, fellowship, or cultural purposes.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Assembly, meeting, event or
exhibition hall; church, mosque, temple, synagogue, or other place of worship;
museum; public library; religious, educational, charitable and benevolent
institutional uses which do not provide housing facilities; club or lodge;
community, senior, or youth center; philanthropic institution; and other uses
meeting the definition of public assembly according to the Zoning
Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Assembly hall; associated office
and storage; associated retail sales area related to principal use; athletic
facilities; auditorium or theater; before- and after-school day care;
classrooms; concession; day care; dormitory; food preparation and dining
facility; laboratory; library; medical clinic; minor utilities; pre-school; and
recreation facility.
   PUBLIC FLOOR AREA. The gross building area, as figured on a per-story basis,
which clearly serves the general public, such as vestibules and lobbies,
corridors, waiting rooms and toilets, servicing areas, and required stairs,
ramps and elevators. Employee oriented areas, such as kitchens and freezer
rooms, storage, maintenance and service areas, shall not apply. Unfinished
areas shall be included and figures on the basis of potential use.
   PUBLIC USE. Any instance where a lot or parcel of land, or any improvement
on a lot or parcel of land, is used by (1) the city, or (2) another
governmental entity having a contractual relationship with the city for the use
of such lot or parcel or improvement.
   R
   RADIO OR TELEVISION STATION OR STUDIO. An establishment containing one or
more broadcast studios for over-the-air, cable, or satellite delivery of radio
or television programs.
   REC. Recreational zoning district.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2)
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and, (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. Any property upon which two or more occupied
recreational vehicles are situated, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the park.
   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility or land use, regardless of name or title, at
which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, glass, metal,
plastic materials, tires, grass and leaves, and similar items, except hazardous
waste and medical waste are collected, cleaned, sorted, stored, flattened,
shredded, dismantled, crushed, bundled, or separated by size, grade, quality,
or type, and compacted, baled, or packaged for shipment or delivery for the
eventual manufacture of new products.
   REPAIR-ORIENTED USE. A subset of uses in the retail repair, sales, and
service use category that is primarily engaged in the provision of repair
services to individuals and households rather than other businesses, but
excluding vehicle and commercial repair services.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include store offering repair of retail
consumer goods excluding those repair services listed in the vehicle sales and
service use type, and including, but not limited to: appliances, bicycles,
clocks, electronics, furniture, jewelry, locks and keys, musical instruments,
office equipment, shoes, and watches, and other uses meeting the definition of
repair-oriented uses according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
concession; day care for children of employees; food preparation and dining
area; minor utilities; and single attached dwelling unit for caretaker.
   REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. A building covered by a contract for flood
insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions in which the
cost of the repair, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value
of the structure at the time of each such flood event; and at the time of the
second incidence of flood related damage, the contract for flood insurance
contains increased cost of compliance coverage.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in
which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing,
or experimentation, but not include facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
   RESTAURANT. A use category containing uses serving food and beverages where
all service takes place within an enclosed building or accessory outdoor eating
or food dispensing areas.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Candy or ice cream shop;
catering establishment; coffee shop; food delivery; restaurant, sit-down;
restaurant, drive-in or drive-through; and other uses that the Zoning
Administrator interprets to be functionally similar to a use in this use
category.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
drive-through facility; minor utilities; outdoor dining area; and recreational
facility.
   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH. A restaurant located either within a
coordinated development or situated in a stand-alone structure, that contains a
drive-in or drive-through facility and customarily serves food in disposable
containers.
   RETAIL REPAIR, SALES, AND SERVICE. A use category containing establishments
or individuals involved in the sale, lease, or rental of new or used products,
or providing personal services or repair services to the general public. Refer
to the definitions for repair-oriented, sales-oriented, and service-oriented
uses.
   RH. High-Density Residential zoning district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES. Lines which separate private property from dedicated
public property containing or proposed to contain publicly owned street
surfaces, curb and gutter, sidewalks and planted strips. Where a public street
is designated on the major thoroughfare plan, all requirements of this chapter
which relate to rights-of-way shall be measured from the indicated proposed
right-of-way lines.
   RIPARIAN area relating to or situated on the banks of a river.
   RL. Low-Density Residential zoning district.
   RM. Medium-Density Residential zoning district.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected or constructed, in whole or in part, upon or above
the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the lowest portion of a roof
for any building with a pitched roof, or above a parapet wall.
   RR. Rural Residential zoning district.
   S
   SALES-ORIENTED USE. A subset of uses in the retail repair, sales, and
service use category that is engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include selling, leasing or renting
consumer, home, and business goods including, but not limited to: Alcoholic
beverages; animal feed; antiques; appliances; art; art supplies; automobile and
motorcycle parts and accessories; baked goods (retail); bicycles; books;
building supplies; cameras; carpet and floor coverings; clothing; collectibles;
computers; convenience goods; crafts; electronic equipment; electronic and
mixed media; fabric; flowers; furniture; garden supplies; gifts or novelties;
groceries; hardware; home improvement supplies; household products; jewelry;
luggage; medical supplies; musical instruments; office supplies; pawned items;
pets or pet supplies; pharmaceuticals; photographic supplies; picture frames;
plants; postal supplies (non-governmental); printed materials; produce; school
or teacher supplies; second-hand goods indoors; seeds; souvenirs; shoes;
sporting goods; stationery; tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and related
products; and toys; and other uses meeting the definition of sales-oriented
uses according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
concession; day care for children of employees; food preparation and dining
area; minor utilities; and single dwelling unit for caretaker.
   SCREENING. The use of fences, decorative walls or other physical or
structural enclosures or plant material to separate uses and hide from view
materials which require screening. Screening shall be required for outside
storage areas only when called for by the Zoning Ordinance. Fences, decorative
walls or other physical or structural enclosures used for screening shall be
opaque to obstruct view of storage materials, with the finished face facing
outside, and shall be at least six feet in height with a maximum of eight feet
in height. If plant materials are used for screening purposes, they shall be
three to four feet in height at planting time and shall otherwise meet the same
intent as stated for fencing, etc. with the exception of height described
herein. Screening, including walls and plant material, for parking lots and
garages adjacent to public streets may be a minimum of four feet in height
rather than six feet as specified above for other types of screening.
   SELF-SERVICE STORAGE. A use category containing facilities providing
separate storage areas for personal or business use designed to allow private
access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Boat or recreational vehicle
storage; mini-warehouse; and other uses meeting the definition of self-service
storage according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
minor utilities; moving vehicle rental; and single attached caretaker's
quarters.
   SERVICE-ORIENTED USES. A subset of uses in the retail repair, sales, and
service use category that provides non-medical services that are generally
needed on a recurring basis, and generally require one-to-one interaction
between the proprietor or employee and the customer in order to provide the
service.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Animal grooming; barbershop or
beauty, nail, skin care, or tanning salon; day spa; dry cleaning and pressing
establishment; funeral home or mortuary; kennel; laundromat; massage
establishment; music, art, or photographic studio or classroom; optician or
optometrist; photocopy, blueprint, and quick-sign service; postal services
(non-governmental); psychic or medium; tailor; taxidermist; and veterinarian
(small animal); and other uses meeting the definition of service-oriented uses
according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
concession; day care for children of employees; food preparation and dining
area; minor utilities; and single dwelling unit for caretaker.
   SETBACK. The minimum or maximum distance by which any building or structure
must be separated from all lot lines.
   SEVERE REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE. A structure that:
      (1)   Is covered under a contract for flood insurance made available
under the NFIP; and
      (2)   Has incurred flood related damage:
         (a)   For which four or more separate claims payments have been made
under flood insurance coverage with the amount of each such claim exceeding
$5,000, and with the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeding
$20,000; or
         (b)   For which at least two separate claims payments have been made
under such coverage, with the cumulative amount of such claims exceeding the
market value of the insured structure.
   SHALLOW FLOODING AREA. A special flood hazard area with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   SHOPPING CENTER. Commercial development of more than one retail sales or
service establishment on a single parcel of common ownership attached by common
walls or if located in separate buildings are interconnected by walkways and/or
access ways, providing common parking facilities for all establishments, having
multiple tenancy of a single or several large common structures, and otherwise
present the appearance of one continuous commercial area.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The provision of a dwelling unit, a guest room or
accommodation space within the dwelling unit, or any accessory building that is
suitable or intended for transient occupancy for dwelling, sleeping, or lodging
purposes and is offered in exchange for a charge for the occupancy.
   SIDEWALK SIGN. A sign not affixed to a building, structure, vehicle, or the
ground. This includes, but is not limited to, A-frame signs, otherwise known as
sandwich boards and chalkboard signs. Sidewalk signs do not include a flag or
banner.
   SIGN. Any device (writing, letter work or numeral, pictorial presentation,
illustration or decoration, emblem, symbol or trademark, figure, or character)
visible to and designed to communicate information to persons in a public area.
The term SIGN does not include devices specifically for drive-thru patrons.
   SIGN AREA. The area which encloses the extreme limits of the intended
communicated information.
   SIGN FACE. The area or surface which displays the intended communicated
information.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the ground at the sign's foundation
to the highest point of the sign.
   SIGN, ACCESS. A freestanding on-premise sign located at the entry or exit of
a vehicle use area that may or may not give exit or entry directions or
facility information.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A freestanding sign used for off-premise advertising also
known as a billboard.
   SIGN, AWNING. A sign placed directly on the surface of an awning. Awning
signs are wall signs.
   SIGN, CANOPY (ATTACHED). A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and
either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at
additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be
illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. Similar to a
SIGN, MARQUEE.
   SIGN, CANOPY (FREESTANDING). A multi-sided overhead structure supported by
columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources
of light.
   SIGN, DIRECTORY. An outdoor sign listing and identifying the occupants
within retail centers, industrial centers, office complexes, institutional
campuses (e.g. medical center, hospital, etc.), and other multi-tenant mixed-
use or nonresidential sites.
   SIGN, HANGING. A sign that is suspended over a walkway or a sidewalk,
street, or other public right-of-way.
   SIGN, MARQUEE. A permanent roof-like structure suspended over a walkway or a
sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way, constructed of rigid materials
that is supported by and extending from the facade of a building and which is
designed to include manual or electronic changeable copy.
   SIGN, MENU BOARD. A sign erected in conjunction with a use that incorporates
a drive-through or drive-in generally used to provide service or product
options and pricing for customers in a vehicle or on foot.
   SIGN, MONUMENT. Any freestanding sign having a low profile and made of
masonry, metal, rounded wood planks or beams, durable plastic or similar
materials, including individual lettering, which repeat or harmonize with the
architecture of the establishment it serves. Monument signs must be built on a
monument base as opposed to a pole base.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign, other than a wall sign, affixed perpendicular to
a building and supported only by the wall on which it is mounted.
   SIGN, PYLON. A freestanding sign that is affixed to one or more pylons or
poles, designed so that the combined width of the poles or pylons is at least
50% of the width of the sign face.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A prohibited temporary sign or poster affixed to a fence, pole,
post, hydrant, bridge, another sign, public bench, street light or any tree,
rock, or other natural object.
   SIGN, WALL. Any sign attached to, painted upon, and erected parallel to the
face of the outside wall of a building and supported by such wall or building.
   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign attached or painted on the surface of, located on the
interior of, or flashing through a window.
   SITE PLAN. Refer to Article D for site plan review.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications facility that meets both
of the following qualifications: each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet and all other wireless
equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than
28 cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal
Communications Commission. The following types of associated equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, back-up power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs
for the connection of power and other services.
   SOCIAL SERVICE. A use category containing uses that primarily provide
treatment of those with psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems; transient
housing related to social service programs; and housing for individuals legally
confined.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Correctional facility, not owned
or operated by the government; domestic abuse, homeless, or youth shelter;
drug, alcohol, or psychiatric treatment center, in-patient; halfway house; soup
kitchen; and other uses meeting the definition of social service according to
the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
class rooms; day care for children of employees or clients; dormitory; food
preparation and dining facility; library; meeting space; minor utilities; and
recreation facility.
   SOLAR PANEL ARRAY. A method of generating electrical power by converting
solar radiation into direct current electricity using semiconductors that
exhibit the photovoltaic effect. Photovoltaic power generation employs a solar
panel array that is composed of a number of solar cells containing a
photovoltaic material.
   SOLAR PANEL ARRAY (ACCESSORY USE). A solar panel array that is accessory to
a primary use.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in this Zoning
Ordinance.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered: Human
genitals, pubic region, buttock; and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal. Acts of human masturbation, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual
penetration with an inanimate object, sexual intercourse or sodomy. Fondling or
other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female
breast.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction and substantial
improvement, under the Coastal Barriers Resource Act (P.L. - 97-348), means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition; placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STEEP SLOPES. Natural slopes prior to land disturbance or construction that
exceed 15%. Such slopes are measured as the rise in elevation over the
horizontal distance between contour lines on a topographic map with a contour
interval of five feet or less.
   STORY. Excluding basements, a portion of a building for living between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is
no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property, including any avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard,
highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley which is designated or
dedicated for public use.
   STREET FRONTAGE. The width of the lot measured along the line parallel to
the street in which the lot is addressed. On corner lots with a curve
connecting the intersecting streets, frontage shall be measured along the
extended tangent to the point of intersection of the two streets.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a structure,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the premises or which is attached to something having location on
the premises. For floodplain management purposes, it shall mean a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally
above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBDIVIDER. The person, firm, association, organization, or corporation
which holds legal title to land and subdivides it.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, tracts or parcels, any of which are less than five acres in area for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. (1)
Division of land for agricultural purposes not involving the establishment of a
new street or access easement shall be exempt from these regulations. (2)
Industrial property shall be developed within the framework of this chapter.
(3) The term SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
It also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two occasions
in a ten-year period, in which the cost of the repair, on the average, equals
or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure at the time of each such
flood event.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure  before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
      (3)   Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all
ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of
Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the state historic preservation officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
   SUPPORT STRUCTURE. With regard to wireless telecommunications, any structure
that may support a wireless telecommunications facility including but not
limited to telecommunications towers, alternative support structures, and
structures that may be attached to or on top of buildings and other structures.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any enclosure, in ground or above ground, having a water
surface area exceeding 200 square feet and a water depth of not less than 24
inches.
   SWIMMING POOL (TEMPORARY ABOVE-GROUND). Any swimming pool less than 5,000
gallons which is erected a maximum of six months in a calendar year and is
completely drained and stored away for the winter months.
   T
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Any transmission, emission or reception of signs,
signals, sounds, voice, text, images, video, data, information or intelligence
of any nature by wire, radio, optical or other electromagnetic systems.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any structure, except concealed wireless
telecommunications facilities, designed, constructed, erected, repurposed or
re-used for the sole or primary purpose of providing and supporting wireless
telecommunications services.
   TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION OR FIELD SALES OFFICE. A building or structure that
is temporarily placed to aid in the process of managing a construction project.
   TEMPORARY VENDOR. A use in which a person or persons sell retail goods for
the purpose of purchase by consumers, whether immediately or by placing of
orders for a limited duration of time.
   TEMPORARY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A readily movable self-
contained wireless telecommunications facility used to provide provisional
wireless telecommunications services. An example is a cell on wheels (COW).
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A sign, signal, marking, or other device used to
regulate, warn, or guide traffic placed on, over, or adjacent to a street,
highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or shared-use
path by authority of a public agency or official having jurisdiction, or in the
case of a private road open to public travel, by authority of the private owner
or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAINING FACILITY OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. An establishment, for profit or not,
offering regularly scheduled instruction in technical, commercial or trade
skills, such as but not limited to business, real estate, building and
construction trades, electronics, computer programming and technology,
automotive and aircraft mechanics and technology and similar types of
instruction.
   U
   UNOCCUPIED. A property on which all buildings are unused or not being used
for a permitted activity.
   UPPER-STORY RESIDENTIAL. A dwelling unit located above the first floor of a
mixed use building type.
   UTILITIES. A use category containing major or minor infrastructure that
serves a site, a development, or the city at-large. MAJOR UTILITIES include
public or private infrastructure serving the general community, that may or may
not be maintained or regulated by a public or municipal entity and possibly
having on-site part-time or full-time personnel. MINOR UTILITIES include public
or private infrastructure serving a limited area with seasonal, as needed, or
no on-site personnel.
      (1)   MAJOR UTILITIES include: Electrical substation; electric or gas
generation plant; solar panel array (wall-mounted or ground-mounted and greater
than 850 square feet); telephone exchange and transformer or substation; water
storage tank; and water treatment plant and other uses meeting the definition
of major utilities according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   MINOR UTILITIES include: Pumping or regulator stations; solar panel
array (roof-mounted or ground-mounted 850 square feet or less); stormwater
retention or detention facility; telecommunication antenna co-located on an
existing structure; and other uses not meeting the definition of major
utilities according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
fleet maintenance; minor utilities; and storage structures.
   V
   VACANT. A property on which there is situated no structures.
   VARIANCE. A reasonable deviation from the provisions regulating the size,
configuration or area of a street or other feature, when the strict application
of the ordinance would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the
property owner, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by
other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the intended
spirit and purpose of the ordinance, and would result in substantial justice
being done.
   VEHICLE FUEL STATION. Any building, structure, or land used for the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail of any vehicle fuels, oils, or
accessories.
   VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR. Premises where mechanical, bodywork, major painting,
or other similar work is performed on vehicles.
   VEHICLE SALES. Premises where the primary occupation is the sale or rental
of any vehicle and can include ancillary service or repair of any vehicle. Such
use may include the storage of inoperable vehicles for a period not to exceed
90 days.
   VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE. A use category containing establishments related
to direct sales of and service to passenger vehicles, light, medium, and heavy
trucks and equipment, and other motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats, and
recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Car wash; heavy vehicular
equipment sales, service, and repair; rental or sales of manufactured homes,
mobile homes, portable buildings, or trailers; truck stop; personal vehicle
repair; vehicle service; vehicle fuel station; vehicle sales, rental, and
leasing; and other uses meeting the definition of vehicle sales and service
according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage; car
wash; concession; food preparation and dining area; fueling facility; minor
utilities; sale of auto parts; and towing.
   VEHICLE SERVICE, MINOR. The replacement or repair of any vehicle part that
does not require removal of the engine, transmission, or differential. Examples
include dent repair, minor painting, upholstering, brake work, and oil changes.
   VEHICLE USE AREA. An unenclosed area used by three or more vehicles of any
type, moving or at rest, including, but not limited to, parking lots, loading
and unloading areas, stacking lanes, access and circulation drives, driveways,
and parking aisles.
   VEHICLE, INOPERABLE. Any vehicle not capable of being used on public streets
or roads and/or on which a state inspection and/or license is not displayed or
has expired for more than 30 days.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. An animal clinic that provides medical care for small
animals, including, but not limited to: dogs, cats, and birds. This definition
does not include the veterinary hospital use.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. An animal hospital that provides medical care for large
or livestock animals, including, but not limited to: horses, cows, sheep,
goats, chickens, turkeys, ducks, and pigs.  This definition does not include
the veterinary clinic use.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in the community's floodplain
management regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   W
   WAREHOUSING AND FREIGHT MOVEMENT. A use category containing establishments
involved in the storage or movement of goods for themselves, other firms, or
individual consumers. Goods are generally delivered to recipients with little
on-site sales activity to customers.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Bulk storage, including cold
storage plants, household moving and general freight storage, nonflammable
liquids, and other retail and wholesale consumer goods sold in person or
online; food processing, packing, and distribution; motor freight or truck
terminal; outdoor storage yard; truck, tractor, trailer, or bus storage,
parking yard, lot, or garage; and other uses meeting the definition of
warehousing and storage according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage; day
care for children of employees; fleet maintenance; food preparation and dining
facility for employees; fueling facility; medical clinic for employees; meeting
space; minor utilities; outdoor storage yard; recreation facility; and single
attached residential unit for caretaker.
   WASTE-RELATED SERVICE. A use category containing establishments that receive
solid or liquid wastes from others for treatment or transfer to another
location and uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the large-
scale composting of organic material.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Animal waste processing;
composting facility; landfill; recycling facility; tire recycling or
retreading; and other uses meeting the definition of waste-related use
according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
minor utilities; fleet maintenance; fueling facility; and repackaging and
shipment of byproducts.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WHOLESALE TRADE. A use category containing establishments involved in the
sale, lease, or rent of products to industrial, institutional, or commercial
enterprises only. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order-taking and often
include display areas. The business may or may not be open to the general
public. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer.
      (1)   Uses in this use category include: Contractor equipment sales and
storage yard; fuel sales, wholesale; mail-order business; sale or rental of
machinery, equipment, heavy equipment, building materials, special trade tools,
welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies,
restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; wholesale or auction of food,
clothing, auto parts, or hardware; and other uses meeting the definition of
wholesale trade according to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Typical accessory uses include: Associated office and storage;
associated showroom; day care for children of employees; fleet maintenance;
food preparation and dining facility for employees; medical clinic for
employees; meeting space; minor fabrication; minor utilities; product repair;
repackaging of goods; and single residential unit for caretaker.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Any unmanned facility established for
the purpose of providing wireless telecommunications services. Such facilities
can consist of one or more antennas and accessory equipment, equipment
cabinets, telecommunications towers, concealed wireless telecommunications
facilities, distributed antenna systems, industrial microcells, base stations,
small cell facilities, or any combinations thereof. This definition does not
apply to equipment for radio or television studios, facilities designed for
amateur radio use, or for residential or household uses (i.e. consumer
microcells, etc.).
   Y
   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied
and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where
encroachment and accessory buildings are expressly permitted herein.
   Z
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. See ADMINISTRATOR.
   ZONING DISTRICT. See DISTRICT.
(Ord. 15039, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 15085, passed 7-8-2024; Ord. 15097, passed
12-20-2024; Ord. 15104, passed 6-23-2025)
CHAPTER 157: LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
157.001   General provisions
   
157.002   Rules and definitions
   
157.003   Procedures for platting
   
157.004   Presentation requirements for plats
   
157.005   Design standards for plats
   
157.006   Required minimum site improvements
   
157.007   Procedures for improvements
   
157.008   Administration
 
   
157.999   Penalty
Editor's Note
   This chapter is derived from Ord. 12288, passed 8-27-1973; Ord. 14346,
passed 4-8-1991; Ord. 14688, passed 11-2-2002; Ord. 14776, passed 11-14-2005;
Ord. 14844, passed 9-9-2008.
§ 157.001 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This chapter from the date of its passage shall be entitled:
Land Subdivision Regulations of 1973, as amended, Marshalltown, Iowa.
   (B)   Legal authority. The enactment of this chapter is in pursuance of the
authority granted by I.C.A Chapter 354.
   (C)   Purpose. The general purposes of this chapter are: to carry out the
policies and goals of the Comprehensive Guide Plan (General Development Plat)
to provide for the orderly, economic and safe development of land and urban
services and facilities and to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare. Further this chapter is adopted:
      (1)   To improve land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plats, and by requiring accurate legal descriptions of boundaries which will
help provide clear title;
      (2)   To prevent scattered or premature platting of lots beyond the
service areas of existing public utilities and improvements;
      (3)   To discourage platting of lots which are unbuildable or very
difficult to build on;
      (4)   To assure sound layout and to permit economy of construction in new
subdivisions;
      (5)   To secure the reservation of public lands and waters;
      (6)   To encourage attractive, stable and wholesome community growth by
providing procedures for plat review which involve checking by all appropriate
officials;
      (7)   To cause the cost of public improvements to be done by lot
purchasers rather than to permit the cost to become a burden upon existing
property owners who have already paid for their improvements; and
      (8)   To establish minimum improvement standards and design criteria.
   (D)   Geographic jurisdiction. This chapter shall regulate the subdivision
of land within the City of Marshalltown, Iowa, and all land within an area
extending two miles beyond the City Limits in accordance with the provisions of
I.C.A. § 354.9.
   (E)   Use and interpretation.
      (1)   Whenever any subdivision of land shall hereafter be laid out, the
subdivision plat and plans of proposed improvements shall, in all respects, be
in full compliance with these regulations and with the provisions of I.C.A.
Chapter 354. For purposes of this chapter, all lots or parcels created from the
division of land within a Quarter-Quarter Section on or after April 8, 1991
shall be subject to the regulations herein.
      (2)   Except as provided by State Law, until said plats and plans are
approved, properly signed and officially recorded:
         (a)   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out;
         (b)   No lot or parcel of land, within any subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall any sales, contract for sale, or option be made or
given unless such sale, contract or option is conditional upon city approval of
the final plat;
         (c)   No permanent utility services by any public service corporation
nor public improvements shall be installed.
      (3)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements.
      (4)   Where the conditions of this chapter conflict with other laws or
Ordinances, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher
standards or requirements, shall govern.
§ 157.002  RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter certain terms and words are herein defined
as follows:
   (A)   Rules.
      (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
      (2)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary, and the word
"may" is permissive.
      (3)   The word "person" includes a "firm," "association," "organization,"
"partnership," "trust," "company," or "corporation," as well as an
"individual."
      (4)   The word "lot" shall include the words "tract," "plot," "piece,"
and "parcel."
      (5)   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended,"
"designed," or "arranged to be used."
   (B)   Definitions.
      ACQUISITION PLAT. The graphical representation of the division of land or
rights in land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for
right-of-way purposes by an agency of the government or other persons having
the power of eminent domain.
      ALIQUOT PART.  A fractional part of a section within the United States
public land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-quarter,
one-half of one-quarter, or one-quarter of one-quarter shall be considered an
aliquot part of a section.
      ALLEY. Any strip of land publicly or privately owned, less than 50 feet
and more than 16 feet in width between property lines, set aside for secondary
public vehicular access to abutting property.
      ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street or highway of considerable
continuity designed primarily to serve as an intercommunication link between
various sectors of the area and beyond (such as from within the city to
outlying areas).
      AUDITOR'S PLAT. A subdivision plat required by either the auditor or the
assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of the auditor.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Marshalltown, Iowa.
      COLLECTOR STREET. A street designed to serve the internal traffic
circulation of a recognized land use area which distributes and collects
traffic between local and arterial streets or highways.
      COMMISSION. The City Planning and/or Zoning Commission of Marshalltown,
Iowa.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The General Development Plan, or any portion thereof,
adopted by the city in accordance with the laws of the State of Iowa.
      CONVEYANCE. An instrument filed with a recorder as evidence of the
transfer of title to land, including any form of deed or contract.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A comparatively short street having but one end open to
traffic and the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-
around.
      DIVISION. Dividing a tract or parcel of land into two parcels of land by
conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other than a
public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the purpose of
this chapter.
      FINAL PLAT. Shall mean the drawings and documents described in §
157.004(B).
      FORTY-ACRE ALIQUOT PART. One-quarter of one-quarter of a section.
      GOVERNING BODY. A city council or the board of supervisors, within whose
jurisdiction the land is located, which has adopted ordinances regulating the
division of land.
      GOVERNMENT LOT. A tract, within a section, which is normally described by
a lot number as represented and identified on the township plat of the United
States public land survey system.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Street grading, pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, subdrains, monuments, street signs,
street lights, street trees, wire utilities and other facilities the City of
Marshalltown may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation.
      LOCAL STREET. A street designed for access to abutting property and not
intended to facilitate through traffic.
      LOT. A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat, and occupied or intended to be occupied by a
building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are
required under the provisions of this chapter, having not less than the minimum
area required by this chapter for a building site in the Zoning Use District in
which such lot is situated, and having its principal frontage on a publicly
dedicated street.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Marshall County,
Iowa, or a parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Marshall County, Iowa, as of the 8th day of April, 1991.
      MARGINAL ACCESS STREET OR FRONTAGE ROAD. A local street which is parallel
and adjacent to highways and arterials with access to abutting private
properties only on one side.
      METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of land that uses distances
and angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the
parcel by reference to physical features of the land.
      OFFICIAL PLAT. Either an auditor's plat or a subdivision plat that meets
the requirements of this chapter and I.C.A. Chapter 354, and has been filed for
record in the offices of the recorder, auditor, and assessor.
      PARCEL. A part of a tract of land.
      PARCEL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER. A unique number or combination of numbers
assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to I.C.A. § 441.29.
      PLAT OF SURVEY. The graphic representation of a survey of one or more
parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel
within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. Shall mean the drawings and documents described in §
157.004(A).
      PROPRIETOR. A person who has a recorded interest in land, including a
person selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons
holding a mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
      SUBDIVIDER. The owner of the parcel of land to be subdivided or his
authorized representative.
      SUBDIVISION. The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
regardless of how it is to be used, into three or more lots; or the division or
redivision of land involving dedication of a new park, walkway, street or other
public right-of-way facility, or the vacation, realignment or any other change
in existing streets, alleys, easements, recreating areas, water or other public
improvements or facilities provided, however, that the division of land solely
for agricultural purposes into parcels of ten acres or more shall not be deemed
a subdivision if no public streets, easements and public facilities are
involved.
      SUBDIVISION PLAT. The graphical representation of the subdivision of
land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter
designation for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is
unique for the county where the land is located.
      SURVEYOR. A registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of land
surveying pursuant to I.C.A. Chapter 542B.
      TRACT. An aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official plat, or a
government lot.
§ 157.003 PROCEDURES FOR PLATTING.
   The following procedures are established for the administration of this
chapter and no plat shall be recorded until the proposed subdivision has been
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and the Council. Planned unit
developments and plans for any combination of uses shall be presented in the
same manner as plats for the review of the Commission.
   (A)   Pre-application meeting.
      (1)   Prior to the submission of any plat for consideration by the
Commission under provisions of this chapter, the subdivider shall meet with
City Development Staff to introduce himself as a potential subdivider and they
shall advise the subdivider what shall be expected of him in that capacity. An
initial informal sketch of the proposed plat over a print of a topographic map
or other suitable sketch and a tentative proposed improvement list will be
required. The sketch shall also show the relationship of the land to be platted
to surrounding subdivisions. The subdivider shall familiarize himself with
provisions of the Comprehensive Plan affecting the use of his property, and he
shall satisfy himself that the zoning is appropriate for his intended use of
the property.
      (2)   The purpose of the pre-application conference is to afford the
subdivider an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the
City Development Staff and to consult early and informally with staff before
preparation of the preliminary plat and before formal application for its
approval.
      (3)   The land which is proposed for subdivision must be zoned for the
use or uses contemplated in the proposal before the preliminary plat is filed.
   (B)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk 16 copies of a
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, the requirements of which are as
set forth in this chapter. The preliminary plat shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator not less than three weeks prior to the next regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting and shall be accompanied by a fee of $250
plus $10 dollars for each lot payable to the City of Marshalltown.
      (2)   If the preliminary plat submitted by the subdivider is rejected by
the city for any reason, the subdivider may resubmit a revised application
within one year, satisfying the reason for rejection, without paying an
additional fee.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the preliminary
plat is in proper form. The Council and Commission shall not receive nor
consider the application as filed until all documents are in accordance with
the requirements set forth herein. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the
Commission and Council, in writing, that the fee has been paid and all other
requirements have been met.
      (4)   Not later than three days from receipt of said plat, the Zoning
Administrator shall distribute one copy each of the preliminary plat to the
Chairman of the Commission, the City Solicitor, the City Engineer, the Fire
Chief, the Building Official, the Housing Director, Water Pollution Control
Director, the Superintendent of the Water Works, the District Engineer of the
Iowa State Highway Department, if the plat borders a State or State Aid Highway
and one copy each to each company providing electric, gas, cable TV and
telephone services with a request for their reactions to be presented at the
next regularly scheduled Commission meeting. In instances where the proposed
subdivision lies outside the City Limits the Zoning Administrator shall submit
one copy of the preliminary plat to the County Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Any interested person may address the Commission orally or in
writing regarding any preliminary plat but notice of the Commission's
consideration of same need not be given. The Commission shall review the
preliminary plat considering the oral or written comments from interested
parties and take appropriate action. If recommended for approval, the
Commission shall, by written report, express its action as a conditional
approval and shall recommend the conditions of such approval, if any; or if
recommended for disapproval, shall express its reasons therefore.
      (6)   The action of the Commission shall be noted on three copies of the
preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and two copies
forwarded to the Council.
      (7)   The Council shall consider the recommendation of the Commission and
shall take action on the application within 60 days of its filing with the
Zoning Administrator. If the Commission has not recommended approval, the
Council may approve said plat only by a 3/4 vote of the entire Council. The
action of the Council shall be recorded on the copies forwarded by the
Commission and one copy each shall be kept as permanent records by the City
Clerk and by the City Engineer.
      (8)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum
period of 12 months except that submission within this period of a final plat
applying to at least a portion of the area covered by the preliminary plat
shall extend the effective period of approval to a maximum of 60 months from
date of approval.
      (9)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the
final plat. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout
submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final
plat.
      (10)   A final plat may be submitted no sooner than 14 days after the
preliminary plat has been approved. Final plats may only be submitted
contemporaneously with a preliminary plat if the plat involves a simple lot
split and:
         (a)   All infrastructure is already in place on all resulting lots;
         (b)   No single private access/street is necessary to any resulting
lot; and
         (c)   Each lot created by the split fronts a publicly dedicated
street.
      (11)   All storm water retention pond parcels must be combined with an
adjacent parcel(s) by execution and recording of an affidavit of non-
severability with the developed lot and have an easement recorded on the title
of all parcels the pond serves.
   (C)   Final plat.
      (1)   The owner or subdivider shall file 16 copies of the final plat, the
reproducible original, the appropriate fees, and a performance guarantee for
public improvements with the Zoning Administrator at least two weeks before the
next regularly scheduled Commission meeting. The final plat shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved.
      (2)   The subdivider may file a final plat limited to such portion of the
preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at one time, provided
that such portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall refer one copy of the final plat to
the Mayor, one copy each to the Commission members, one copy to the City
Planner, two copies to the City Engineer, and one copy to the City Solicitor
for their review and report.
      (4)   The Commission, City Solicitor, the City Planner, and the City
Engineer shall check the final plat to see that it is in substantial agreement
with the preliminary plat as approved and that it meets all ordinances and
regulations of the city. If the Commission recommends approval, such approval
shall be entered upon the reproducible originals by the Chairman. If the
Commission disapproves, it shall transmit its reasons to the Council and
provide the applicant a copy. The Commission shall act on the final plat within
30 days of filing.
      (5)   Within 60 days of filing, the Council shall take action. If the
Council approves, such approval shall be duly entered by the Mayor and City
Clerk. Approval by the Council shall be by resolution setting forth all
conditions upon which approval is predicated. If the Council disapproves, it
shall set forth its reasons and provide the applicant and Commission with a
copy.
      (6)   The final plat shall not be recorded until the performance
guarantee for public improvements is accepted by the Council. A certificate to
that effect shall be issued by the City Clerk on demand and shall accompany the
final plat.
   (D)   Filing.
      (1)   The final plat, if approved, shall be filed with the Marshall
County Recorder and Auditor. Any approval of the final plat by the Council
shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 60 days after the
date of approval. A reproducible signed copy of the final plat, after the plat
has been recorded, shall be filed with the City Engineer. No building permit
shall be issued nor construction started until the recorded duplicate has been
returned to the City Engineer.
      (2)   Approval of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or
effect acceptance by the City of any improvement shown on the plat.
(Ord. 15090, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 157.004 PRESENTATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS.
   The plats shall be prepared at either a size of 11" x 17" or multiples
thereof and at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet on a suitable
reproducible base as specified by the City Engineer. Plats shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   Preliminary plat.
      (1)   Identification and description.
         (a)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or
be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the
City.
         (b)   Legal description including location by section, township and
range.
         (c)   Names, addresses and phone number of the owner, subdivider,
planner, engineer, and surveyor of the plat.
         (d)   Graphic scale, north point, and date of survey.
         (e)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated by
bearings and distances to section lines or fractional congressional corner.
         (f)   Total acreage of the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Existing conditions in tract and in surrounding area to a minimum
distance of 300 feet.
         (a)   The name and location of adjacent subdivisions.
         (b)   Platted streets, railroad rights-of-way, easement lines of
record limited to the plat itself, parks and schools.
         (c)   Boundary lines of adjoining land.
         (d)   Location, size and approximate invert elevations of sewers,
water mains, culverts, gas mains, drains, transmission lines or other
underground facilities.
         (e)   Permanent buildings, structures, hydrants and utility poles and
lines, limited however to the plat itself and the surrounding area to a minimum
distance of 50 feet.
         (f)   Lakes, watercourses, marsh areas, rock outcrop, wooded areas,
isolated trees of one foot or more diameter, contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet with drainage indicated at all subject property
boundaries, indication of top of banks and toe of steep slopes, and such other
information as soil tests or depth to ground water if requested by the
Commission or City Engineer to aid in their review. All elevation data shall be
mean sea level or other workable datum approved by the City Engineer.
         (g)   The existing zoning classification of the tract and adjoining
properties.
      (3)   Proposed subdivision design features.
         (a)   Layout, numbers and dimensions of all lots.
         (b)   Location and area of all land intended to be dedicated to public
use or reserved in the deeds for use of all property owners in the subdivision.
         (c)   Proposed layout and width of all improvements including streets
and easements showing street numbers or names, parks, walkways, and other
public areas in conformance with the city's Comprehensive Plan. The name of any
street heretofore used in the city shall not be used or be similar in
pronunciation to the name of an existing street, unless the proposed street is
an extension of an already named street, in which event that name shall be
used. The street layout shall include all contiguous land owned or controlled
by the subdivider and be shown in relation to streets and alleys of adjacent
subdivisions. In addition, the City Engineer shall advise the subdivider of the
extent of the required layout adjacent to the subject property.
         (d)   Proposed street grades, drainage plan, and erosion control plan.
         (e)   A general statement with drawings indicating proposed methods of
providing water, storm water and sanitary sewage facilities.
         (f)   A vicinity map at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to the
inch showing the location of streets, major drainage courses, the location of
and distance to the nearest subdivision and how the streets may connect with
those of the nearest subdivision.
         (g)   A draft of restrictive covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect existing natural features
and future improvements within the proposed development.
         (h)   The proposed uses of land, giving the type and number of
dwelling units and the type of business or industry.
   (B)   Final plat.
      (1)   Title under which the subdivider is to be recorded.
      (2)   Names and addresses of the owners.
      (3)   Date, scale shown graphically, north point, a vicinity map showing
the general location of the subdivision and the total area of the plat.
      (4)   Legal description including location by section, township and
range.
      (5)   Boundary line of plat with distances and bearings and tied to
comers of sections or half-sections.
      (6)   The location and description of all monuments erected.
      (7)   The exact length, width, bearing, radii, points of curvatures and
tangency, length of arcs, etc. of the lands surveyed and divided, and of all
block lines, lot lines, public grounds, streets, alleys, and easements.
Dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot, to the nearest
one hundredth of a foot.
      (8)   Name and number of all streets within and abutting the plat, block
and lot numbers.
      (9)   Lake or stream shore meander lines, flood plain, floodway, and top
and toe of bluffs.
      (10)   Accompanying documents shall include an abstract of title, with
title opinion of an attorney at law, an instrument of dedication and certified
statements of County officials, as well as other attachments required by I.C.A.
§ 354.11, together with a form of resolution for acceptance of said dedication
by the City Council, and a certified statement from the Registered Land
Surveyor that the Subdivision Plat complies with the provisions of I.C.A. Ch.
355.
      (11)   Certifications in substantially the same form as those on file
with the City Clerk when requested by the City Solicitor to improve the record
and give proper notice to all concerned parties.
      (12)   Final plans and specifications for improvements, approved by the
City Engineer and signed by the owner and subdivider, shall accompany the Final
Plat.
      (13)   Meet the requirements of I.C.A. Ch. 354.
§ 157.005 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PLATS.
   The following regulations control the manner in which streets, lots and
other elements of the subdivision are arranged on the land.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The subdivision shall conform to the Marshalltown Comprehensive
Plan (General Development Plan).
      (2)   The subdivision shall be designed to serve potential building sites
in the most advantageous manner.
      (3)   Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, or of slope
deemed unsuitable for residential use, shall not be platted for residential
occupancy nor shall such land be platted for other use as may continue such
conditions, or increase danger to health, safety, life or property.
   (B)   Streets and alleys.
      (1)   The design of all streets shall be considered in their relation to
existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to
topographical conditions, to runoff of storm waters and to the proposed uses of
the area to be served.
      (2)   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of
streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of
streets. When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible to being
subdivided, then the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the
lands being subdivided.
      (3)   The following table of standards for street design shall be
observed by the subdividers:
 
              Minimum right-
Street and    of-way width   Minimum roadway Maximum gradient Minimum gradient
alley type    (lot line to   width (back to  in percent       in percent
              lot line in    back) in feet
              feet
Regional      120 ft.        69 ft.          4%               0.7%
arterial
City arterial 100 ft.        49 ft.*         4%               0.7%
Collector     80 ft.         45 ft.          6%               0.7%
Industrial    80 ft.         31 ft - 45      6%               0.7%
                             ft.***
Local streets 80 ft.         31 ft.          6%**             0.7%
Alley         80 ft.         16 ft.          6%               0.7%
* 68 ft. where parking is allowed
** Steeper grades to a maximum of 10% may be allowed upon recommendations of
the City Engineer
*** Actual width shall be established by the City Council at its discretion.
      (4)   Tangents of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between
reverse curves on collector streets and 50 feet on lesser streets.
      (5)   Where new streets extend existing adjoining streets, their
projections shall be at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the
minimum required width.
      (6)   Local streets shall be so designed that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
      (7)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 130 feet shall be
avoided.
      (8)   Insofar as practical, street intersections shall be at right
angles.
      (9)   No dead-end streets shall be approved unless said streets are
provided to connect with future streets on adjacent land. In such event, a
temporary turn-around shall be provided.
      (10)   Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-
around having a minimum outside roadway diameter of 90 feet and a minimum
street property line diameter of 120 feet.
      (11)   Half-streets shall be prohibited except where the city finds a
better design will result and when the city deems it practical to require the
dedication of the other half of an arterial, local or collector street when the
adjoining property is subdivided.
      (12)   Where a proposed plat is adjacent to an arterial, the city may
require the developer to provide marginal access/frontage streets along the
right-of-way of such facilities or they may require that lots should back on
the thoroughfare, in which case, vehicular and pedestrian access between the
lots and thoroughfare shall be prohibited.
      (13)   The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause hardship to
owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing
convenient access to it.
      (14)   Curb lines at street intersections shall be rounded to a minimum
of 25 feet.
      (15)   The provision for alleys shall be discouraged.
      (16)   A building set-back line safeguarding future street widening or
other improvement may be required by the city.
      (17)   Additional right-of-way may be required by the city along existing
collector and arterial streets to meet the requirements of §
157.005(B)(3).
   (C)   Public easements.
      (1)   Easements shall be provided for utilities, where necessary. They
shall be centered on rear and side lot lines or along the front lot line as
required by the utility companies. They shall have continuity of alignment from
block to block. At deflection points, easements for pole line anchors shall be
provided where necessary.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way substantially in alignment with the lines of such watercourse,
together with such further width for construction or both, as will be adequate
for storm water runoff. The easement shall include not only the stream channel,
but also adjoining areas that have been subject to flooding in years of heavy
runoff.
      (3)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, the City Council may require an easement over and across
certain portions of the subdivision lying contiguous to said waterway, the
width of which the Council shall determine, for green belt public recreation
and public access areas, provided, however, that said purposes shall not
include use by any motorized means of transportation, except for maintenance
vehicles.
      (4)   Easement widths shall be determined by the City Council as
recommended by the City Engineer, except no easement for utility or drainage
purposes shall be less than 12 feet in width on rear lot lines and ten feet in
width on side lot lines and the same shall be apportioned between abutting and
subject property.
   (D)   Blocks.
      (1)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks and lots shall provide for
adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the use contemplated;
provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of traffic, and
provide for the limitations and opportunities of topography.
      (2)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet and, if possible, shall
not be less than 400 feet in length. In blocks longer than 800 feet, a
pedestrian crossway with a minimum right-of-way of ten feet shall be required
near the center of the block. The use of additional walkways and access ways to
schools, parks, scenic points and other destinations may also be required by
the City Council.
      (3)   A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth, except where a change of land use, severe topographic
conditions or a highway necessitates a single tier of lots in the opinion of
the Planning Commission. In these cases the lot depth shall be at least 25 feet
greater than minimum requirements.
   (E)   Lots.
      (1)   Every lot shall front on a publicly dedicated street except in
planned unit developments according to the City Zoning Ordinance and as
approved by the City Council. A lot located in the General Commercial or
General Industrial Zone may have private access from an adjacent lot or from a
private street if all the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Any private access or private street must be compliant with Fire
Code;
         (b)   An easement which permits access from the adjacent lot or
private street must be properly recorded with the property title of each
affected lot;
         (c)   Property titles of all lots must indicate that the city will not
maintain or have dedication of the private street, private access or easement;
         (d)   Any storm water retention pond and/or stand-alone access parcel
must be combined with an adjacent developed parcel by execution and recording
of an affidavit of non-severability; and
         (e)   All other requirements in this Code not directly related to the
private access or private street still apply.
      (2)   Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines. Lots with frontage on two
approximately parallel streets shall be permitted only under unusual
circumstances.
      (3)   Minimum lot sizes within the City shall conform to zoning
regulations in force. Corner lots shall be platted at least ten feet wider than
the minimum lot width required in the zoning ordinance.
      (4)   Residential lots, served by septic systems, shall be a minimum of
90 feet wide at the building line and shall have a minimum area and depth as
recommended by the City Engineer, provided further that no such lot shall have
an area less than 33,000 square feet.
      (5)   Residential lots on major street intersections and at other
intersections having restricted vision clearance due to topographic or other
conditions may be required to have a corner radius or other special shape.
   (F)   Public lands.
      (1)   Because subdivision activity creates a need for land space devoted
to public use in addition to that ordinarily set aside for streets and
easements, the city, or the Marshalltown Community School District, or both
acting together, may reserve a part or all of a proposed subdivision for public
use such as, but not limited to, parks, schools, or playgrounds. The city, or
the Marshalltown Community School District, or both acting together, shall
purchase any such reserved land within two years after approval of a final plat
adjoining such reserved land. This section shall not apply to easements set
forth in §
157.005(C).
      (2)   If the reserved area is to be served by any of the streets, sewers,
street lights, or other improvements of any subdivision adjacent to it, the
proportionate cost shall be born by the city, or the Marshalltown Community
School District, or both acting together.
   (G)   Natural features. In the subdivision of land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features and historic sites which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
   
   (H)   Restrictive covenants. The subdivider is encouraged to further
restrict the use of land within the subdivision to achieve better development.
However, any covenants which do not assist orderly, efficient, integrated
development and promote the general welfare of the community in the opinion of
the Commission may constitute grounds for disapproval of the plat.
(Ord. 15090, passed 8-26-2024)
§ 157.006 REQUIRED MINIMUM SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before the city approves a Final Plat, the subdivider shall give
satisfactory assurance of the provision of the following improvements:
   (A)   Monuments.
      (1)   Monumentation shall be provided according to I.C.A. § 355.6.
      (2)   A permanent benchmark meeting USGS standards with a brass plate
inscribing the number and elevation shall be accessibly placed within
subdivisions exceeding one acre when directed by the City Engineer, the
elevation of which shall be referred to the USGS datum and accurately noted on
the subdivision plat.
      (3)   All official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations shall
be preserved in precise location.
   (B)   Grading and surface drainage.
      (1)   Grading and the provision of surface drainage facilities shall
minimize damage to the natural features of the subdivision and avoid erosion
onto adjoining properties.
      (2)   Grading shall be accomplished in such a manner as to prevent
ponding in excess of eight inches in the event of a complete failure of the
storm sewer system.
      (3)   Drainage easements shall be provided in all cases when surface
waters from more than two lots are conveyed down a property line.
      (4)   All street and alley rights-of-way shall be graded to full width
and to the line and in a manner approved by the City Engineer. The grade of all
streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be established by ordinance.
      (5)   Within Flood Plain Overlay Districts indicated on the Zoning Map of
Marshalltown principal building sites are to be filled and graded so that the
first floor and basement floor will be at a point no lower than one foot above
the flood protection elevation for the principal building site and shall be
designed to extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the
anticipated structure. However, no filling or excavation shall be permitted
which will adversely affect the capacity of floodways and tributary channels,
drainage ditches or other drainage facility. The City Engineer shall approve
only those improvements which provide adequate protection from floods.
   (C)   Storm water sewerage and erosion control.
      (1)   The subdivider shall construct a storm sewer system adequate to
serve the area, including anticipated extension of use to serve additional
areas. The storm sewer system shall be constructed in accordance with design
standards of the city and at sewer grades approved by the city. The design
shall be based upon rain storms of ten year frequency and to carry the runoff
anticipated from the development of tributary areas at the density indicated on
the Comprehensive Guide Plan.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide at his own cost all storm sewers below
25" in size, and shall pay an amount equal to the cost of the 24" size for all
sewers required above the 24" size.
      (3)   The subdivider shall provide an erosion control plan to prevent
siltation onto adjacent property, the public street, or into storm water
intakes.
      (4)   The subdivider shall provide and maintain, temporary seeding, silt
fences, and erosion control matting to prevent erosion until permanent seeding
is growing.
      (5)   The subdivider shall provide at their sole cost a subdrain tile
line system to provide access from each lot to the storm sewer system. In areas
that have storm sewer, tile laterals shall be extended to each lot. In areas
that don't have storm sewers, tile line extensions shall be provided behind
each curb extending from an existing storm sewer or ditch outlet to each
property frontage.
   (D)   Sanitary sewerage.
      (1)   The subdivider shall make adequate provision for the disposal of
sanitary sewage from the platted area. He shall at his expense construct a
sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping stations, pumping
equipment, manholes and laterals to the street right-of-way lines to provide
for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or parcels of land, within
the platted area to a connection with the city's sanitary sewers. The sewerage
system shall be constructed in accordance with the design standards of the city
and at the sewer grades as approved by the city.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide at his own cost all sanitary sewers
below eleven inches in size and shall pay an amount equal to the cost of ten
inch size for all sanitary sewer required above the ten inch size.
      (3)   The Plan and Zoning Commission may waive the requirements of this
division (D). When gravity sanitary sewers are not feasible, provided septic
systems meet the specifications of the City Engineer as to soil type and
density, minimum lot size, drainage area, area density, and such other
specifications he may impose. In addition, the subdivider shall install a dry
sewer that will meet all requirements of §
157.006(D)(1) above.
   (E)   Water supply system. Lots shall be served by the Marshalltown public
water supply system in accordance with plans and specifications of the city.
   (F)   Street paving, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
      (1)   The subdivider shall pave all streets with full depth asphalt or
concrete paving. The subgrade and street improvement shall be constructed in
accordance with the design standards of the city, and shall adequately reflect
the classification of the street, its location and anticipated volume of
traffic. The installation of the streets shall be under the supervision of the
City Engineer and the subdivider shall be required to pay a reasonable charge
for the engineering and inspection service.
      (2)   Curbs and gutters shall be required for all lots and on all
arterial and collector streets, except if part of a Planned Unit Development.
Curb and gutter shall also be required on the side adjacent to the proposed
subdivision when the subdivision abuts an existing platted street with a rural
type street cross section unless the topography or other circumstances wouldn't
justify such installation. In those circumstances, the developer shall provide
the city a payment in the amount equal to those improvements required but not
constructed to be placed in an escrow account for the city to use in the future
when those improvements are constructed.
      (3)   Sidewalks shall be provided by the subdivider in all residential
subdivisions and in all commercial and industrial development areas and in all
blocks adjacent to a block containing a school or planned to contain a school.
Additional walks shall be provided as required by the City Council.
         (a)   Commercial and industrial zoned lots and subdivisions shall have
a sidewalk system which provides pedestrians a safe access to all buildings
from the public street entrances.
         (b)   For all zoning districts, grading for sidewalk improvements is
required at the time of final plat, if sidewalks are not installed at the time
of final plat.
         (c)   Sidewalk must be installed before occupancy of the property is
permitted.
         (d)   Remaining sidewalks must be installed within a period of two
years on all undeveloped lots in a subdivision once 70% of the lots in the
subdivision have sidewalks.
         (e)   All sidewalks in a subdivision must be installed within ten
years of the date the final plat was approved.
         (f)   If an undeveloped lot is sold to an owner of an adjacent
developed lot for the purpose of free space, parking, or an undetermined future
need, then the undeveloped lot must have sidewalks installed at the time of
sale.
      (4)   Disabled access to sidewalks by curb ramping. Provisions shall be
made for curb ramping to sidewalks on all corners at each street intersection
and other locations as required by the City Council.
   (G)   Street lights and street name signs. Street lights shall be provided
by the subdivider equal to or exceeding the minimum design standards of the
city and the plans of the Commission, if any. Street name signs will be
provided by the city.
   (H)   Street terraces. The street terraces shall be graded and seeded
according to city specifications.
   (I)   Public telephone, electric utility (15kv and below), cable TV, and
other wire service utilities.
Underground service shall be required except by variance by the Council. The
subdivider shall be responsible for making necessary arrangements for the
installation of such facilities, shall assure that they do not interfere with
other underground utilities and that incidental appurtenances, such as
transformer enclosure, and the like shall be located so as not to be unsightly
or hazardous to the public.
   (J)   Major utility transmission lines. All major utility transmission lines
designed to provide utility distribution through a new subdivision shall be
placed underground or located so as to provide the least possible effect upon
the subdivision.
(Ord. 14688, passed 2-11-2002)
§ 157.007 PROCEDURES FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Improvements paid for by subdivider. Before the submission of the
final plat the subdivider shall guarantee the construction of all improvements
in accordance with approved plans and specifications and insure completion of
the improvements within an approved specified time. All sewers, water lines,
drainage facilities, street improvements, sidewalks, street lights and other
designated improvements shall, upon inspection, approval and acceptance by the
city, become the property of the city.
   (B)   Detailed engineering plans.
      (1)   All engineering plans shall be submitted on 11 inch by 17 inch
sheets or multiples thereof and shall bear the signature and seal of the
Professional Engineer (and architect, if any) under whose directions they were
prepared. Two prints of preliminary plans and two reproducible sets of final
plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall review the improvement plans for
conformance with design standards and other requirements of the city. Other
City Development Staff may review the plans for conformance with standards of
design with particular attention to location and aesthetic qualities.
   (C)   Construction and inspection.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall inspect the construction of infrastructure
improvements installed by a developer or subdivider (hereinafter "developer").
A construction inspection service fee shall be charged pursuant to the current
City of Marshalltown construction administration, inspection and staking
services contract.
      (2)   The developer's engineer shall submit two complete full size sets
of plans and number of calendar days the developer's contractor will be given
to complete the project and make it ready for final inspection by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall use the plans and specified contract calendar
days in preparing a not to exceed fee amount of the cost to provide
construction administration, inspection and staking services. Payment of this
fee shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the project plans by the
City Engineer. Although the developer's engineer shall have the authority to
determine the number of calendar days needed to complete the project, the City
Engineer shall have the authority to withhold approval of the project plans if
the City Engineer determines that the submitted days for the completion of the
project is unreasonable.
      (3)   If, during the construction of the project, it appears that the
project will not be completed by the developer in the number of calendar days
specified by the developer's engineer and additional construction inspection
services are required, the developer's engineer shall submit a statement of the
City Engineer that indicates the number of additional calendar days needed to
complete the project. Before additional construction inspection services are
provided on the project for any additional calendar days beyond the original
completion date, the developer shall pay a per day fee for the additional costs
to provide construction administration, inspection, and staking services for
the additional number of calendar days submitted by the developer's engineer.
This per day fee shall be determined by dividing the original fee amount by the
number of specified calendar days the contractor was originally allotted to
complete the project. This developer notification and advance inspection fee
payment process shall continue until the project is completed. No project shall
be finally accepted by the city until all construction administration,
inspection, and staking service fees have been paid in full by the developer.
If the additional per day fee paid pursuant to this division by the developer
is higher than the actual final cost incurred by the city for additional
construction inspection services, the difference between the total additional
per day fee and the city's actual final cost shall be rebated by the city to
the developer.
      (4)   The City Council may by resolution accept improvements after
receipt of a written notice of a satisfactory final inspection by the City
Engineer and the posting of a maintenance guarantee.
   (D)   Guarantee of performance and maintenance.
      (1)   The subdivider shall guarantee the completion of all required
improvements within a period of two years after the approval of the final plat
by a construction performance bond, subdivision bond or certified check. Said
guarantee shall be in the amount of 100% of the estimated construction costs of
such uncompleted improvements as determined by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The subdivider shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of
100% of the construction cost of all sewers and street improvements. The
maintenance period for all street and sewer improvements shall be four years
except the maintenance period for all sidewalk improvements is hereby changed
from four years to two years from the date of city acceptance of the completed
improvements. Said guarantees shall be in the amount of 100% for the first
year, 75% the second year, 50% the third year, and 25% the fourth year.
      (3)   If the required improvements are not completed within the required
time or if improvements are not satisfactorily maintained for the required
time, the subdivider shall be automatically in default and the guarantee of
performance shall be applied by the city to the costs of completing or
restoring said improvements.
(Ord. 14776, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 14844, passed 09-09-2008)
§ 157.008 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Enforcing officer and appeals. The Director of Public Works upon
recommendations of the Planning Commission and in conformity to the provisions
of this chapter is hereby designated as the enforcing officer for the
administration of this chapter. Any party having an interest in any matter
dealt with by the provisions of this chapter and aggrieved by a decision of the
Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission, the Director of Public Works, or
officer delegated to issue permits of any kind hereunder, may file a written
appeal within 45 days thereafter to the City Council. The City Council after
giving a ten day published notice shall conduct a public hearing on such appeal
and shall receive and consider the proofs offered for or against the decision
appealed from and determine the same by majority vote of the whole number of
Council members. The person aggrieved, if the Council vote is unfavorable, may
within 30 days further appeal to the District Court under certiorari for review
of the Council's action.
   (B)   Building and occupancy permits. No building permit shall be issued by
any governing official for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement on any land henceforth subdivided until all requirements of this
chapter have been fully complied with. No certificate of occupancy shall be
granted for the use of any structure within any subdivision approved for
platting until required utilities and roadways have been installed and made
ready for service to the property.
   (C)   Variances and exceptions. When the subdivider can show to the Planning
Commission that a provision of these regulations, or provisions, if strictly
enforced, would cause unnecessary hardship because of topographic or other non-
created or non-self-inflicted conditions peculiar to the site being developed,
and a variance or exception can be permitted without destroying the intent of
this chapter, nor interfere with carrying out the Comprehensive Plan, the
Planning Commission may make such variance or modification of the development
plan so that such hardship may be relieved and the public interest served, but
such waiver or modification shall not authorize or release the requirements for
the public improvements as are required under this Platting Ordinance.
   (D)   Planned unit development under zoning ordinance.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter establish requirements concerning
the platting of lots for sale and the construction of public improvements to
service the lots in order to improve the development of the city. To encourage
even better development a Planned Unit Development procedure is established
which will provide more flexibility in the application of these provisions.
      (2)   Provisions for Planned Unit Development shall be as described in
the City of Marshalltown, Iowa, Zoning Ordinance. Under certain procedures and
conditions specified therein these Land Subdivision Regulations may be modified
for a specific development only. Modifications may include, but are not limited
to: lots of smaller size, private utilities, more than one principal structure
on each lot and lots which do not abut a dedicated public street. In essence,
the approved drawings and accompanying materials become the zoning provisions
and land subdivision regulations for the affected development.
   (E)   Auditor's plats. Auditor's plats as are required under I.C.A. § 354.13
shall not be filed and recorded unless and until the same shall have been
reviewed and approved by the City Plan and Zoning Commission and the City
Council as required by I.C.A. § 354.15.
   (F)   Amendments. Prior to amending the subdivision regulations the City
Council shall refer the proposals to the Planning Commission for its
recommendation.
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
      (1)   Any person who violates any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
than $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
      (2)   In the event of a violation or threatened violation of this
chapter, the City Council or any member thereof, in addition to other remedies,
may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate such violations or threatened violations, and it shall be the duty of
the City Solicitor to prosecute such action. In addition to any other penalty
herein violation of the terms or provisions of this chapter is a Municipal
Infraction.
CHAPTER 158: VACANT PROPERTY CODE
Section
   
158.001   Purpose
   
158.002   Definitions
   
158.003   Applicability
   
158.004   Registration required
   
158.005   Vacant property standards
   
158.006   Exemptions
   
158.007   Violation and enforcement
   
158.008   Appeals
§ 158.001 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a vacant property
code registration and maintenance program as a mechanism for preserving and
promoting public health, safety, prosperity, and welfare; to abate and prevent
public and private nuisances and potential fire hazards; and to provide for
administration, enforcement, and penalties. This chapter applies to all
property types in the city.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING/STRUCTURE. A subordinate building the use of which is
incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or land. (e.g., a
garden house, greenhouse, garage, carport or shed).
   AGENT. A designated representative of the property owner who may act on
behalf of and make decisions for the owner with regard to the vacant property.
   AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL. The Housing & Community Development Director and the
Director’s designees, including but not limited to, members of the city staff
such as the Building Official, Building Inspector, Rental Housing Inspector,
Code Enforcement Inspector or independent contractors appointed by the Director
alike, shall oversee the administration and enforcement of this code. Work may
include but is not limited to completion of administrative work, inspections or
assessments, and/or other necessary actions in order to ensure compliance.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. A building is deemed to be dangerous if it meets any of
the definitions set forth in §
151.036 or §
95.002.
   EXTERIOR PREMISES. The open space on the premises or the portion of the
premises upon which there is not a structure.
   GOOD REPAIR. Free from blight and hazardous conditions, clean, sanitary, and
safe.
   ILLEGALLY OCCUPIED. Shall include any occupancy in violation of city
ordinances.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   JUNK. Scrap metals or scrap materials, abandoned, dismantled or partially
dismantled machinery, motor vehicles, other vehicles or appliances.
   MIXED OCCUPANCY. Occupancy of a building in part for residential use and in
part for some other use not accessory thereto.
   OCCUPANT. Any person other than the record owner who leases or otherwise
lawfully resides in a building or premises, or a portion of a building or
premises.
   OWNER. Any person holding title to the premises, or with a legal or
equitable interest in the property, as recorded in the Office of the Recorder
for Marshall County, or as recorded on the Marshall County assessment rolls.
   PARTIALLY VACANT. A building that has one or more stories or dwelling units
vacant.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A natural person who is the owner, operator, agent or
manager of any building, structure, or premises and is responsible for the
property’s maintenance and/or management.
   REFUSE. All garbage, rubbish, ashes, or other substances offensive to sight
or smell, dangerous to the public health, or detrimental to the best interests
of the community.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the
ground or attached to something having location on the ground.
   UNOCCUPIED. A building which lacks of physical presence of an occupant for
at least 180 consecutive days for the purpose for which it was erected or a
building unfit for occupancy due to a failure to meet minimum standards set out
by city ordinances. The storage of products, materials, or other personal
property does not constitute occupancy unless authorized by the city zoning
ordinance.
   VACANT BUILDING. 
      (1)   A building shall be deemed to be vacant if it is unoccupied and/or
no person currently resides in the building or operates a lawful business open
regularly for business (with the exception of holidays and seasonal
businesses), and if it meets one or more of the following.
         (a)   Unsecured or secured by means other than those used in the
design of the building;
         (b)   Declared unfit for occupancy as determined by the Building
Official or other authorized representative;
         (c)   Been deemed a dangerous and/or dilapidated building by the city;
         (d)   Subject to housing, building, fire, health and safety, nuisance
or zoning code violations; or
         (e)   Lacks one or more utilities for a period of at least 180
consecutive days.
      (2)   VACANT BUILDINGS do not include any buildings being constructed
pursuant to a valid building permit issued by the city that is progressing in
accordance with time lines authorized under the issuance of the permit.
   VACANT LOT. A parcel of ground that does not contain a building or structure
and is not owned by the owner of an adjoining parcel containing a principal
building or structure.
   VACANT PROPERTY. Includes both vacant lots and vacant buildings.
   WASTE. Garbage, ashes, rubbish, refuse, or trash.
   WEEDS. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation which
may constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings
in any zoning district in the city vacant or partially vacant for 180
consecutive days.
   (B)   Conflict. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other provisions of the code, the provision
which established the higher standard for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare shall prevail.
   (C)   Application of other ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to authorize the use of a structure or premises contrary to any other
provision of the code. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure shall
be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of state and local
laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set
aside any provision of the city zoning ordinance or building code.
   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city, or its officers
or agencies, under state laws or this code, including the zoning ordinance,
relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous,
unsafe, and/or unsanitary, or the abatement of public nuisances.
   (E)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
structures designated by the federal government, state, or city as historic
buildings. Any work to said structures shall also comply with current
International Building Code or International Existing Building Code as
applicable and as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.004 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Vacant property registration required.
      (1)   Vacant lot. The owner of any vacant lot to which this chapter
applies shall be required to register the property within 90 days of
acquisition.
      (2)   Vacant building. The owner of a vacant building to which this
chapter applies shall be required to register the property within 90 days of
becoming vacant. Upon enactment of this chapter of the city code, any vacant
building must register no later than July 1, 2021.
   (B)   Vacant property registration form. The required form shall be
completed by the property owner or agent and submitted to the Housing &
Community Development Department. The owner/agent is responsible for updating
the registration form annually and as changes occur. The registration form
shall require information including, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Contact information for all owners. If the owner does not reside
within the state, the owner shall provide the name, address, telephone number,
and email address of an agent who is available for service of process within
the state. If the owner is other than a natural person or persons, the
following shall apply, as appropriate:
         (a)   If the owner is a corporation, limited liability company, or
limited or general partnership, the registration statement shall provide the
names and addresses of all responsible persons and the name and business
address of the registered agent for service of process appointed pursuant to
the Iowa Code.
         (b)   If an estate, the name and address of the executor of the
estate.
         (c)   If a trust, the names and addresses of the trustee or trustees.
         (d)   If a partnership, the names and addresses of the partner or
partners.
      (2)   Contact information for a responsible person, as defined by this
chapter, who is a natural person who may be contacted at all times for
inspections, emergency repairs, or maintenance, and who can respond to the
vacant property when requested.
      (3)   Proof of insurance coverage for the property including the
following minimum amounts.
         (a)   One hundred thousand dollars in general liability coverage; and
         (b)   Fire and casualty coverage for all structures equal to no less
than their replacement value, as determined by the applicant’s insurance
provider, or a minimum of $50,000; or
         (c)   If insurance is not able to be obtained, a bond in the amount of
$50,000 can be secured in the city’s favor to ensure all structures on the
property can be properly demolished and removed in the event of destruction
without taxing public resources.
         (d)   If neither insurance or bond is secured, an uninsured property
fee will be charged annually.
      (4)   Proposed plans for the property and corresponding timeline for
action. This may include any new construction, redevelopment, rehabilitation,
or demolition plans for the property.
      (5)   An acknowledgment by the owner/agent that grass and weeds shall not
exceed a height of ten inches and a plan for how the owner will comply with
this requirement, including (if applicable) the name and telephone number of
any company engaged to manage grass and weeds at the property.
      (6)   An acknowledgment by the owner that snow and ice shall be removed
from the public right-of-way within 24 hours of snowfall and a plan for how the
owner will comply with this requirement, including (if applicable) the name and
telephone number of any company engaged to provide snow and ice removal
services at the property.
      (7)   An acknowledgment by the applicant that the owner is aware of and
understands the vacant property standards set forth in §
158.004.
   (C)   Vacant property registration fee. A registration fee shall be
collected at the time of registration and annually thereafter. Failure to
register a vacant property will result in the city charging an unregistered
property fee. All fees will be set by resolution.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.005 VACANT PROPERTY STANDARDS.
   All vacant buildings subject to registration shall comply with the following
standards:
   (A)   Building openings. Doors, windows, and other openings shall be
weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and trespassers.
Missing or broken glass in doors, windows, and other such openings shall be
repaired and/or replaced with glass within 12 months of becoming vacant. No
building opening shall be boarded for more than 12 months. All first floor or
ground level windows, doors, and openings shall be free of any posters, paper,
or fabric coverings.
   (B)   Waste removal. All waste, debris, rubbish, and garbage shall be
removed from the exterior of the property and from areas visible from the
public right-of-way and adjacent properties such as porches, carports, or other
open areas.
   (C)   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects which might admit moisture, rain, or roof draining
and shall allow for sufficient drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the interior of the building.
   (D)   Building structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and structurally sound. The building shall be maintained in a sanitary manner
and in a manner that does not pose a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
   (E)   Structural members. The structural members shall be free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
   (F)   Foundation walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained in a
structurally sound and sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare, shall be capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be free from open
cracks and breaks, free from leaks, and resistant to vermin.
   (G)   Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (H)   Decorative features. The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terracotta
trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be safe, anchored and
in good repair. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (I)   Overhanging extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar
features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe, and sound. Exposed metal,
wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay
or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
   (J)   Appurtenance. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance
or ornamentation on the exterior thereof shall be of sufficient strength or
stability, and anchored so as to be capable of resisting wind pressure of one-
half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted
in the building code for such buildings.
   (K)   Chimneys and towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed
metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe for
pedestrian travel, and shall be free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal
shall be completed within 24 hours of a snowfall.
   (M)   Accessory building/structures. Accessory buildings and structures such
as garages, sheds, and fences shall be free from safety, health, and fire
hazards; and, shall comply with these vacant building maintenance standards.
   (N)   Exterior premises. The surrounding premises upon which the structure
or building is located shall be clean, safe, sanitary, free from waste,
rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, shall not be used for exterior storage,
and shall not pose a threat to public health, welfare, or safety.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.006 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Property actively listed for sale or lease. A vacant property that is
actively listed and offered for sale or lease shall be exempt from the
registration requirement subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The property is offered for sale at a price not to exceed 25% the
assessed value as documented by the County Assessor’s Office unless the owner
is able to submit recent comparable market data which justify a higher value.
      (2)   The property is offered for lease at a proposed rent that is
comparable with the rental market throughout the community.
      (3)   If after 12 months of active listing, the property remains vacant,
registration shall be required.
   (B)   Temporary vacancy of owner-occupied dwellings. A vacant owner-occupied
residential property where the owner resides elsewhere for less than six months
per calendar year shall be exempt from the registration requirement.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.007 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspection and assessment. The city is authorized to inspect and
assess the property for compliance. Access to the interior of any building
shall be with owner consent or pursuant to an administrative search warrant.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter. If the city determines the property is in
violation of any provision of this chapter, the city may notify the owner of
the violation by providing a notice of violation via regular and certified mail
and posting at a conspicuous place on the property. The notice of violation
shall identify the sections in violation, required corrective action, and a
time frame for compliance.
   (C)   Violations of other applicable city codes. Registered properties shall
remain subject to compliance with other applicable city code provisions
including but not limited to those pertaining to nuisances, property
maintenance, zoning, building, and fire. Violations of other applicable code
provisions will follow corresponding enforcement procedures.
   (D)   Failure to comply. If the owner fails to take corrective action within
the specified time frame, the City reserves the right to pursue all available
legal remedies including without limitation issuance of a municipal infraction
citation pursuant to §
10.999 or pursuit of title to the property pursuant to I.C.A. § 657A.10B.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
§ 158.008 APPEALS.
   The owner shall have the right to appeal a notice of violation by the
authorized official to the Building Board of Appeals as outlined in § .
   (A)   Written request for appeal. A written request for an appeal must be
submitted within ten calendar days from the date on the notice of violation to
the Housing & Community Development Director. The written request shall include
the following:
      (1)   Date;
      (2)   Owner’s name;
      (3)   Owner’s address;
      (4)   Owner’s phone number;
      (5)   Property address or parcel number;
      (6)   Information supporting the owner’s position.
   (B)   Setting the hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the
written appeal, the Board of Appeals shall fix a date, time and place of
hearing. Said hearing shall be not less than five days nor more than 20 days
from the date the written notice of appeal is filed.
   (C)   Failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of
rights to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or
any portion thereof.
   (D)   Matters of consideration. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (E)   Decision. After hearing all testimony, the Board of Appeals shall have
15 days to issue a decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall contain
findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements
to be complied with. The decision shall be served on the appellant by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. 15019, passed 5-24-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      III.   URBAN REVITALIZATION PLAN AND URBAN RENEWAL PLANS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting Interstate Power & Light Company the right and
                     franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and
14806    4-9-2007    operate a natural gas distribution system in the city and
                     the right to lay down, operate and maintain the necessary
                     pipes, mains and other conductors and appliances in the
                     city
                     Granting Interstate Power & Light Company the right and
                     franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and
14807    4-9-2007    operate in the city, works and plants for the manufacture
                     and generation of electricity and a distribution system
                     for electric light, heat and power in the city
                    
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Rezoning approximately 34.7 acres including Parcel 8318-
14979    11-26-2018  11-426-005 and Parcel 8318-11-426-007 from R-2 Low Density
                     Residential to TN Traditional Neighborhood
                     Rezoning properties at 108, 110, 112 and 114 N. 3rd Avenue
14981    3-25-2019   from R-4 Medium Density Residential to TN Traditional
                     Neighborhood
                     Rezoning approximately 73.76 acres including Parcels 8418-
14989    11-25-2019  26-229-015, 8418-25-151-001 and 8418-25-101-002 from R-
                     2 Low Density Residential to M-2 Heavy Industry
                     Rezoning approximately 17.51 acres including Parcel 8418-
14993    2-10-2020   34-4094-005 south of Washington Street from R-2 Low
                     Density Residential to R-4 Medium Density Residential
                     Rezoning approximately 0.43 acres along East Southridge
15003    10-12-2020  Road from PUD Planned Unit Development to R-2A Low Density
                     Residential
                     Rezoning Lot 61, in Sugar Creek Estates 7th Addition to
15014    4-12-2021   Marshall from PUD Planned Unit Development to R-2A Low
                     Density Residential
                     Rezoning approximately 9.28 acres including Parcel 8318-
15017    3-22-2021   11-426-011, 421 E. Merle Hibbs Blvd. from TN Traditional
                     Neighborhood District to CC Community Commercial District
                     Rezoning of approximately 225 acres including Parcels
                     8418-25-126-001, 8418- 25-176-001, 8418-25-201-001, 8418-
15027    10-11-2021  25-201-002, 8418-25-226-001, 8418-25-276-001, the west 500
                     feet of Parcel 8417-30-100-003 (2002 Marion Street) from
                     R-2 Low Density Residential and A-1 Agricultural Reserved
                     to M-2 Heavy Industry
15068    7-24-2023   Rezoning 201 E. Merle Hibbs Boulevard, Parcel 8318-11-426-
                     012, from Mixed-Use to General Commercial
                     Rezoning Lots 1 - 25 and Outlots A and B, Block 1,
15089    7-22-2024   Creekside Estates Addition, from Mixed-Use to Medium
                     Residential
15100    5-27-2025   Rezoning Lots 166 - 175 in Melrose Park Addition from
                     Medium Density Residential to General Industrial
15101    6-23-2025   Rezoning 915, 917 and 919 S. Center Street from Medium
                     Density Residential to Mixed-Use
                     Lots 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, and 16, Block 1, Woods Addition and
15102    6-23-2025   Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, Block 2, Woods addition and Lots
                     11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16, Block 3, Woods Addition from
                     Medium Density Residential to General Industrial
                    
 
TABLE III: URBAN REVITALIZATION PLAN AND URBAN RENEWAL PLANS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
15048    9-26-2022   Providing for the division of taxes levied on taxable
                     property in the Marshalltown Urban Renewal Area No. 7
15088  6-10-2024   Amending the Marshalltown Urban Revitalization Area No. 3
                     Amending Ord. 13657 relating to partial property tax
15093    10-14-2024  exemptions for industrial property on which improvements
                     have been made, providing a schedule of tax exemptions and
                     setting for the procedure to obtain same
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Iowa Code Annotated
References to 2013 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE ANNOTATED
I.C.A. Section Code Section
I.C.A. Section            Code Section
4.1                       10.002
4.1(20)                   92.001
4.1(26)                   10.005
Ch. 8C                    156.C.009
Ch. 17A                   54.010
Ch. 18B                   156.A.003
Ch. 21                    54.010,
                          156.J.002
Ch. 22                    156.J.002
Ch. 35C                   31.045
74A.4                     52.005,
                          52.007
Ch. 80D                   33.035
80D.7                     33.041
Ch. 100                   91.002
Ch. 123                   112.001,
                          112.015
123.1 et seq.             112.003
123.122                   112.015
123.143                   112.020
123.2                     112.016
123.30                    112.017
123.32(2)                 112.018
123.39                    112.016,
                          112.019
123.40                    112.019
123.49(2)b                112.021
123.49(2)h                112.003
123.50                    112.016
123.51                    112.021
Ch. 124                   130.032
124.101, sub. 5           95.002
Ch. 135O                  156.C.005
137C.2(5)                 116.001
137C.25E                  116.001
Ch. 211                   152.003
231A.1                    156.M.003
Ch. 321                   70.077,
                          73.040
321G.1                    73.040
321.G.9(2)                73.049
321.G.9(3)d               73.048
321G.9(4)a                73.043
321.1                     70.001,
                          71.090
321.1(16)                 71.013,
                          74.001
321.124                   70.001
321G.13(1)                73.047
321G.13(11)               73.049
321.2, subsec. 1, para. b Ch. 77, Sch. IX
321.228                   70.002
321.229                   70.003
321.230                   70.004
321.231                   70.010
321.233                   70.005
321.234                   70.006
321.236(9)                71.040
321.248                   71.090
321.251(1)                70.007
321.255                   70.040
321.256                   70.041
321.259                   Ch. 76, Sch. VI
321.260                   Ch. 76, Sch. VI
321.261                   70.025
321.262                   70.026
321.263                   70.027
321.264                   70.028
321.265                   70.029
321.265                   70.029
321.277                   71.025
321.278                   71.026
321.285(6)                70.005
321.288                   71.027
321.291                   71.028
321.294                   71.029
321.295                   71.010
321.297                   71.001
321.298                   71.002
321.299                   71.003
321.302                   71.004
321.303                   71.005
321.304                   71.006
321.305                   71.007
321.306                   71.008
321.307                   71.009
321.311                   71.040
321.312                   71.041
321.313                   71.042
321.314                   71.043
321.315                   71.044
321.316                   71.045
321.317(1)                71.045
321.318                   71.046
321.319                   71.060
321.320                   71.061
321.321                   71.062
321.322                   71.063
321.323                   71.064
321.324                   71.065
321.325                   75.001
321.326                   75.002
321.327                   75.003
321.328                   75.004
321.329                   75.008
321.330                   75.005
321.331                   75.006
321.332                   75.007
321.333                   75.007
321.340                   71.011
321.341 through 321.344   72.070
321.350                   72.071
321.354 through 321.356   72.015
321.357                   72.014
321.358                   72.010
321.359                   72.016
321.360                   72.017
321.361                   72.018
321.362                   71.080
321.363                   71.081
321.365                   71.083
321.367                   71.084
321.368                   71.085
321.369                   71.086
321.370                   71.086
321.371                   71.086
321.372                   71.089
321.383                   71.027
321.384                   73.019
321.384 et seq.           70.009
321.433                   70.010
321.449                   71.027,
                          72.070
321.451                   70.001
321.473                   74.001
321.484                   70.011
321L.5                    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
321L.6                    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
321L.8                    Ch. 77, Sch. IX
Ch. 329                   156.C.009
Ch. 351                   90.021
                          Ch. 76, Sch. I,
Ch. 354                   157.001,
                          157.002,
                          157.004
354.9                     157.001
354.11                    157.004
354.13                    157.008
354.15                    157.008
Ch. 355                   157.004
355.6                     157.006
362.3                     156.J.002
Ch. 364                   114.020,
                          156.A.003
364.12                    95.003
364.12(3)                 53.020
                          10.999,
                          52.999,
                          54.999,
364.22                    55.999,
                          70.075,
                          70.076 ,
                          72.999,
                          114.999
364.22(2)                 151.999
364.3                     10.999
Ch. 368                   156.A.003
Ch. 372                   156.A.003
372.4                     30.001
372.14                    34.002
372.15                    31.031
Ch. 380                   156.A.003
380.4                     156.J.002
380.8                     10.001
Ch. 384                   52.024,
                          95.009
384.91                    31.046
                          Ch. 150,
                          156.A.003,
Ch. 414                   156.C.006,
                          156.I.002,
                          156.I.003,
                          156.J.002
414.4                     156.C.006
414.5                     156.C.006
414.6                     Ch. 150,
                          150.010
414.7                     156.M.003
414.15                    156.G.007
414.21                    156.C.006
414.22                    156.M.003
431.5, sub. 3             156.C.007
431.5, sub. 5             156.C.007
435.26                    156.C.007
441.29                    157.002
Ch. 455B                  52.049,
                          52.999
455B.381(1)               92.001
455B.381(4)               92.001
455B.381(5)               92.001
Ch. 481A                  90.071
Ch. 481B                  90.071
Ch. 542B                  157.002
558.65                    Ch. 76, Sch. I
661                       152.003
657A.10B                  158.007
Chs. 687 through 747      10.999
702.22                    131.003
708.1                     132.002
709.9                     130.016
714.5                     131.003
714.16(2)(a)              130.014
716.7                     131.004
718.2                     130.013
718.4                     130.013
723.2                     130.001
Ch. 723A                  95.002
727.2                     130.018
727.10                    133.005
801.4                     70.001
808.12                    131.003
808.14                    95.005
                          
 
REFERENCES TO 2013 CODE
2013 Code 2019 Code
2013 Code     2019 Code
1-1           10.001
1-2           10.002
1-3           10.003
1-4           10.004
1-5           10.005
1-6           10.006
1-7           10.007
1-8           10.999
1-9           10.999
1-10          10.999
1-11          10.999
1-12          10.008
2-1           30.001
2-2           31.015
2-3           31.016
2-4           31.017
2-6           30.002
2-16          31.001
2-18          31.002
2-34          31.030
2-35          31.031
2-36          31.032
2-151         31.045
2-152         31.045
2-153         31.045
2-154         31.045
2-155         31.045
2-156         31.045
2-157         31.045
2-158         31.045
2-169         31.046
2-190         31.999
2-201         31.048
2-202         31.048
2-203         31.048
2-204         31.048
2-205         31.048
2-206         31.048
5-1           112.001
5-2           112.002
5-26          112.015,
              112.017
5-34          112.017
5-34          112.018
5-42          112.019
5-44          112.020
5-45          112.021
5-47          112.021
5-51          112.023
5-53          112.023
5-54          112.023
5-101         112.003
5-102         112.003
5-103         112.003
5-104         112.003
5-105         112.003
5-125         112.035
5-126         112.036
5-127         112.037
5-128         112.038,
              112.999
5-129         112.039,
              112.999
5-130         112.040
5-131         112.041
5-132         112.042
5-151         112.004
6-1           90.001
6-1.1         90.002
6-2           90.002
6-3           90.003
6-5           90.004
6-6           90.004
6-7           90.005
6-8           90.006
6-18          90.020
6-19          90.021
6-20          90.022
6-21          90.023
6-22          90.024
6-22          90.999
6-23          90.025
6-24          90.026
6-25          90.027
6-26          90.028
6-27          90.029
6-29          90.030
6-30          90.031
6-31          90.031
6-32          90.031
6-33          90.031
6-34          90.031
6-35          90.032
6-36          90.033
6-37          90.034
6-38          90.035
6-51          90.050
6-51          90.056
6-51.1        90.051
6-51.2        90.052
6-52          90.053
6-53          90.054
6-54          90.055
6-55          90.056
6-61          90.070
6-62          90.071
7-1           151.001,
              151.999
7-17          151.015
7-18          151.016
7-19          151.016
7-20          151.017
7-21          151.018
7-22          151.019
7-23          151.020
7-24          151.021
7-25          151.022
7-26          151.023
7-27          151.024
7-30          151.035
7-31          151.036
7-32          151.037
7-33          151.038
7-34          151.039
7-35          151.040
7-36          151.040
7-37          151.042
8-1.1         114.001
8-1.2         114.002
8-2.1         114.020
8-2.2         114.021
8-2.3         114.022
8-2.4         114.023
8-2.5         114.024
8-2.6         114.025
8-3.1         114.040
8-3.2         114.041,
              114.059
8-3.3         114.042
8-3.4         114.043
8-3.5         114.044
8-3.6         114.045
8-3.7         114.046
8-3.8         114.047
8-3.9         114.048
8-3.10        114.049
8-3.11        114.050
8-3.12        114.051
8-3.13        114.052
8-3.14        114.053
8-3.15        114.054
8-3.16        114.055
8-3.17        114.056
8-3.18        114.057
8-3.19        114.058
8-3.21        114.060
8-3.22        114.061
8-3.23        114.062
8-3.24        114.063
8-3.25        114.064
8-4.1         114.075
8-4.2         114.076
8-4.3         114.077
8-4.4         114.078
8-4.5         114.079
8-4.6         114.080
8-4.7         114.081
8-4.8         114.082
8-4.9         114.083
8-4.10        114.084
8-5.1         114.095
8-5.2         114.096
8-5.3         114.097
8-5.4         114.098
8-5.5         114.099
8-5.6         114.100
8-5.7         114.101
8-6.1         114.115
8-6.2         114.116
8-6.3         114.117
8-6.4         114.118
8-6.5         114.119
8-6.6         114.120
8-6.7         114.121
8-6.8         114.122
8-6.9         114.123
8-7.1         114.135
8-7.2         114.136
8-7.3         114.137
8-7.4         114.138
8-7.5         114.139
8-7.6         114.140
8-7.7         114.141
8-7.8         114.142
8-8.1         114.155
8-8.2         114.156
8-8.3         114.157
8-8.4         114.158
8-8.5         114.159
8-8.6         114.160
8-8.7         114.161
8-8.8         114.162
8-8.9         114.163
8-8.10        114.164
8-8.11        114.999
8-9.1         114.003
8-9.2         114.004
8-9.3         114.005
8-9.4         114.006
8-9.5         114.007
9-1           34.001
9-2           34.002
9-4           34.003
9-5           34.004
9-6           34.005
9-7           34.004
9-8           34.006
9-9           34.007
10-16         11.001
10-17         11.002
10-18         11.003
10-19         11.004
10-20         11.005
10-23         11.006
11-1          154.001
11-2          154.002
11-3          154.003
11-4          154.035
11-37         154.050
11-38         154.051
11-39         154.052
11-40         154.053
11-41         154.054
11-42         154.055
11-44         154.057
11-45         154.056,
              154.058
11-46         154.058
11-47         154.059
11-48         154.059
11-49         154.060
11-61         154.015
11-62         154.016
11-63         154.017
11-64         154.018
11-66         154.020
11-67         154.021
11-68         154.022
11-69         154.023
11-81         154.075
11-82         154.076
11-83         154.077
11-84         154.078
11-85         154.079
11-86         154.079
11-87         154.080
11-88         154.081
11-89         154.082
11-91         154.082
11-92         154.082
11-93         154.083
11-99         154.085
11-100        154.085
11-101        154.085
11-102        154.086
11-103        154.087
11-104        154.088
11-105        154.089
11-106        154.090
11-107        154.091
11-108        154.092
11-109        154.093
11-110        154.999
12-3          91.003
12-4          91.004
12-5          91.005
12-24         32.015
12-27         32.016
12-28         32.016
12-31         32.999
12-41 - 12-44 32.018
12-46 - 12-50 32.018
12-60 - 12-64 32.018
12-77         91.020
12-78         91.021
12-79         91.022
12-80         91.023
12-81         91.024
12-85         91.026
12-86         91.999
12-96         32.001
12-97         32.002
12-98         32.002
13-1          50.001
13-2          50.002
13-3          50.002
13-10         50.020
13-11         50.021
13-12         50.022
13-14         50.023
13-15         50.024
13-16         50.025
13-17         50.026
13-18         50.027
13-19         50.028
13-20         50.029
13-22         50.030
13-53         50.020
13-77         50.045
13-78         50.046
13-83         50.020
13-106        50.047
13-115        50.027
14-2          115.999
14-3          115.001
14-4          115.002
14-73         115.004
14-75         115.003
14-76         153.001
14-77         153.002
14-78         153.999
14.5-1        92.001
14.5-2        92.002
14.5-3        92.002
14.5-4        92.002
14.5-5        92.004
14.5-6        92.005
14.5-7        92.005
17-1          110.001
17-1.1        110.002
17-1.2        110.003
17-2          110.004
17-3          110.005
17-4          110.006
17-5          110.007
17-6          110.999
17-111        91.040
17-112        91.041
17-113        91.042
17-193        119.001
17-194        119.002
17-195        119.003
17-196        119.004
17-197        119.005
17-198        119.006
17-199        119.007
17-200        119.008
17-201        119.009
17-202        119.010
17-203        119.011
17-204        119.012
17-205        119.013
17-206        119.014
17-207        119.015
17-219        33.020
17-220        33.020
17-221        33.022
17-222        33.023
17-223        33.024
17-224        33.025
17-225        33.026
17-245        33.999
20-1          70.001
20-2          70.002
20-3          70.003
20-4          70.004
20-5          70.005
20-6.1        70.999
20-7          70.007
20-8          70.008
20-9          70.009
20-10         70.010
20-12         70.011
20-13         70.012
20-14         70.013
20-26         70.025
20-27         70.026
20-28         70.027
20-29         70.028
20-30         70.029
20-36         70.040
20-37         70.041
20-38         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
20-39         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
20-40         Ch. 76, Sch. V
20-41         Ch. 76, Sch. V
20-42         Ch. 76, Sch. VI
20-43         Ch. 76, Sch. VI
20-44         Ch. 76, Sch. VI
20-45         Ch. 76, Sch. VI
20-46         Ch. 76, Sch. VI
20-46.1       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.2       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.3       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.4       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.5       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.6       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.7       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.8       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-46.9       Ch. 76, Sch. VII
20-47         71.001
20-48         71.002
20-49         71.003
20-51         71.004
20-52         71.005
20-53         71.006
20-54         71.007
20-55         71.008
20-56         71.009
20-57         71.010
20-58         71.011
20-59         71.012
20-60         71.013,
              71.999
20-76         71.025
20-77         71.026
20-78         Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
20-79         Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
20-80         71.027
20-81         71.028
20-82         71.029
20-91         71.040
20-92         71.041
20-93         71.042
20-94         71.043
20-95         71.044
20-96         71.045
20-97         71.045
20-98         71.046
20-111        71.060
20-112        71.061
20-113        71.062
20-114        71.063
20-115        71.064
20-116        71.065
20-151        75.001
20-152        75.002
20-153        75.003
20-154        75.004
20-155        75.005
20-156        75.006
20-157        75.007
20-158        75.008
20-160.6      Ch. 77, Sch. I
20-161        Ch. 77, Sch. II
20-161.1      Ch. 77, Sch. II
20-161.2      Ch. 77, Sch. II
20-162        Ch. 77, Sch. III
20-162.1      Ch. 77, Sch. III
20-162.2      Ch. 77, Sch. III
20-162.3      Ch. 77, Sch. III
20-163        Ch. 77, Sch. IV
20-163.1      Ch. 77, Sch. IV
20-163.2      Ch. 77, Sch. IV
20-164        Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-164.1      Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-164.2      Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-164.3      Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-164.4      Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-164.5      Ch. 77, Sch. V
20-165        Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-165.5      Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-166        Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-167        Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-167.1      Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-167.2      Ch. 77, Sch. VI
20-169        Ch. 77, Sch. VII
20-169.1      Ch. 77, Sch. VII
20-169.2      Ch. 77, Sch. VII
20-169.3      Ch. 77, Sch. VII
20-169.4      Ch. 77, Sch. VII
20-184        Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.1      Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.2      Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.3      Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.3.5    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.3.6    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-184.4      Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
20-185        Ch. 77, Sch. IX
20-185.1      Ch. 77, Sch. IX
20-185.2      Ch. 77, Sch. IX
20-221        Ch. 77, Sch. X
20-222        Ch. 77, Sch. X
20-223        Ch. 77, Sch. X
20-224        Ch. 77, Sch. X
20-281        73.015
20-283        73.016
20-286        73.017
20-289        73.018
20-290        73.019
20-346        73.040
20-347        73.041
20-348        73.042
20-349        73.043
20-350        73.044
20-352        73.045
20-353        73.045
20-354        73.047
20-358        73.048
20-359        73.049
20-360        73.049
20-361        73.051
20-363        73.052
20-364        73.053
20-365        73.054
20-366        73.054
20-367        73.054
20-368        73.055
20-386        71.080
20-387        71.081
20-388        71.082
20-389        71.083
20-390        71.084
20-391        71.085
20-392        71.086
20-393        71.086
20-394        71.086
20-395        71.087
20-396        71.088
20-397        71.089
20-398        71.090
20-399        71.091
20-399        71.999
20-400        71.092
20-401        71.092
20-402        71.092
20-403        71.093,
              71.999
21-1          130.001
21-1.1        130.002
21-2          130.003
21-3          130.004
21-4          130.005
21-4.1        130.006
21-5          130.007
21-8          131.001
21-9          130.008
21-10         130.030
21-11.1       130.030,
              130.999
21-12         130.031
21-12.5       130.032,
              130.999
21-13         130.009
21-14         131.002
21-15         133.001,
              133.999
21-16         133.001
21-17         133.002
21-19         133.003
21-20         133.004
21-21         133.005
21-22         132.001
21-25         132.002
21-31.1       130.999
21-31.2       130.049
21-33         130.010
21-36         130.011
21-37         130.012,
              130.999
21-37.1       130.012
21-38         130.013
21-39         130.013
21-40         130.050
21-45         131.003
21-47         130.014
21-48         130.015
21-49         131.004
21-51         131.005
21-52         130.016
21-52.1       130.017,
              130.999
21-54         130.018,
              130.999
21-58         130.019,
              130.999
21-60         131.006
21-61         95.001
21-62         95.002
21-63         95.003
21-64         95.004,
              95.999
21-65         95.005
21-66         95.006
21-67         95.006
21-68         95.006
21-69         95.007
21-70         95.008
21-71         95.009
21-72         95.009
21-73         95.999
21-74         95.010
21-100        151.055
21-102        151.056
21-102        151.999
21-151        116.001
21.5-2        93.001
21.5-3        93.001
21.5-4        93.001
21.5-5        93.001
21.5-6        93.002
21.5-7        93.003
21.5-8        93.004
21.5-9        93.005
21.5-10       93.999
21.5-11       93.006
21.5-12       93.007
22-12         150.001
22-13         150.002
22-14         150.003
22-15         150.003
22-16         150.004
22-17         150.005
22-18         150.006
22-21         150.006
22-25         150.007
22-28         150.008
22-30         150.009
22-31         150.009
22-32         150.009
22-33         150.010
22-34         150.010
22-35         150.010
24-1          33.001
24-12         33.002
24-14         33.003
24-15         33.003
24-17         33.003
24-19         33.004
24-21         33.005
24-22         33.006
24-25         33.007
24-61         33.035
24-62         33.036
24-63         33.037
24-64         33.038
24-65         33.039
24-66         33.039
24-67         33.041
24-68         33.042
24-69         33.043
25-16         74.001,
              74.999
25-17         74.001
25-18         74.001
25-35         74.002
26-1          57.001
26-3          57.001
26-4          57.002
26-5          57.002
26-6          57.004
26-16         57.015
26-17         57.015
26-18         57.017
26-19         57.018
26-20         57.019
26-22         57.020
26-23         57.021
26-24         57.022
26-25         57.023
26-27         57.024
26-44         57.038
26-45         57.041
26-51         57.053
26-52         57.054
26-53         57.054
26-54         57.054
26-55         57.055
26-55         57.999
26-67         151.070
26-68         151.071
26-69         151.072
26-70         151.073
26-71         151.074
26-72         151.075
26-73         151.076
26-74         151.076
26-75         151.077
26-76         151.078
26-77         151.079
26-87         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-88         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-89         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-90         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-91         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-92         Ch. 76, Sch. I
26-93         Ch. 76, Sch. II
26-94         Ch. 76, Sch. II
26-95         Ch. 76, Sch. II
26-96         Ch. 76, Sch. II
26-97         Ch. 76, Sch. II
26-100        Ch. 76, Sch. III
26-101        Ch. 76, Sch. III
26-102        Ch. 76, Sch. III
26-103        Ch. 76, Sch. III
26.5-1        155.001
26.5-2        155.002
26.5-3        155.003
26.5-4        155.004
26.5-5        155.999
28-16         51.001
28-17         51.001
28-18         51.001
28-19         51.001
28-20         51.001
28-21         51.001
28-22         51.001
28-23         51.001
28-24         51.002
28-25         51.003
28-26         51.003
28-27         52.001
28-28         52.002,
              52.003
28-29         52.003
28-30         52.003
28-31         52.003
28-32         52.004
28-33         52.005
28-34         52.006
28-35         52.007
28-41         52.020
28-42         52.021
28-43         52.022
28-44         52.023
28-45         52.024
28-46         52.025
28-47         52.026
28-48         52.027
28-49         52.028
28-50         52.029
28-51         52.030
28-52         52.031
28-53         52.999
28-61         52.045
28-62         52.046
28-63         52.047
28-64         52.048
28-65         52.049
28-66         52.049
28-67         52.049
28-68         52.051
28-69         52.999
28-76         52.065
28-77         52.066
28-78         52.067
28-79         52.068
28-80         52.069
28-81         52.070
28-82         52.071
28-83         52.072
28-84         52.073
28-85         52.073
28-86         52.074
28-87         52.075
28-88         52.076
28-89         52.077
28-90         52.078
28-91         52.079
28-92         52.080
28-93         52.081
28-94         52.082
28-95         52.083
28-96         52.084
28-97         52.084
28-98         52.999
28-99         52.999
28-120        53.001
28-121        53.002
28-122        53.003
28-123        53.004
28-124        53.005
28-125        53.006
28-126        53.007
28-127        53.008
28-128        53.009
28-129        53.020
28-130        53.021
28-131        53.022
28-132        53.023
28-133        53.024
28-134        53.025
28-135        53.026
28-136        53.026
28-137        53.026
28-138A       53.026
28-138B       53.026
28-139        53.026
28-140        54.001
28-141        54.002
28-142        54.003
28-143        54.004
28-144        54.005
28-145        54.006
28-146        54.007
28-147        54.008
28-148        54.009
28-149        54.999
28-150        54.010
28-160        55.001
28-161        55.002
28-162        55.003
28-163        55.004
28-164        55.005
28-165        55.006
28-166        55.007
28-167        55.007
28-168        55.007
28-169        55.008
28-170        55.009
28-171        55.010
28-172        55.011
28-173        55.999
28-174        55.012
28-175        55.013
28-201        56.001
28-202        56.002
28-203        56.003
28-204        56.004
28-205        56.005
28-206        56.006
28-207        56.007
28-208        56.008
28-209        56.999
28-210        56.009
28-211        56.010
              
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2018-155 8-29-2018   31.048
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1        8-14-1950   31.002,
                     31.045
9        8-14-1950   32.018
                     33.002,
10       8-14-1950   33.004,
                     33.006,
                     33.007
                     32.015 -
11       8-14-1950   32.017,
                     32.999
12       8-14-1950   32.018
16       8-14-1950   31.001
17       8-14-1950   31.046
20       8-14-1950   151.070 -
                     151.079
22       8-14-1950   57.999
                     57.001,
23       8-14-1950   57.053 -
                     57.055
                     57.015 -
24       8-14-1950   57.019,
                     57.021 -
                     57.024
29       8-14-1950   110.003 -
                     110.005
38       8-14-1950   74.002
40       8-14-1950   91.040 -
                     91.042
                     95.001,
                     95.005,
42       8-14-1950   95.006,
                     95.008,
                     95.009
                     112.003,
                     112.015,
47       8-14-1950   112.017,
                     112.018,
                     112.020,
                     112.021
48       8-14-1950   112.023
58       8-14-1950   75.007
61       8-14-1950   52.001
                     70.029,
66       8-14-1950   133.001,
                     133.999
                     70.001 -
                     70.006,
                     70.009 -
                     70.011,
                     70.025 -
                     70.028,
                     70.040,
                     70.041,
                     70.999,
                     71.001 -
                     71.011,
                     71.025,
                     71.027 -
                     71.029,
68       8-14-1950   71.041 -
                     71.046,
                     71.060 -
                     71.063,
                     71.065,
                     71.080,
                     71.081,
                     71.083 -
                     71.087,
                     71.089,
                     75.001 -
                     75.006,
                     75.008;
                     Ch. 76, Sch. VI;
                     Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
                     130.010,
                     130.011,
                     130.013 -
                     130.015,
                     131.001,
75       8-14-1950   131.003 -
                     131.005,
                     132.001 ,
                     132.002,
                     133.002 -
                     133.005
8048     3-28-1951   32.015
8086     4-24-1951   52.002 -
                     52.004
8142     7-10-1951   32.016
8141     7-11-1951   71.087
8463     1-26-1953   32.018
8597     1-27-1954   33.002
8764     1-24-1955   32.018
8775     2-28-1955   57.001
9025     2-27-1956   31.045
                     90.020,
                     90.023,
9073     6-25-1956   90.025 -
                     90.033,
                     90.054
9091     8-27-1956   57.019,
                     57.020
9161     1-28-1957   Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
9477     2-24-1958   90.001,
                     90.035
9751     1-13-1959   131.002
9801     4-28-1959   133.002
10292    7-16-1962   57.019
10324    11-12-1962  150.001 -
                     150.010
10440    7-11-1963   112.003,
                     112.021
10478    9-24-1963   133.002
                     119.001 -
10586    5-11-1964   119.004,
                     119.006 -
                     119.015
                     130.005,
10665    10-12-1964  130.007,
                     131.005
10717    3-23-1965   57.001
10722    4-13-1965   31.001
                     50.001 -
10761A   5-24-1965   50.003,
                     50.020 -
                     50.029
10842    12-15-1965  31.001
10838    12-17-1965  151.015 -
                     151.024
10860    12-29-1965  33.003
10877    2-28-1966   130.009
10905    5-11-1966   130.007
11059    5-9-1967    90.026,
                     90.029
11308    10-15-1968  71.089
11621    1-12-1969   31.999
11654    4-22-1970   50.001
11658    4-29-1970   70.008
11690    6-23-1970   90.001
11765    11-10-1970  74.002
11806    1-12-1971   130.001,
                     130.004
                     90.020,
                     90.023,
12017    4-11-1972   90.025 -
                     90.033,
                     90.054,
                     90.999
12240    5-3-1973    33.002
12288    8-27-1973   Ch. 157, Ed. Note
12376    12-26-1973  73.040 -
                     73.055
12390    1-15-1974   90.030,
                     90.054
12392    1-31-1974   151.999
12416    2-27-1974   151.999
                     95.001,
12447    4-11-1974   95.003 -
                     95.010,
                     95.999
12455    4-23-1974   130.001
12463    5-1-1974    90.021
12491    6-18-1974   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
12490    6-28-1974   150.001 -
                     150.010
12502    7-24-1974   71.090
12521    8-14-1974   70.008
                     30.001,
12723    6-16-1975   31.015 -
                     31.017
12716    7-8-1975    31.045
12749    8-11-1975   31.001
12750    8-15-1975   31.016,
                     31.017
                     33.002,
12786    9-22-1975   33.004 -
                     33.006
12788    9-22-1975   50.001
12787    9-25-1975   130.016
12797    10-16-1975  50.001
12837    12-26-1975  52.005
12975    7-28-1976   71.088
                     50.001 -
12993    9-27-1976   50.003,
                     50.020 -
                     50.030
                     155.001 -
13031    12-13-1976  155.004,
                     155.999
13033    12-13-1976  33.002
13149    6-13-1977   130.003
13162    6-27-1977   95.999
13202    9-12-1977   93.006,
                     93.999
13312    4-10-1978   151.999
13352    5-22-1978   33.002
13511    3-12-1979   57.004
13525    4-9-1979    130.006
13641    11-13-1979  Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
13677    2-25-1980   Ch. 77, Sch. VII
13710    4-14-1980   73.015 -
                     73.019
13862    12-9-1980   70.012
13933    3-23-1981   151.999
13987    5-11-1981   90.021,
                     90.026
14047    7-27-1981   52.006
                     93.001 -
14051    8-10-1981   93.005,
                     93.999
14067    8-24-1981   151.035 -
                     151.042
14089    10-26-1981  31.001
14129    2-8-1982    11.006
14130    2-8-1982    33.035 -
                     33.043
14135    7-12-1982   155.002
14137    8-9-1982    70.006,
                     70.999
14138    8-23-1982   130.019,
                     130.999
14159    6-27-1983   110.001
14165    10-10-1983  31.001
14169    11-14-1983  90.001,
                     95.001
14176    3-12-1984   33.002
14182    4-23-1984   Ch. 77, Sch. VI
14183    5-15-1984   151.999
14184    7-9-1984    91.003 -
                     91.005
14198    9-24-1984   70.013;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. III
14216    6-10-1985   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14218A   6-24-1985   70.013
14225    11-12-1985  Ch. 77, Sch. III
14228    4-14-1986   57.015,
                     151.016
14230    5-27-1986   151.999
14231    5-27-1986   91.003 -
                     91.005
                     90.020,
14232    5-27-1986   90.023,
                     90.026
14233    6-23-1986   32.018,
                     33.001
14252    4-27-1987   52.006
14253    4-27-1987   32.001 -
                     32.003
                     92.001 -
14256    5-11-1987   92.005,
                     92.999
                     90.050,
14261    8-10-1987   90.053,
                     90.055
14264    12-14-1987  31.001
14286    2-27-1989   151.017
14293    7-10-1989   112.003
14308    12-11-1989  10.999
                     115.001 -
14309    12-18-1989  115.004,
                     115.999
14310    1-8-1990    50.030
14315    4-9-1990    31.003,
                     31.032
14340    12-27-1990  50.001,
                     50.020
14345    3-25-1991   31.001
14346    4-8-1991    Ch. 157, Ed. Note
14353    8-26-1991   31.016
14357    9-23-1991   130.017,
                     130.999
14363    11-12-1991  11.001
14364    11-12-1991  71.012
14365    12-23-1991  74.001
14367    12-23-1991  74.001,
                     74.999
14369    1-13-1992   31.030 -
                     31.032
14374    3-23-1992   151.999
                     153.001,
14375    3-23-1992   153.002,
                     153.999
                     154.001 -
                     154.003,
                     154.015 -
                     154.023,
14392    8-14-1992   154.050 -
                     154.060,
                     154.075 -
                     154.093,
                     154.999
14394    10-12-1992  133.001,
                     133.999
14399    10-26-1992  71.090
14403    12-14-1992  57.002
14407    12-28-1992  Ch. 77, Sch. X
14408    12-28-1992  74.001,
                     74.999
14409    12-30-1992  130.999
                     71.013,
14414    2-8-1993    71.999,
                     74.001,
                     74.999
14417    3-22-1993   31.031
14373    3-23-1993   91.003 -
                     91.005
14423    4-26-1993   130.008
14424    4-26-1993   130.031
14425    5-10-1993   115.004
                     52.065 -
14438    8-23-1993   52.085,
                     52.999
14446    11-8-1993   52.068
14449    12-20-1993  112.002
14457    3-28-1994   31.048
14422    4-26-1994   130.049
14459    5-9-1994    33.020
                     33.020,
14459    5-9-1994    33.023 -
                     33.026
                     52.045 -
14461    5-23-1994   52.051,
                     52.999
                     50.001,
14473    8-8-1994    50.027,
                     50.048
                     50.001,
14472    8-25-1994   50.020,
                     50.045, -
                     50.046
14490    1-9-1995    Ch. 77, Sch. VI
14489    1-19-1995   130.030,
                     130.999
14494    2-13-1995   Ch. 77, Sch. V
14497    2-27-1995   73.043
14498    2-27-1995   130.006
14515    2-27-1995   153.002
14488    5-8-1995    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
14505    7-11-1995   Ch. 77, Sch. X
                     33.020,
14508    9-11-1995   33.021,
                     33.023 -
                     33.026
14513    11-13-1995  Ch. 77, Sch. VI
14514    11-13-1995  32.002
14525    2-12-1996   Ch. 77, Sch. V
14527    3-11-1996   112.003
14529    3-25-1996   130.032,
                     130.999
                     52.020 -
14531    3-25-1996   52.031,
                     52.999
14534    4-8-1996    151.999
                     115.001 -
14535    4-8-1996    115.004,
                     115.999
                     153.001,
14536    4-8-1996    153.002,
                     153.999
10904    5-11-1996   70.001
14542    6-10-1996   10.008
14543    6-10-1996   91.003
14543    6-10-1996   91.004
14543    6-10-1996   91.005
14545    6-24-1996   93.007,
                     93.999
14547    7-8-1996    30.002
14556    1-13-1997   Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
14557    2-10-1997   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14564    4-14-1997   52.051
14571    6-23-1997   51.001 -
                     51.004
14572    6-23-1997   52.029
14575    8-11-1997   130.999
                     114.001 -
                     114.007,
                     114.020 -
                     114.025,
                     114.040 -
                     114.064,
                     114.075 -
                     114.084,
14586    4-13-1998   114.095 -
                     114.101,
                     114.115 -
                     114.123,
                     114.135 -
                     114.142,
                     114.155 -
                     114.164,
                     114.999
14232    5-27-1998   90.021
14595    7-27-1998   Ch. 77, Sch. V
14601    9-14-1998   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14605    12-30-1998  90.022
                     33.004,
                     50.021,
                     57.015,
                     110.003,
14609    12-30-1998  119.003,
                     119.004,
                     119.007,
                     119.008,
                     119.012,
                     119.013
14614    1-11-1999   Ch. 77, Sch. V
14608    1-25-1999   Ch. 77, Sch. VI
14616    2-28-1999   Ch. 77, Sch. V
                     34.001 -
14622    3-22-1999   34.007,
                     34.999
14623    4-12-1999   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14627    4-12-1999   51.001
14626    6-28-1999   33.022
14642    2-14-2000   131.006
14643    2-14-2000   130.030,
                     130.999
14647    5-8-2000    153.001,
                     153.002
14648    5-8-2000    151.999
14668    2-26-2001   57.038
14678    8-27-2001   11.002 -
                     11.005
14686    12-10-2001  Ch. 77, Sch. VI
14688    11-2-2002   Ch. 157, Ed. Note,
                     157.006
14690    4-22-2002   52.051
14691    4-22-2002   52.029
14700    9-23-2002   31.045
14706    2-24-2003   51.001
                     90.001,
                     90.020 -
                     90.023,
                     90.025 -
14707    3-10-2003   90.035,
                     90.050,
                     90.053,
                     90.054 -
                     90.056,
                     90.999
                     130.017,
14709    3-24-2003   130.032,
                     130.999
                     50.001 -
14710    3-24-2003   50.003,
                     50.045
                     51.001,
14711    3-24-2003   51.003,
                     52.999
                     90.024,
                     90.034,
14709    3-25-2003   90.999,
                     133.001,
                     133.999
14712    5-28-2003   31.003
14713    7-14-2003   53.001
14716    7-14-2003   154.085,
                     154.088
14723    9-8-2003    71.999
14731    1-12-2004   52.007
14733    1-12-2004   110.002
14737    5-24-2004   154.085
14739    7-12-2004   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14740    7-12-2004   130.012
14741    7-12-2004   71.012
14742    8-16-2004   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14746    9-13-2004   53.026
14749    11-8-2004   130.012
14750    11-8-2004   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14748    12-27-2004  90.002,
                     90.003
14754    12-27-2004  154.035
14757    1-24-2005   90.029
14759    2-28-2005   31.001
14766    8-8-2005    57.001
14769    8-8-2005    73.015
14768    8-22-2005   130.030,
                     130.999
14773    10-10-2005  71.093
14776    11-14-2005  Ch. 157, Ed. Note,
                     157.007
14777    11-14-2005  57.023
14779    3-13-2006   57.041
14781    3-27-2006   Ch. 76, Sch. III
14780    4-24-2006   52.029
14784    6-12-2006   Ch. 77, Sch. IX;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. X
14787    9-25-2006   130.999
14789    10-23-2006  Ch. 77, Sch. III
                     151.055,
14793    1-8-2007    151.056,
                     151.999
14799    2-12-2007   112.004
                     54.001 -
14800    2-26-2007   54.010,
                     54.999
                     90.050 -
14801    3-12-2007   90.052,
                     90.054 -
                     90.056
14803    3-12-2007   151.999
                     91.003 -
14805    4-9-2007    91.005,
                     151.075
14806    4-9-2007    T.S.O. I
14807    4-9-2007    T.S.O. I
14818    9-10-2007   Ch. 77, Sch. III
14819    12-17-2007  154.035
14823    1-28-2008   31.048
                     55.001 -
14824    2-11-2008   55.013,
                     55.999
                     91.020 -
14825    2-11-2008   91.026,
                     91.999
14828    3-18-2008   Ch. 77, Sch. III
14832    5-27-2008   Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
14840    8-11-2008   Ch. 76, Sch. III
14844    9-9-2008    Ch. 157, Ed. Note,
                     157.007
14852    2-9-2009    52.051
                     56.001 -
14853    2-23-2009   56.010,
                     56.999
14854    4-13-2009   130.999
14855    4-13-2009   52.029
                     90.005,
                     90.006,
                     90.024, 90.036,
14861    9-14-2009   90.051,
                     90.052,
                     90.054,
                     90.999
14869    3-8-2010    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
                     52.006,
                     52.020,
                     52.021,
14870    3-8-2010    52.031,
                     52.045,
                     52.046,
                     52.051,
                     54.007
14870    3-10-2010   31.030
14872    4-26-2010   90.020,
                     93.003
14874    6-28-2010   Ch. 77, Sch. VI
                     70.009,
14875    7-12-2010   70.012,
                     71.012
14876    7-12-2010   50.027
14878    8-23-2010   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14878    8-23-2010   Ch. 77, Sch. X
14881    2-14-2011   Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
14884    3-14-2011   110.002
14879    3-28-2011   Ch. 77, Sch. I;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. X
14885    5-9-2011    10.999
14886    6-27-2011   110.002
14887    7-11-2011   116.001
14888    8-22-2011   11.002
                     112.003,
                     112.004,
14889    9-26-2011   112.035 -
                     112.042,
                     112.999
14892    11-28-2011  Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
14893    12-19-2011  71.086
14894    12-19-2011  131.006
14895    1-23-2012   154.035
14897    2-27-2012   31.048
14899    4-9-2012    52.066
14900    6-11-2012   153.001,
                     153.002
14910    8-13-2012   Ch. 77, Sch. VIII;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. X
14913    11-26-2012  50.027
                     52.029 -
14914    12-10-2012  52.031,
                     52.999
14915    2-25-2013   Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
14917    3-25-2013   Ch. 77, Sch. IV -
                     VI
                     53.001 -
                     53.005,
14918    4-22-2013   53.007 -
                     53.009,
                     53.020 -
                     53.026
14919    5-13-2013   90.056
14920    6-24-2013   151.056,
                     151.999
14924    7-22-2013   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14926    10-28-2013  Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
14928    11-11-2013  57.023
14935    8-25-2014   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14933    9-8-2014    10.999 
                     52.999
14934    9-8-2014    71.086
14936    1-26-2015   154.035
14937    1-26-2015   Ch. 76, Sch. VI
14944    1-11-2016   52.003;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. I
                     52.029 -
14945    3-14-2016   52.031,
                     52.999
14956    2-27-2017   53.006
                     57.001,
14959    3-13-2017   95.001 -
                     95.010,
                     95.999
                     52.066,
14969    9-25-2017   52.073,
                     52.080
        11-27-2017  90.034
                     10.999,
                     31.999,
                     52.077,
                     52.999,
                     56.999,
                     57.999,
                     70.006,
                     70.999,
                     71.090,
                     71.999,
                     90.024,
                     90.034,
                     90.999,
                     92.005,
                     93.006,
14970    11-27-2017  93.007,
                     93.999;
                     Ch. 76, Sch. VI;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. VII;
                     115.999,
                     130.012,
                     130.017,
                     130.019,
                     130.030,
                     130.032,
                     130.999,
                     133.001,
                     133.999,
                     151.056,
                     151.999,
                     153.999,
                     155.999
14971    3-13-2018   130.018,
                     130.999
14972    5-14-2018   154.035
14974    6-11-2018   Ch. 77, Sch. III;
                     Ch. 77, Sch. VII
                     57.002,
14973    7-9-2018    57.035 -
                     57.052
14977    8-27-2018   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14978    9-10-2018   151.035 -
                     151.042
14979    11-26-2018  T.S.O. II
14981    3-25-2019   T.S.O. II
14982    5-28-2019   Ch. 77, Sch. II
14983    6-10-2019   Adopting Ordinance
14985    7-22-2019   91.020 -
                     91.026
14987    9-23-2019   Ch. 77, Sch. II
14988    9-23-2019   Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14989    11-25-2019  T.S.O. II
14991    11-25-2019  Ch. 77, Sch. IX
14993    2-10-2020   T.S.O. II
14994    1-27-2020   Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
14996    5-11-2020   90.024
14995    4-27-2020   31.001
                     130.009,
                     130.012,
14999    7-13-2020   134.001 -
                     134.009,
                     134.999
                     Ch. 76, Schs. IV,
15000    7-27-2020   V,
                     VI
15002    8-12-2020   Ch. 77, Sch. II
15003    10-12-2020  T.S.O. II
15005    12-28-2020  Ch. 77, Sch. II
15006    12-28-2020  Ch. 76, Sch. IV
15010    2-22-2021   154.035
15011  1-25-2021   Ch. 77, Sch. VII
15012    2-8-2021    Ch. 77, Sch. VIII
15014  4-12-2021   T.S.O. II
15015    3-8-2021    Ch. 76, Sch. IV
15017    3-22-2021   T.S.O. II
15019    5-24-2021   158.001 -
                     158.008
15020    5-24-2021   52.029
15021    6-28-2021   Repeals 31.047
15022    8-23-2021   Repeals Ch. 35
                     154.082,
                     154.085,
15024    10-11-2021  154.090,
                     154.091,
                     154.092, Repeals 154.019, 154.084
15025    10-25-2021  91.004
15026    10-25-2021  Repeals Ch. 94
15027    10-11-2021  T.S.O. II
15028    11-8-2021   31.046
15030    12-13-2021  Repeals Ch. 111
                     113.001 -
15031    12-13-2021  113.004,
                     113.999
15032    12-27-2021  Repeals Ch. 120
15034    12-13-2021  11.002 -
                     11.005
                     151.016 -
15036    2-14-2022   151.020,
                     151.023
15038    2-28-2022   11.002
                     156.A.001 -
                     156.A.010,
                     156.B.001 -
                     156.B.008,
                     156.C.001 -
                     156.C.011,
                     156.D.001 -
                     156.D.009,
                     156.E.001 -
                     156.E.008,
                     156.F.001 -
                     156.F.006,
15039    4-11-2022   156.G.001 -
                     156.G.007,
                     156.H.001 -
                     156.H.004,
                     156.I.001 -
                     156.I.006,
                     156.J.001 -
                     156.J.005,
                     156.K.001 -
                     156.K.007,
                     156.L.001,
                     156.M.001 -
                     156.M.003
15040    5-9-2022    130.003
                     118.001 -
                     118.004,
15041    5-23-2022   118.006 -
                     118.014,
                     118.999
                     58.001 -
                     58.003,
                     58.015 -
15042    6-13-2022   58.024,
                     58.035,
                     58.036,
                     58.999
15043    6-13-2022   90.005, Repeals 90.036
                     Ch. 77, Schs.
                     II,
15044    6-13-2022   III,
                     IV,
                     VI
15045    7-11-2022   Ch. 76, Sch. IV
                     70.006,
15047    9-26-2022   73.016,
                     73.020
15048    9-26-2022   TSO III
15049    10-10-2022  Ch. 76, Sch. IV
15050    9-26-2020   Ch. 77, Sch. X
15051    10-10-2022  73.003
                     117.001 -
15053    11-28-2022  117.011,
                     117.999
15054    12-12-2022  152.001 -
                     152.006
                     70.012,
15055    12-27-2022  70.070 -
                     70.077
15057    1-9-2023    70.073
15056    1-23-2023   53.010
15058    2-27-2023   152.003
15059    2-27-2023   Ch. 77, Sch. II
15060    3-27-2023   Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
15061    6-12-2023   91.001,
                     91.002
15067    6-26-2023   53.022
15062    7-10-2023   93.007
                     130.12, Repeals
15063    7-10-2023   130.045 -
                     130.047,
                     130.048
15068    7-24-2023   T.S.O. II
15070    7-24-2023   52.024
15069    8-14-2023   73.080,
                     73.081
15071    9-25-2023   151.001 -
                     151.008
15072    10-9-2023   53.022
                     Ch. 76, Sch. I,
15074    10-23-2023  Ch. 76, Sch. II,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. IV,
                     Ch. 76, Sch. VIII
                     Ch. 77, Sch. II,
15075    10-23-2023  Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                     Ch. 77, Sch. VII
15076    11-13-2023, Ch. 77, Sch. II,
                     VII
15077    11-27-2023  Ch. 77, Schs. II
                     73.001,
15078    11-13-2023  73.002,
                     93.001
                     50.001 -
                     50.007,
15079    12-22-2023  50.020 -
                     50.030,
                     50.045 -
                     50.048
15082    3-11-2024   53.006
15083    2-12-2024   91.002,
                     91.004
15084    4-8-2024    91.002,
                     91.999
                     156.C.002 -
15085    7-8-2024    156.C.005,
                     156.C.007,
                     156.M.003
15086    6-10-2024   70.074,
                     70.075
                     118.003 -
                     118.005,
15087    7-8-2024    118.008,
                     118.009,
                     118.011
15088    6-10-2024   T.S.O. III
15089    7-22-2024   T.S.O. II
15090    8-26-2024   157.003,
                     157.005
15091    9-23-2024   156.E.003,
                     156.E.004
                     72.001,
                     72.010 -
                     72.026,
                     72.035 -
                     72.042,
15092    11-11-2024  72.055 -
                     72.060,
                     72.070 -
                     72.072,
                     72.085 -
                     72.089,
                     72.999
15093    10-14-2024  T.S.O. III
15094    10-14-2024  118.001,
                     118.011
15095    11-11-2024  156.B.004,
                     156.J.005
                     Ch. 77, Schs.
                     II,
15096    11-25-2024  IV,
                     VI -
                     X 
                     156.B.005,
                     156.C.003,
                     156.C.005,
15097    12-20-2024  156.C.007,
                     156.F.002,
                     156.G.004,
                     156.M.003
15098    2-10-2025   156.C.007
15099    4-14-2025   156.F.005
15100    5-27-2025   T.S.O. II
15101    6-23-2025   T.S.O. II
15102    6-23-2025   T.S.O. II
15103    6-23-2025   156.C.003,
                     156.C.005
                     156.C.003,
                     156.C.007,
                     156.D.002,
                     156.D.005,
15104    6-23-2025   156.D.006,
                     156.E.004,
                     156.I.003,
                     156.J.004,
                     156.J.005,
                     156.M.003
15105    6-9-2025    130.018
15106    6-23-2025   52.029
15107    6-23-2025   53.024
                    
 
 
