CITY CODE
OF
MASON CITY, IA
Code current through:
Ord. 25-08, passed 4-15-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of Mason City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 25-08, passed April 15, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 25 - 10
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 5 “PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY”, CHAPTER 3: “TREES AND SHRUBS”, IN
ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER 3 IN LIEU THEREOF
 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
   
   Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and
the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 5 “Public Ways and Property”,
Chapter 3: “Trees and Shrubs”, in its entirety and adopting a new Chapter 3 in
lieu thereof, as follows:
 
TITLE 5: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 3: TREES AND SHRUBS
 
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title And Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: City Forester
5-3-4: Street Parkways In Excess Of Certain Distances
5-3-5: Permit To Plant Or Remove Trees
5-3-6: Applications For Permits
5-3-7: Applications For Commercial Areas
5-3-8: Issuance Of Permit
5-3-9: Rules Of Construction
5-3-10: Regulations For Planting Trees And Shrubs
5-3-11: Prohibited Species Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-12: Permitted Species Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-13: Maintenance Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-14: Protection Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-15: Tree Diseases And Pests
5-3-16: Nuisance; Notice Of Abatement, Removal
5-3-17: Charges For Abating Nuisance
5-3-18: Statement Of Costs
 
5-3-1:   TITLE AND PURPOSE:
As set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa, setting forth the authority to
adopt regulations by the City Council, this chapter shall be known as and may
be cited as the STREET TREE ORDINANCE of the City of Mason City. (Ord. 15-07,
7-28-2015)
5-3-2:   DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BOULEVARD: Any unpaved or untraveled portion of a public street located between
opposing travel lanes.
CUL-DE-SAC ISLAND: The unpaved or untraveled portion of a public street located
in the middle of a cul-de-sac.
EDGE OF CURB:
A.   Inside Edge of Curb: That side of the curb nearest the outside edge of the
public sidewalk, or if no sidewalk is present, that side of the curb nearest
the adjacent property line.
B.   Outside Edge of Curb: That side of the curb opposite the inside edge of
the curb, where the face of the curb faces the street.
EDGE OF STREET: On a street with no curb, the outer paved edge of the traveled
portion of the street, excluding gravel shoulders.
OUTSIDE EDGE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALK: That edge of the public sidewalk nearest the
public roadway.
STREET PARKWAY: On a street with both curb and sidewalk, that portion of the
public right-of-way between the inside edge of the curb and the outside edge of
the public sidewalk; or, on a street with a curb but no public sidewalk,
between the inside edge of the curb and the nearest adjacent property line; or
on a street with a public sidewalk but no curb, between the edge of the street
and the outside edge of the public sidewalk; or on a street with no curb and no
sidewalk, between the edge of the street and the nearest adjacent property
line. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-3:   CITY FORESTER:
The Operations and Maintenance Street and Sanitation Supervisor, as agent,
shall perform the duties of City Forester for the City and shall have charge,
custody and control of all trees and shrubs growing now or hereafter in any
street parkway, public parks, boulevards and public places in the City and
shall have the power to plant, care for and otherwise maintain such trees and
shrubs. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28- 2015)
5-3-4:   STREET PARKWAYS IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN DISTANCES:
A.   Trees may be planted in the street parkway where the unpaved distance is
more than four and one-half feet (4½’), and less than six feet (6'), provided
that plantings will not exceed thirty feet (30') in height and spread not more
than ten feet (10') when fully grown. Such planting shall be made after first
making application for and obtaining a written permit from the City Forester.
B.   Trees to be planted in the street parkway in excess of six feet (6') shall
be for a species conforming with the approved species set forth in this
chapter.
C.   Planting shall be done only after a permit has been obtained from the City
Forester, after first having submitted an application containing information as
set forth in sections 5-3-7, 5-3-8 and 5-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-
28-2015)
5-3-5:   PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES:
No person shall plant, move, trim or remove any tree in any street parkway,
boulevard, cul-de-sac island, park or public place in the City, nor cause such
action to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit from the
City Forester.
Contractors hired to trim or remove a tree on the public right-of-way or
property shall be required to obtain a written permit from the City Forester
and have sufficient liability insurance, and obtain a license issued by the
City Clerk's Office before performing tree service within the community.
Exception: Annual plants and flowers whose maximum mature height is less than
thirty six inches (36") may be planted in any street parkway and boulevard
without obtaining a permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7- 28-2015)
5-3-6:   APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Said application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing which shall
accurately show:
A.   The property of the applicant adjacent to the street parkway upon which a
permit to plant is sought, along with any existing public sidewalk, street,
street parkway area and curb located between the applicant's property line and
the outside edge of the curb or, in the absence of a curb, the street edge, all
of which shall be to a definite indicated scale.
B.   The species and location of each tree proposed to be planted and of those
trees already existing in the street parkway, also in definite scale.
C.   The location of any fire hydrant, utility poles, street light pole,
mailbox, or other obstructions located upon the street parkway, all of which
shall be in scaled relation to the other information required. (Ord. 15-07, 7-
28-2015)
5-3-7:   APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AREAS:
Trees may be planted in the street parkway, provided the plantings are a
minimum of three feet (3') from the inside edge of the curb, or in the absence
of a curb, three and one-half feet (3½’) from the street edge; and that before
any tree may be planted in such areas, the owner of the property adjacent to
said street parkway must first make application to and secure a permit from the
City Forester as hereinafter provided.
A.   Application Data:
1.   Local address of the applicant's property which is adjacent to the street
parkway upon which a permit to plant is sought;
2.   The species, number, height and trunk diameter of each tree proposed to be
planted; and
3.   Any additional information which the City Forester shall deem is
reasonably necessary to enable the making of a fair determination of whether or
not a permit should be issued hereunder; and
4.   The recommendations, along with comments, if any, by the City Planner,
City Engineer, electrical inspector, any communications company, gas and
electric utility provider, and the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT)
when the street parkway abuts a highway within the City under IDOT’s
jurisdiction .
5-3-7:   
A.   
B.   Application Plan Or Drawing: Application plan or drawing shall be as set
forth in section 5-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-8:   ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The City Forester may, after review and consideration of any application as
above required, issue a permit to an applicant. Any such permit issued shall be
to plant trees in strict compliance with terms and provisions of this chapter
and the application and plan or drawing as finally approved by the City
Forester, a copy of which said finally approved application and plan and
drawing shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Forester. All such
permits shall be issued upon the express condition that they may be revoked at
any time by the City Forester and that all trees planted pursuant to said
permit may be removed by the City without liability to any person for such
removal.
Further, no such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have executed
and filed with the City Forester an indemnification agreement whereby said
applicant agrees to save and hold harmless the City from any and all liability
for damage or injury to person or property proximately caused by trees planted
pursuant to said permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-9:   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purpose of determining the distance under sections 5-3-6 and 5-3-7 of
this chapter, where there is no existing public sidewalk or curb, then it shall
be assumed that such improvements have been installed and the location and
dimensions of such improvement shall be as determined by the City Engineer
based upon projected improvements. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-10:   REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING TREES AND SHRUBS:
A.   All trees planted in any street parkway area under this chapter shall be
planted in strict accordance with the following regulations:
1.   All trees planted under section 5-3-7 of this chapter in an area where the
outside edge of the public sidewalk runs continuously to the inside edge of the
curb so that there is no unpaved distance between the outside edge of the
public sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb shall be planted in the center
of an area which is at least thirty six inches (36") square and the outside
line of said square area shall be the inside edge of the curb. Said planting
area may be adjusted to accommodate underground utilities; however, the size of
the tree trunk at maturity shall be considered to alleviate damage to sidewalks
and curbs. Offset of tree planting shall meet all conditions.
2.   All trees planted under section 5-3-6 of this chapter shall be planted at
a point in the street parkway at a distance of forty percent (40%) of the
street parkway width from the outside edge of the public sidewalk and a
distance of sixty percent (60%) of the street parkway width from the inside
edge of the curb. The City Forester shall determine the species and the
planting site whenever overhead utility wires are present.
3.   All trees hereafter planted in any street parkway, except section 5-3-7 of
this chapter, shall be at least twenty feet (20') from any intersection street
right-of-way line; at least ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant, alley and
driveway; at least one-half (1/2) the diameter of the tree canopy at maturity
of the tree, from a light standard or transmission poles. Spacing between trees
shall be dependent upon species and variety of tree being planted. Standard or
large growing trees shall be at least three- fourths inch (3/4") to one inch
(1") in diameter, six inches (6") above the ground and at least five feet (5')
to six feet (6') tall. Small growing trees such as flowering and ornamental
trees shall be at least four feet (4') to five feet (5') tall and have five (5)
or more branches.
4.   Hereafter, the total number of any tree species planted on the street
parkway within a specified block shall equal no more than ten percent (10%) of
the combined total number of tree species that are or may be planted on the
street parkway within that block, except the percentage may be increased by
special permission of the City Forester.
B.   Shrubs may be planted in cul-de-sac islands only after a planting plan for
said shrubs shall be approved by the City Forester after a statement shall be
submitted in writing assuming responsibility for maintenance of said shrubs;
said responsibility assumption shall be made by adjacent property owners or an
area homeowners' association. Said responsibility shall transfer with property
ownership. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-11:   PROHIBITED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to plant any of the following described species
of trees and shrubbery upon any street parkway in the City along with any new
species and varieties that are known to be or which may become a public
nuisance:
American elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be
planted.
Ash.
Austree (salix alba x matsudana).
Birch - river birch, white or paper birch, etc. Black locust.
Box elder.
Catalpa.
Chinese or Siberian elm - elm species that are certified to be disease
resistant may be planted.
Common fruit trees.
Conifers (evergreens).
Cottonwood.
Ginkgo (female only).
Hawthorn - except thornless variety. Mulberry, common.
Poplars.
Russian olive.
Soft maple.
Sumac.
Trees bearing large nuts, i.e., walnut, hickory, butternut.
Tree of Heaven
Willow.
All species of shrubbery, except as provided in subsection 5-3-10B of this
chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28- 2015)
5-3-12:   PERMITTED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
Ginkgo (male).
Hackberry.
Hard maple - allowed but not recommended due to over population of maples at
this time and susceptibility to the Asian longhorn beetle.
Hawthorn - (only thornless varieties allowed) to be used when overhead utility
wires are present and the street parkway is more than ten feet (10').
Japanese lilac - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the
street parkway is more than ten feet (10').
Kentucky coffeetree.
Linden.
Locust - excluding black locust.
Oak.
Tatarian maple - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the
street parkway is more than ten feet (10').
Any species approved by the City Forester meeting the requirements of section
5-3-10 above that is native to North Iowa, is salt tolerant, and is recognized
as appropriate for planting in the street parkway. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015; amd.
2017 Code)
5-3-13:   MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
It shall be the duty of all property owners having trees and shrubbery abutting
or overhanging any public property, street parkway, public alleys, public
sidewalks and other public property:
A.   To keep all trees pruned so that the lower branches are not less than
eight feet (8') in height above public sidewalks, sixteen feet (16') above the
traveled portion of all public streets, public alleys and primary highways.
B.   To remove all dead, damaged and broken limbs and trees; all limbs and
trees which are or may become dangerous to travel upon the public way and all
limbs and trees that obstruct the natural flow of any meandering public streams
within the City limits.
C.   To maintain all trees, shrubbery, hedges, bushes, vines or plants in such
a manner so as not to interfere with the vision of drivers of vehicles
approaching any intersection, street or alley.
D.   To keep all trees trimmed so as not to unduly obstruct street lights or
traffic signs and traffic signals.
E.   While performing any of the preceding maintenance to trees controlled by
the City, the Arborist Department may clear any privately owned tree not
conforming to this chapter and retain the option to assess the charge to the
property owner(s).
F.   In the event a tree is located upon the property lot line and City
property, the cost of maintaining or removal shall be equally shared by both
parties. The property owner shall reserve the option to obtain cost estimates
by a private contractor and said costs shall be approved by the City Forester
before said work is done. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-14:   PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
No person shall break, deface, injure, kill or destroy any tree or shrub in any
street parkway, park or public place in the City. Also, no person shall place
or permit any toxic, liquid, gaseous or solid substances to seep, drain or be
placed on or about any public tree or shrub. During all public building and
construction operations, the contractor or builder shall erect protective
barriers around all trees during the period of construction. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-
2015)
5-3-15:   TREE DISEASES AND PESTS:
All trees infected with any declared pest such as Dutch elm disease, emerald
ash borer or any diseases or pests declared at a later date are hereby declared
to be nuisances, and the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property
whereon such tree or trees are located is hereby ordered to remove such tree or
trees or use a proven method of treatment to eliminate or stop the declared
disease or pest. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-16:   NUISANCE; NOTICE OF ABATEMENT, REMOVAL:
The property owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, shall remove
said tree or any portion thereof at the owner's expense within thirty (30) days
after receiving a notice to abate said nuisance from the City Forester. In the
event the owner does not perform the acts necessary to remove and abate said
nuisance(s) within the time set forth in said notice, the City may perform or
contract the required action and assess the costs thereof against the property
upon which the nuisance is located. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-17:   CHARGES FOR ABATING NUISANCE:
If the City abates the said nuisance, charges for equipment use and labor shall
be assessed against the property. Charges under this section shall be set by
resolution of the Council. (Ord. 23-11, 8-1- 2023)
5-3-18:   STATEMENT OF COSTS:
At such time as the City Forester has removed or abated any nuisance
hereinbefore authorized, he shall prepare a certified statement of all costs
and expenses connected therewith and shall submit such statement or statements
to the Finance Director to be billed to the property owner. If the statement is
left unpaid, it shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with the legal
description prepared by the City Engineer of the property involved, and the
City Clerk shall thereupon certify such cost to the County Auditor and it shall
then be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. (Ord.
1 5-07, 7-28-2015)
Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 4th day of November, 2025.
 
                        /s/Bill Schickel
                        Bill Schickel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:      October 7, 2025
Second Consideration:   October 21, 2025
Third Consideration:      November 4, 2025
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25 - 14
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 4 “HEALTH AND SANITATION”, CHAPTER 1: “NUISANCES”, SECTION 1
“DEFINITIONS” IN ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW SECTION 1 IN LIEU THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
      Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be
and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 4 “Health and Sanitation”,
Chapter 1: “Nuisances”, Section 1 “Definitions” in its entirety and adopting a
new Section 1 in lieu thereof, as follows:
“TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1: NUISANCES
 
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
GARBAGE: Food waste; discarded or useless material.
JUNK: Secondhand, worn or discarded articles.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the
senses, or an obstacle to the free use of property, so as essentially to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. In addition to
any nuisance identified elsewhere in this code the following, although not all
inclusive, are declared to be nuisances:
 A.   The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other places for the
exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious fumes, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and
dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
B.   The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to
accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
C.   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
D.   The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river,
stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or
state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
E.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise the
public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying
grounds.
F.   Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness,
gambling houses, or houses resorted to for the use of controlled substances or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
G.   Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets.
H.   Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the limits of any Municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including
takeoff and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use
or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
I.   The accumulation of items including, but not limited to, the following:
old or scrap rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, tires, waste,
used lumber or salvaged wood; inoperable machinery, electronics, or appliances
or parts of such machinery, electronics, or appliances; iron, steel, or other
old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old
or discarded household goods or hardware, except if stored inside a completely
enclosed structure. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or rear yard
is not considered a nuisance.
J.   The depositing or storing of "garbage" or "recyclables" (as defined in
section 4-2A-1 of this title) whether it is within a totally enclosed structure
or not is prohibited except for the normal accumulation of garbage and
recyclables stored for weekly City garbage collection.
K.   The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
L.   Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines, brush, dead wood, or other
vegetation in the City, so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard,
pursuant to article A of this chapter.
M.   Trees infected with Dutch elm disease, blight, or pest infestation; dying
trees; dead trees; and/or any tree lacking leaves on fifty (50) percent or more
of its canopy during the growing season.
N.  Effluent from septic tank or drainfield running or ponding on the ground in
the open.
O. Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk, public
ground, or in any ditch, waterway or gutter so as to obstruct the drainage.
P.   Junk vehicles as set out in title 8, chapter 5 of this Code.
Q. All diseased animals.
R. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
S. Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24) hours after
death, as set forth in section 167.15, Iowa Code.
T. Pollution of any public well as set out in title 6, chapter 1, article B of
this Code, or cistern, stream or body of water by sewage, creamery or
industrial wastes, or other substances.
U. Any building or portion thereof in which any of the following listed
conditions exist either individually or in combination with each other to the
extent of being injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or
an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance:
      1.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents,
      2.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance,
      3.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
      4.   Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Those premises on which an
accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage,
offal, filth, vermin harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and
similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards, and
those premises lacking adequate light, air, and heating or sanitary facilities
(including running water and operable plumbing), thereby rendering them unfit
for human habitation, occupancy, and use,
      5.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors,
      6.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering,
      7.   Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings,
      8.   Likelihood of any portion or member or appurtenance thereof to fail
or become detached or dislodged or to partially or completely collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property, and
      9.   Inoccupancy for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance, a harborage for
vagrants, and/or hazard to the public.
   W.   The shoveling, raking, throwing, dumping or depositing of any garbage,
refuse, dirt, yard wastes, solid wastes or any other materials into any stream,
river or creek or upon any stream, river or creek banks.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title.
REFUSE: Worthless or useless part of something.
RUBBISH: Useless waste or rejected matter.
TRASH: Something worth little or nothing; junk, rubbish, refuse and garbage.
(Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-11, 11-17-2020)
       Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
      Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
      Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
      PASSED AND APPROVED this 18 th day of November, 2025.
 
                        /s/Bill Schickel
                        Bill Schickel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:      October 21, 2025
Second Consideration:   November 4, 2025
Third Consideration:      November 18, 2025
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25 - 14
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 4 “HEALTH AND SANITATION”, CHAPTER 1: “NUISANCES”, SECTION 1
“DEFINITIONS” IN ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW SECTION 1 IN LIEU THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
      Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be
and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 4 “Health and Sanitation”,
Chapter 1: “Nuisances”, Section 1 “Definitions” in its entirety and adopting a
new Section 1 in lieu thereof, as follows:
“TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1: NUISANCES
 
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
GARBAGE: Food waste; discarded or useless material.
JUNK: Secondhand, worn or discarded articles.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the
senses, or an obstacle to the free use of property, so as essentially to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. In addition to
any nuisance identified elsewhere in this code the following, although not all
inclusive, are declared to be nuisances:
 A.   The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other places for the
exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious fumes, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and
dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
B.   The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to
accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
C.   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
D.   The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any river,
stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course or
state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
E.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise the
public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying
grounds.
F.   Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness,
gambling houses, or houses resorted to for the use of controlled substances or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
G.   Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets.
H.   Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the limits of any Municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including
takeoff and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use
or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
I.   The accumulation of items including, but not limited to, the following:
old or scrap rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, tires, waste,
used lumber or salvaged wood; inoperable machinery, electronics, or appliances
or parts of such machinery, electronics, or appliances; iron, steel, or other
old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old
or discarded household goods or hardware, except if stored inside a completely
enclosed structure. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or rear yard
is not considered a nuisance.
J.   The depositing or storing of "garbage" or "recyclables" (as defined in
section 4-2A-1 of this title) whether it is within a totally enclosed structure
or not is prohibited except for the normal accumulation of garbage and
recyclables stored for weekly City garbage collection.
K.   The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
L.   Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines, brush, dead wood, or other
vegetation in the City, so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard,
pursuant to article A of this chapter.
M.   Trees infected with Dutch elm disease, blight, or pest infestation; dying
trees; dead trees; and/or any tree lacking leaves on fifty (50) percent or more
of its canopy during the growing season.
N.  Effluent from septic tank or drainfield running or ponding on the ground in
the open.
O. Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk, public
ground, or in any ditch, waterway or gutter so as to obstruct the drainage.
P.   Junk vehicles as set out in title 8, chapter 5 of this Code.
Q. All diseased animals.
R. All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
S. Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24) hours after
death, as set forth in section 167.15, Iowa Code.
T. Pollution of any public well as set out in title 6, chapter 1, article B of
this Code, or cistern, stream or body of water by sewage, creamery or
industrial wastes, or other substances.
U. Any building or portion thereof in which any of the following listed
conditions exist either individually or in combination with each other to the
extent of being injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or
an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance:
      1.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents,
      2.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance,
      3.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
      4.   Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Those premises on which an
accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage,
offal, filth, vermin harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and
similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards, and
those premises lacking adequate light, air, and heating or sanitary facilities
(including running water and operable plumbing), thereby rendering them unfit
for human habitation, occupancy, and use,
      5.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors,
      6.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering,
      7.   Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings,
      8.   Likelihood of any portion or member or appurtenance thereof to fail
or become detached or dislodged or to partially or completely collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property, and
      9.   Inoccupancy for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance, a harborage for
vagrants, and/or hazard to the public.
   W.   The shoveling, raking, throwing, dumping or depositing of any garbage,
refuse, dirt, yard wastes, solid wastes or any other materials into any stream,
river or creek or upon any stream, river or creek banks.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title.
REFUSE: Worthless or useless part of something.
RUBBISH: Useless waste or rejected matter.
TRASH: Something worth little or nothing; junk, rubbish, refuse and garbage.
(Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-11, 11-17-2020)
       Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
      Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
      Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
      PASSED AND APPROVED this 18 th day of November, 2025.
 
                        /s/Bill Schickel
                        Bill Schickel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:      October 21, 2025
Second Consideration:   November 4, 2025
Third Consideration:      November 18, 2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 25 - 15
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 10 “BUILDING REGULATIONS”, CHAPTER 2: “BUILDING CODES, ARTICLE
A. BUILDING CODE IN ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW ARTICLE A IN LIEU THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
      Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be
and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 10 “Building Regulations”,
Chapter 2: “Building Codes”, Article A. “Building Code” in its entirety and
adopting a new Article A in lieu thereof, as follows:
TITLE 10:
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2: BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
 
SECTION:
10-2A-1: Code Adopted
10-2A-2: Amendments To Building Code   
10-2A-3: Building Inspections Division
10-2A-4: Building Advisory And Appeals Board
10-2A-5: Appeals, Method Of Filing
10-2A-6: Moving Of Structures
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
10-2A-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City, the 2024 edition of
the International Building Code, reviewed and/or modified, from time to time,
by the Building Advisory and Appeals Board and the Chief Building Official,
which by this reference, is duly adopted, with the following amendments, as
fully and completely as if set out in detail herein.
An official copy of the International Building Code, as hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective
date thereof, shall be on file at the City Public Library for public
inspection.
10-2A-2:   AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
The City Building Code shall be amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. (Name of jurisdiction) the City of Mason City, Iowa.
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. Change "international" to "Uniform;" delete last
sentence.
Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. [INSERT NAME OF DEPARTMENT]
Building Inspections Division of the Development Services Department.
Section 103.3 Deputies. Delete last sentence.
Section 104.2.4.1 Flood Hazard Area. Delete in its entirety and replace with
the following: The building official shall not grant modifications to any
provision required in flood hazard areas as established by Section 1612.3
unless a variance has been approved by the zoning board of appeals, as
established in title 12, chapter 5 of the city code, in accordance with the
standards of title 12, chapter 18, section 12-18-16 of the city code, and after
approval by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
Section 104.3.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially
damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. Delete the
first sentence and replace as follows: For applications for reconstruction,
rehabilitation, repair, alteration, addition or other improvement of existing
buildings or structures located in flood hazard areas, the building official,
with the concurrence of the flood plain manager, shall determine if the
proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial
damage.
Section 105.3, replace “department of building safety” with “Building
Inspections Division.”
Section 107.1 General. Delete first sentence and replace as follows: Submittal
documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special
inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or
more sets, or in a digital format when required by the building official, with
each permit application.
 
Section 107.2.1 Information on construction documents. Delete the second
sentence and replace with the following: Electronic media documents are
preferred and may be required at the discretion of the building official.
Section 109.2, chapter 1 of the International Building Code pertaining to
permit fees, shall be as follows: Building permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Delete and replace with
the following: Any person who commences any work before obtaining the necessary
permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building official and
approved by resolution of the City Council that shall be in addition to the
required permit fees.
Section 110.3, append new subsection: 110.3.13 Setback inspection. Prior to the
installation of footings and foundations, the exterior corners of the proposed
building and the lot corners shall be marked or flagged to allow the Mason City
Zoning Administrator to ensure that the building meets the setback requirements
of title 12 of the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa. The footing and
foundations may not be installed until the Zoning Administrator has informed
the building official that setbacks as required in said title 12 will be met.
Section 110.3.12.1 Flood hazard documentation. Repeal and replace with the
following: If located in a flood hazard area, documentation of the elevation of
the lowest floor or the elevation of dry floodproofing, if applicable, as
required in Section 1612.4 shall be submitted to the building official and the
floodplain manager prior to the final inspection.
Section 113.1 General, and Section 113.3 Qualifications. Delete each instance
of “board of appeals” and replace with “Building Advisory and Appeals Board.”
Section 115.2 Issuance. Insert after the first sentence: If the owner, owner’s
authorized agent, or person performing the work is not on site at the time the
building official attempts to serve the stop work order, the building official
shall post the stop work order at the site on or near the main entry and in a
visible location. In such a case, the building official shall provide a copy of
the written stop work order to the owner, owner’s authorized agent or person
performing the work as soon as practicable.
Section 423.3 Critical Emergency Operations. Delete.
Section 423.4 Group E Occupancies. Delete.
Chapter 11 Accessibility. Delete.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Delete.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Delete.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete.
Appendix A-K. Delete in "International Building Code" 2024.
10-2A-3:   BUILDING INSPECTIONS DIVISION:
There is hereby established in the administrative body of the City, within the
Development Services Department, the Building Inspections Division. Said
division shall be the "enforcement agency" for all matters contained in this
title. The division shall be under the supervision of the Chief Building
Official.
A.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Official for the City
to administer and enforce all of the Building Codes adopted by ordinance by the
City Council to provide a safe and sanitary environment for the citizens of
Mason City. Said Chief Building Official shall be empowered to inspect any and
all buildings and other structures, public or private and to, as herein
provided, condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe
condition for the citizens of this City, as set out in the housing and building
codes of the City.
10-2A-4:   BUILDING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
A.   Board Established: There is hereby created a Building Advisory and Appeals
Board, as required by chapter 1, section 113 of the International Building Code
and this Code, which shall be composed of five (5) members, appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The Chief Building Official shall
be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the board.
B.   Appointment; Terms: Said members of the board shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall serve for a period
of five (5) years from April 1 following their appointment, except appointments
to fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member. A member whose term has
expired may continue to serve until a replacement has been appointed and
approved by the City Council. Any member may be removed from office by the
Mayor for cause.
C.   Organization Of Board: The board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from among its members. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Vice Chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board shall meet
at City Hall, and all meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The
presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and it shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the Office of the Chief Building Official and the City
Clerk and shall be a public record.
D.   Duties And Powers: The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have the
following powers and duties:
1.   Adopt reasonable rules and regulations, and shall render all decisions and
findings in writing to the Chief Building Official with duplicate copies to the
appellant and the City Clerk.
2.   Recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent
therewith.
3.   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or interpretation made by the Chief Building Official in
the enforcement of the Building Code as set out in this article.
4.   Authorize upon appeal modifications to the Building Code, as provided in
section 104.2.4 of the International Building Code, the compliance of any order
or interpretation of the Chief Building Official as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the
spirit of the Code shall be observed and substantial justice done.
E.   Factors To Be Considered: In considering all appeals to the Building Code,
the board shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first determine
that the proposed modification will not impair the public health, safety,
comfort, morals and welfare of the City.
In the event that a modification is granted, the board shall observe the
conditions as set out in section 104.2.3 and 104.2.3.1 through 104.2.3.7 of the
International Building Code.
1.   In lieu of or in addition to administrative regulations, the board may
grant a limited extension of time for the compliance of any order or notice,
provided the board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating
to the following:
a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of any
notice or order; and
b.   Such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
2.    The board may grant a modification in a specific case and from a specific
provision of this title subject to appropriate conditions; and provided the
board makes specific findings of fact based on the evidence presented in the
record as a whole and related to the following:
a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out a strict interpretation
or order; and
b.   Due to the particular circumstances presented, the effect of the
application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
c.   Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
F.   Adoption Of Modification: Upon appeal, or by adoption of a modification,
the board, by a majority vote, may approve a modification for the building of a
new structure which cannot practicably meet the standards of the Code. Prior to
considering any modification, public notice shall be given. A modification, if
granted, shall:
1.   State in what manner the modification from the specific provision(s) is to
be allowed; and
2.   State the conditions under which the modification is to be made; and
3.   Be based upon specific findings of fact based on evidence related to the
following:
a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of the
specific provision common to structures to which the modification will apply;
and
b.   Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
G.   Appeals Board Jurisdiction: Any persons affected by any written notice,
but not limited to the following notices, or any persons wishing to submit any
petition, but not limited to the following petitions, may appeal to the
Building Advisory and Appeals Board in accordance with the City administrative
procedures ordinance:
1.   Notice of Building Code violation.
2.   Petition for modification.
10-2A-5:   APPEALS, METHOD OF FILING:
The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by the Chief
Building Official in the enforcement of the Building Code. Appeals to the board
may be filed by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Chief Building Official.
Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of the offending
ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the Chief Building Official with
the Building Advisory and Appeals Board, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The fee to file an appeal shall be set by resolution of the
City Council.
A.   Appeals Board Procedures: Any builder, engineer, architect or developer
entitled to service under the Building Code may appeal from any requirement,
decision, interpretation, order or any action of the Chief Building Official
under this title by filing such appeal at the Office of the Chief Building
Official, Mason City, Iowa. All appeals shall be in writing and submitted to
the Chief Building Official containing the following information:
1.   Names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
2.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants involved in the notice and order.
3.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific order
or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant.
4.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought
and the reason(s) why it is claimed the protested order or action should be
reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
5.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
6.   The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one
(1) appellant as to the truth of the matter stated in the appeal.
B.   Scheduling And Notice Of Hearing: As soon as practicable after receiving
the written appeal, the Chief Building Official shall fix a date, time and
place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall be not less
than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was
filed with the Chief Building Official. Written notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing to each appellant by the Secretary of the board either by causing a
copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his the address
shown on the appeal. Said notice of hearing shall be by certified mail.
C.   Hearing: The procedures will be conducted as set out in the City
administrative procedures ordinance. The concurring vote of three (3) members
of the board, shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Chief Building Official or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the Building
Code or to effect any modification in this Code.
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the
Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have recourse to trial as provided by
statute.
D.   Decision On Appeal: In exercising the powers granted, the Building
Advisory and Appeals Board may, in conformity with law, modify the order,
requirement, decision or interpretation appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or interpretation as should be made, and to that end,
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
10-2A-6:   MOVING OF STRUCTURES:
A.    Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
STREET: All public streets, roads, highways, alleys or other public places.
STRUCTURE: Any house, garage, building or other object which is to be moved on
structure moving trucks, or other equipment.
B.   License Required, Fee And Term: No person shall move or cause to be moved
upon, over or across any street or from any lot or parcel of ground to another
lot or parcel of ground any structure unless such person has qualified as a
structure mover and has obtained a license to engage in such business from the
City Clerk as hereinafter provided. As application for the license, the
structure mover shall include information related to his/her experience in
moving structures and the equipment to be used. The license fee to be paid for
said license shall be determined by the City Council via resolution and shall
expire on March 31 of each year.
1.    Exception: A structure with a ground floor area of seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet or less, has no horizontal dimension greater than twenty five
feet (25') and a loaded height no greater than fifteen feet (15') may be moved
by an unlicensed person; provided, that all other requirements of this chapter
are met.
C.   Moving Permit Required: Every person shall, before moving any structure,
obtain a moving permit from the Chief Building Official. The fee for a moving
permit shall be calculated in the same manner as a building permit.
D.   Insurance Required: Except for a move exempted under subsection B1 of this
section, prior to issuance of a moving permit, the applicant shall file proof
of public liability insurance for the period said permit is in effect with
minimum limits of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property
damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a single personal injury or
death, and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for multiple injuries or
deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the City on account
of any and all damage or injury, including death, to real or personal property,
whether public or private, which arises out of or is connected with or caused
by the moving of any structure over, upon or across any public street, alley or
other public place. The City may require higher insurance limits if
circumstances warrant.
E.   Application For Permit: An application for a moving permit shall be in
writing upon forms furnished by the Chief Building Official and shall contain,
among other things, the following information:
1.   The name and address of the applicant, proof of licensing (if not exempt)
and equipment proposed to be used.
2.   The dimensions of the structure to be moved and its maximum heights when
loaded.
3.   The present location and the proposed location of the structure.
4.   The route over which the structure is to be moved, the type and height
above the street of obstructions, including trees, the time when removal will
begin and the approximate length of time necessary to complete the operation.
5.   The time when the structure will be first moved into or within the
corporate limits and the length of time said structure will be in the process
of moving within said limits.
6.   The name and address of the owner of said structure and the proposed use
of said structure upon its new location if such new location is within the
City.
F.   Additional Notice: The Development Review Committee may require the owner
or mover to provide additional public notice, through publication of a notice
in the official newspaper and/or other means, if the proposed move involves a
long period, may disrupt activities on adjacent properties along the move route
or at the site to which the structure is moved, or will potentially block or
slow progress on arterial or collector streets during peak hours.
G.   Development Review Committee: All permit applications to move a structure
within the City limits shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee,
as established in section 12-7-1 of this Code. The Development Review Committee
shall review the proposed time of the move, the move route of the structure,
determine if City and public utilities are affected, review the final placement
of the structure and advise the Chief Building Official regarding any pertinent
requirements affecting or affected by the proposed move. Any utility or similar
entity with equipment or appurtenances located within, over or upon any street
located within the path of the move shall be notified of the date, time and
place of the meeting. The Development Review Committee may require additional
review for certain structures and moving routes prior to final consideration of
a permit by the Chief Building Official.
H.   Other Agencies: If a structure is moved upon, over or across any street or
crossing under the jurisdiction of any other agency or entity (such as the Iowa
Department of Transportation or a railroad), the appropriate permits or
waivers, if required, shall be applied for prior to approval of a moving permit
by the City. Proof of application for or issuance of such permit(s) or waiver
(s) shall be provided to the Chief Building Official. If the affected agency or
entity cedes jurisdiction to the City, written confirmation of the same from
the affected agency shall be provided. The structure shall not be moved until
all required permits or waivers have been issued.
I.   Final Placement Of Structure: The structure shall meet all applicable
requirements of the zoning district applying to the lot upon which the
structure is to be moved, according to title 12 of this Code, as well as all
applicable requirements of this title.
J.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon a determination by the Chief Building Official
that all requirements are met, the Chief Building Official shall issue the
permit.
K.   Denial Of Permit: The Chief Building Official shall deny a permit to move
a structure when the City Engineer determines that the structure is of such
size, weight, dimensions or character as to likely cause substantial damage or
injury to any street or to any private property abutting a street, including
trees overhanging a street or alley, unless necessary accommodations can be
made with the City and/or adjoining private property owners to mitigate any
negative impacts.
L.   Clearing Of Route:
1.   The City of Mason City Arborist, upon request, may assist the mover in the
proper pruning and clearing of City owned trees or trees otherwise encroaching
upon the right-of-way. Should the arborist be unavailable to perform said
trimming, the mover may employ a licensed and bonded tree trimmer from a list
of such businesses licensed by the City.
2.   If the move route requires temporary removal, relocation, or lifting of a
traffic signal, said action must be approved by the City Engineer.
3.   The mover shall make all arrangements and accommodations for raising or
otherwise moving of utility lines or structures with the appropriate utility
company.
M.   Escort: The Chief Building Official, in consultation with the City
Engineer, may require that all or part or the entire move be escorted by
warning vehicles, consisting of vehicles displaying flashing lights and "Wide
Load" signs as necessary. Alternatively, the Chief Building Official may
require the move to be escorted by police vehicles. The structure mover shall
schedule the move according to available police personnel, as determined by the
Chief of Police, and shall pay all associated costs.
N.   Planking Street: The City Engineer shall have the authority to require the
planking of any street when such planking is deemed advisable, having due
regard for the place, manner, form, condition and type of street over which the
structure is to be moved.
O.   Restrictions During Move:
1.   Caution Signals: It shall be the duty of the structure mover to provide
proper caution lights or flares during the hours of darkness and to provide
flagmen when necessary for the safe movement of the structure on any public
street.
2.   Barricading Intersections: It shall be the duty of the structure mover to
place barricades in the intersections of streets when required by the City
Engineer or when reasonably required for public safety.
3.   Parking Restrictions: If required by the City Engineer, the structure
mover shall place "No Parking By Order Of Police" signs in visible locations in
the right-of-way, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the move.
4.   Barricades And Signs: All barricades and signs shall conform to the
current edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). The
applicant shall provide conforming barricades and/or signs, or may obtain them
from the Operations and Maintenance Department during regular business hours,
upon payment of a deposit to ensure return of the barricades and/or signs in
good condition.
P.   Bridge Restrictions And Weight Limit Embargoes:
1.   Any move route that requires passage over bridges or overpasses shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer determines that a
structural analysis is warranted, related costs or a portion thereof may be
assessed to the applicant. The City Engineer may deny use of any bridge or
overpass.
2.   Any move route over streets with weight limit embargoes shall be reviewed
by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may deny use of any embargoed street.
Q.   Report To City Engineer And Chief Building Official: Every person granted
a permit for the moving of a structure shall report to the City Engineer and
the Chief Building Official within twenty four (24) hours after the moved
structure is placed upon any lot within the City. It shall be the duty of the
City Engineer, within ten (10) days after receipt of such report, to inspect
all streets over which said structure has been moved and to determine the
extent of the damage to such streets or private property abutting such streets.
If the moving of said structure has caused any damage to such streets or
private property, the said mover shall be responsible for repairs or
replacement, meeting current State, County and/or City requirements and
standards. Upon failure of the mover to complete repairs or replacement in a
reasonable time after notice from the City Engineer of the damage or injury
required to be repaired, said City Engineer may repair or cause to be repaired
said damage and injury and hold sureties on the mover's bond or on the
insurance carrier responsible for payment and the cost of such repairs.
In addition to the above damages, costs will be filed for damages to trees and
shrubbery at the current cost of the species and labor.
R.   Report To Police, Fire Department, Utility Companies During Move: Every
mover shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department or his assistants, the
Chief of the Police Department or his assistants, and affected utility
companies each night the exact location of the structure while being moved.
Except under unavoidable circumstances, no structure shall be left standing on
any street for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours.
S.   Unlawful Moving: It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to
be moved a structure upon, over or across any street, except the route
designated, within the time specified and with the equipment specified by the
permit granted for the moving of such structure. An extension of time may be
granted by the Chief Building Official under unavoidable circumstances. Except
for structures exempted by this section, moving of any structure without
approval and issuance of a moving permit is in violation of this code.
T.   Temporary Placement Of Moved Structure: A structure that has been moved
from its original site shall not be temporarily placed on any parcel for a
period of longer than forty eight (48) hours. The Chief Building Official may
grant an extension if a structure is in the act of being moved in accordance
with a valid moving permit, and unavoidable circumstances require a structure
to be temporarily placed on a parcel other than the parcel indicated on the
moving permit. This requirement shall not apply to structures placed
temporarily on City owned property, if approved by the City Administrator.
U.   Building Advisory And Appeals Board Authority: In addition to the
authority granted to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board by this article,
the Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have authority to require the
Chief Building Official to issue or deny issuance of a permit for the moving of
any structure where, by reason of peculiar topographical conditions or other
unusual circumstances or conditions, the strict enforcement of the limitations
of this title would be unreasonable and would amount to a practical
confiscation of the structure, and would result in particular hardship upon the
owner, other than the costs related to the move; provided, that the relief
sought can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without injury to streets and property abutting thereon and without
substantially impairing the general intent and purpose of this title. 
 
   Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
   Section 3: If any section, provision or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudge to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
   Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
      PASSED AND APPROVED this 16th day of December, 2025.
 
 
                                                                                                         /
s/Bill Schickel
Bill Schickel, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:    November 18, 2025
Second Consideration: December 2, 2025       
Final Consideration: December 16, 2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 26 - 1
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 10 “BUILDING REGULATIONS”, CHAPTER 2: “BUILDING CODES, ARTICLE
I. FIRE CODE IN ITS ENTIRETY AND ADOPTING A NEW ARTICLE I IN LIEU THEREOF
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
      Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be
and the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 10 “Building Regulations”,
Chapter 2: “Building Codes”, Article I. “Fire Code” in its entirety and
adopting a new Article I in lieu thereof, as follows:
TITLE 10:
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2: BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE I. FIRE CODE
 
SECTION:
10-2I-1: Code Adopted
10-2I-2: Amendments To Fire Code   
10-2I-3: Open Burning
10-2I-4: Special Inspections
 
10-2I-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City, the 2024 edition, or the
more current edition, of the International Fire Code adopted by the State of
Iowa including appendix chapters as prepared and edited by the International
Code Council, reviewed and/or modified, from time to time, by the Chief
Building Official, and the Fire Chief, which by this reference is duly adopted
as fully and completely as if set out in detail herein. An official copy of the
International Fire Code, as hereby adopted, is available online through the
International Code Council web site. A certificate by the City Clerk as to its
adoption and the effective date thereof, is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk (Ord. 17-4)
10-2I-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
 
Section 101.1 Title: (Name of jurisdiction) City of Mason City, Iowa.
 
Section 112.3 Qualifications: Change to "The Board of Appeals shall consist of
members as defined in section 10-2A-4 of the City Code". The Building Advisory
and Appeals Board, as established by Section 10-2A-4 of City Code, shall hear
appeals to the International Fire Code. The Fire Official shall be the
administrative officer to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board in the case
of appeals to the International Fire Code.
 
Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4
of the City Code".
 
Section Failure To Comply: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4 of the
City Code".
 
Section 2304 shall be and the same is hereby amended by adding:
 
The provisions of section 2304 shall not prohibit the dispensing of Class I and
Class II liquids in the open from a fuel dispensing system supplied by an above
ground tank, not to exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons, located at commercial,
industrial, government or manufacturing establishments, and intended for
fueling vehicles used in connection with their business. Such dispensing may be
permitted, provided:
 
1.   An inspection of the premises and operations has been made and approval
granted by the authority having jurisdiction.
2.   The tank is safeguarded against collision, spillage, and overfill, to the
satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction.
3.   The tank is listed or approved for such above ground use.
4.   The tank complies with requirements for emergency relief venting, and the
tank and dispensing system meet the electrical classifications of the Code.
5.   The tank storage shall comply with NFPA 30 2024 & NFPA 30A 2024.
6. Delete Appendix F,H,J,L, and N of the International Fire Code (2024). (Ord.
17-4, amd. Ord.)
 
10-2I-3: OPEN BURNING:
 
A.   Prohibited; Exceptions: Open burning for the purpose of disposal of
material is prohibited except as follows:
 
          1. Notification Of Fire Department:
 
a. Application; Fees: Application for a variance must be made in writing to the
   
Fire Department. If a variance is granted, a permit fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Council shall cover the costs of assuring compliance. If an
on site visit is required for the process of granting a variance, a first time
fee set by resolution of the Council shall be added to the cost of the permit.
 
      b. Lot Size: Unless authorized by the Fire Chief, only single-family lots
of          twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet in size or larger shall
be granted a          variance of this section.
 
      c.  Distance: Unless authorized by the Fire Chief, no variance shall be
granted          unless the site of burning is two hundred feet (200') or more
from any sensitive          neighboring structure.
 
2.   Material Restrictions: Only leaves, grass clippings, small twigs and
branches produced on the site listed on the permit shall be eligible to be
burned. Burning of rubbish and paper products shall be prohibited. Rubber tires
shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
 
   3.   Time And Atmospheric Restrictions:
 
a.   The Fire Chief shall establish periods for burning of yard waste for
spring and fall. No burning shall be permitted outside of these periods except
with authorization by the Fire Chief.
 
b.   Unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief, open burning shall be only
on specific days, between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to sundown. Open burning
shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fires hazardous.
 
   c. Open burning shall be prohibited whenever atmospheric conditions or
            local circumstances are deemed to create a hazardous situation,
including,             but not limited to, periods during which the State Fire
Marshal has issued a          proclamation prohibiting open burning within
Cerro Gordo County.
 
4.   Location On Property: Burning shall not take place within fifty feet (50')
of a structure; within twenty-five feet (25') permissible if the pile size is
three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in height.
 
5.   Containers: No burning shall be done in containers. "Burn barrels",
incinerators, etc., are prohibited.
 
6.   Fire Extinguishing Equipment: A garden hose connected to a water supply,
or other approved fire extinguishing equipment must be readily available at the
burning site.
 
7.   Attendance: All burning material shall be constantly attended by a person
who shall take responsibility of the burning.
 
8.   Discontinuance Of Burning: The Fire Chief, or a designated representative,
shall be authorized to order the burning ceased if smoke emissions are a
problem.
 
    B.   Exemptions: The following shall be permitted:
 
1.   Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists.
      a. Prior to commencement of open burning, a permit shall be obtained from
         the Fire Department.
      b. Specific dates and time period allowed for burning shall be approved
by          the Fire Chief and shall be included in the permit.
 
2.   Trees And Trimmings:
         
a.   The open burning of trees and trimmings not originated on the premises;
provided, that the burning site is operated by the City, said burning site
being fenced and access controlled, burning is conducted on a regularly
scheduled basis and is supervised at all times. Burning is conducted only when
weather conditions are favorable with respect to surrounding property, as
announced by the Fire Chief and the burning site is limited to areas at least
one-fourth (1/4) mile from any inhabited building. However, when the open
burning of trees and tree trimmings causes air pollution as defined in Iowa
Code section 455B.131(3), the City Fire Department or the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) may take appropriate action to secure relocation of
the burning operation. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite trees and tree
trimmings.
 
3.   Flare Stacks: The open burning or flaring of waste gases.
 
4.   Recreational Fires: Open fires for cooking, heating, camping, and
recreation using liquefied petroleum gas, natural gas, charcoal or clean
untreated wood shall comply with the adopted Fire Code with amendments.
 
a)   Wood in excess of one and five-eighths inches (1-5/8”) minimum dimension
used as fuel is permitted, provided it complies with the adopted Fire Code.
Building materials may not be used for fuel.
 
b) Recreational fires other than those for the purpose of cooking are not
permitted after. 2:00 a.m. or before 10:00 a.m.
 
c) Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or
combustible material. Conditions that could cause a fire to spread within 25
feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition.
 
d) Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is
extinguished. A minimum of one (1) portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-
A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment (such as dirt,
sand, water barrel, garden hose, or water truck) shall be available for
immediate utilization.
 
e) Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated
on combustible balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction.
Exceptions include one and two-family dwellings or where buildings, balconies
or decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. In addition, liquefied
petroleum gas fueled cooking devices having an LP gas capacity greater than one
pound shall not be located on or within 10 feet of combustible construction in
buildings or locations other than one and two-family dwellings.
f) Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a
structure or combustible material.
   g) Recreational fires within the boundaries of the MacNider Campground
   are    exempt from permitted times restrictions.
 
   h) Recreational fires shall be prohibited whenever atmospheric conditions or
   local circumstances are deemed to create a hazardous situation, including,
   but not    limited to, periods during which the State Fire Marshal has
issued a proclamation    prohibiting open burning within Cerro Gordo County.
 
         If smoke emissions from a recreational fire cause a problem, the fire
shall be    extinguished by order of the Fire Chief or his designee.
      
5.   Ceremonial Fires: Fires for the purpose of celebration by schools,
churches and other organizations may be permitted by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
 
6.   Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training by Fire
Department personnel in firefighting methods, provided that the Executive
Director of the IDNR receives notice in writing at least one (1) week before
such action commences. All asphalt roofing and asbestos containing materials
shall be removed prior to the training fire.
 
7.   Agricultural Burns: Prescribed burning of weeds and natural prairie may be
permitted by the Fire Chief or his designee.
 
8.   Agricultural Land Use: Existing farmsteads that have been annexed into
Mason City and are still zoned agricultural shall be exempt from City
ordinances on open burning except that if in the event smoke emissions were to
cause a problem, the fire shall be extinguished by order of the Fire Chief or
his designee.
 
C.   Penalties: Penalties for violations of this section shall be as permitted
in this Code; repeat violators shall be subject to revocation of their burning
permits. (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017; 6-6-2017)
 
10-2I-4: SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:
 
A.   A fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council will be charged to
cover costs of inspections that are conducted outside of the regular fire
inspector’s route and that require reports to other agencies as set out herein;
but not limited to the following: State Fire Marshal, State Department of
Health, Department of Human Services, City Council, etc.
 
B.   A fee set by resolution of the Council will be charged for fire
extinguisher classes conducted by the Fire Department.
C.   Regular fire inspections shall be provided free of charge. Upon the first
visit, the occupant will be given a courtesy notice explaining the benefits of
said inspection and will state that a reinspection will also be provided after
a reasonable date at no cost. The third and any additional inspections required
shall be set by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
 
      Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
      Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
      Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
      PASSED AND APPROVED this 6 th day of January, 2026.
 
                        /s/John P. Lee
                        John P. Lee, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:      December 2, 2025
Second Consideration:   December 16, 2025
Third Consideration:      January 6, 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 26 - 2
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CERTAIN CHAPTERS IN TITLE 12, “ZONING REGULATIONS” OF THE
CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA
  
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
      
   Section 1: Chapter 2, Definitions, Section 12-2-2, “Definitions” is hereby
amended by inserting the following new definition in the proper alphabetical
location:
 
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER: Any device or structure that is designed, intended or used
to provide heat and/or hot water to any residence or other building, that
operates by the burning of wood or any other allowable fuel; and is not located
within a residence or other building it is intended to heat.
 
   Section 2: Chapter 6, Nonconformities, Section 12-6-5.E.2 is amended as
follows:
 
2.    Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a
variance to permit the reconstruction of a structure that has been damaged or
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent or more of
its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or destruction, subject to
the standards and requirements of section 12-5-4 of this title.
 
   Section 3: Chapter 8, “Zoning Districts – General” is amended as follows.
 
   A) Section 12-8-2, Table 2, Zoning Form and Function Table, is amended as
follows:
 
1) Section 12-8-2.I, Agriculture: The function “Livestock” is removed as a
permitted use in the Z6 Industrial District by deleting the “P” on the
“Livestock” line in the Z6 column.
 
2) Section 12-8-2.K, Accessory Uses: “Outdoor Wood Boiler” is added as a
permitted accessory use in the Z1 Agriculture District by adding a “P” on the
new line in the Z1 column.
 
    B) Section 12-8-6.C, Recreational Vehicle Storage on Residential Lots:
subsection 3, subparagraph b, is amended as follows:
 
b.   Within the second or third tier of the lot, provided that the vehicle
shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any adjoining property line;.
however, on a corner lot, the vehicle may not encroach into the required
secondary front yard setback. Vehicles stored in the second or third tier must
be stored upon an approved surface, as required by Section 12-8-4.D.
 
   Section 4: Chapter 12-10, “Z2 Sub-Urban District” is amended as follows.
 
   A) Section 12-10-4, Accessory Buildings, Section 12-10-4.C, is amended as
follows:
 
C.    Architectural Style and Building Materials: The architectural style and
building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z2 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot; however, an
accessory dwelling unit shall not be subject to this requirement.
 
   B) The table section at Section 12-10-8.D, Table 1, Z2 Development
Standards, Subsection D is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
 
D. SETBACKS – PRINCIPAL BUILDING
1. Principal Front Setback 35 ft. max., 25 ft. min.
2. Secondary Front Setback 15 ft. min.
                           a. Edgeyard 6 ft. min.
3. Side Setback            b. Sideyard 0 ft. min. one side; 6 ft. min. opposite
                           side
                           c. Splityard 0 ft. min.
4. Rear Setback            25 ft. min.
5. OR the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block
 
   Section 5: Chapter 12-11, Z3 General Urban District, is amended as follows.
 
   A) Section 12-11-4.B, Cumulative Area, is amended by inserting a new
subparagraph 3, as follows, and renumbering succeeding paragraphs:
 
3.   Notwithstanding the above, on lots that contain a minimum of four (4)
units within one (1) or more multiple flat buildings, mansion apartment
buildings, or mixed-use block buildings, one (1) garage space within a detached
garage building with no horizontal dimension per garage space greater than
twenty-four (24) feet shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
 
   3 4.   On any lot, a maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than
eighty (80)    square feet each, such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage
or maintenance sheds, shall    not be considered as part of the overall
accessory building square foot calculation.
 
   B) Section 12-11-4.C, Accessory Buildings, is amended as follows:
 
C.   Architectural Style and Building Materials: The architectural style and
building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z3 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot; however, an
accessory dwelling unit, when allowed, shall not be subject to this
requirement.
 
   C) Section 12-11-6, Interpretation of Standards, Subsection H, Drive
Through, is amended to insert a new subparagraph 3 as follows, with succeeding
paragraphs renumbered:
 
3.   The location of and access to the drive through window shall be designed
to provide adequate stacking of vehicles wholly on the site, so that vehicles
are not encroaching into the public right-of-way (including alleys). The
required number of stacking spaces shall be determined by the Development
Review Committee according to Chapter 7 of this title, but in no case shall
there be fewer than three (3) on-site stacking spaces (not including the space
at the drive-through window). Each stacking space shall be a minimum of sixteen
(16) feet long and eight (8) feet wide. The stacking route shall be designed to
allow for safe and efficient vehicle circulation and pedestrian access.
 
   4. Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of the
City       Engineer; and
    5. The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the City
   Engineer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 22-3,
3-   1-2022)
 
 
   D) Section 12-11-8, Table 1, Z3 Development Standards, Subsection E of the
table regarding setbacks of accessory buildings, is deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
 
 
E. SETBACKS - ACCESSORY BUILDING
1. Principal Front Setback 20 feet plus principal bldg. setback minimum
2. Secondary Front Setback 25 ft. minimum
3. Side Setback            5 ft. minimum
4. Rear Setback            5 feet minimum
5. OR the predominant setback on lots fronting on the same block.
 
   Section 6: Chapter 12, Z4 Multi Use District, is amended as follows.
 
   A) Section 12-12-6, Interpretation of Standards. A new subsection J, “Drive
Through” is added to the end of the section, as follows:
 
J.   Drive Through: Drive through functions in the Z4 District shall meet the
following standards:
1.   The location of and access to the drive through window shall be designed
to provide adequate stacking of vehicles wholly on the site, so that vehicles
are not encroaching into the public right-of-way (including alleys). The
required number of stacking spaces shall be determined by the Development
Review Committee according to Chapter, but in no case shall be fewer than four
(4) on-site stacking spaces (not including the space at the drive-through
window). Each stacking space shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet long and
eight (8) feet wide. The stacking route shall be designed to allow for safe and
efficient vehicle circulation and pedestrian access.
2.   Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of the
City Engineer; and
3.   The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the City
Engineer.
 
   B) Section 12-12-7, Overlay Districts, subsection C, South Federal Gateway
Overlay District; Section 12-12-7.C.8 is deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
 
8.   Additional Standards of Review: In addition to the standards of review for
a conditional use, as outlined in section 12-5-5 D of this title, the zoning
board of adjustment shall find that the development will result in an
attractive gateway to the community from the Avenue of the Saints (US 18/IA
27).
 
   C) Section 12-12-9, Table 1, Z4 Development Standards, subsection E of the
table regarding setbacks of accessory buildings, is deleted in its entirety and
replaced with the following:
 
E. SETBACKS - ACCESSORY BLDG
1. Principal Front Setback 20 feet plus minimum principal building setback
2. Secondary Front Setback 10 feet minimum
3. Side Setback            5 feet minimum
4. Rear Setback            5 feet minimum
 
   Section 7: Chapter 12-14, Z6 Industrial District, Section 12-14-6,
Interpretation of Standards: A new subsection C, Drive Through, is added to the
end of this section, as follows:
 
C.   Drive Through: Drive through functions in the Z6 District shall meet the
following standards:
1.   The location of and access to the drive through window shall be designed
to provide adequate stacking of vehicles wholly on the site, so that vehicles
are not stacking in the public right-of-way (including alleys). Each stacking
space shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet long and eight (8) feet wide. The
number of stacking spaces (not including the space at the drive-through window)
shall be determined by the Development Review Committee.
2.   Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of the
City Engineer; and
3.   The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the City
Engineer.
 
   Section 9: Chapter 12-16, Zoning Standards, is amended as follows.
 
   A) Section 12-16-3, Fences, subsection G, is amended as follows:
 
G.   Z2, Z3, Z7-5 and Z7-6 District Fence Standards: All residential district
fences shall be placed within the property being fenced.
1.   Except in the case of a secondary front yard on a corner lot that abuts a
street, fences alongside property lines shall not be more than six feet (6’) in
height for the distance commencing from a point on the side property line
located along the rear lot line and proceeding along the side property line to
a point that would be intersected by the front wall line of the existing
principal building on the lot.
2.   Fences along or paralleling any rear property line shall not exceed six
feet (6’) in height.
3.   The required screening provisions for residential districts shall
supersede, where applicable, the provisions of this section.
4.   Fences extending beyond the front wall of the existing principal building
or across the required secondary front setback shall be no greater than four
(4) feet in height.
5.   In the Z7-6 Golf Course Development District, the above requirements shall
apply to fences serving residential forms and functions.
 
   B) Section 12-16-5, Required Landscaping and Screening, subsection F, Types
and Species of Trees, is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following:
 
F.   Types and Species of Trees: All plant species shall be non-invasive,
indigenous and/or native to the appropriate USDA hardiness zone and physical
characteristics for Northern Iowa. Tree and shrub species listed as prohibited
in section 5-3-11 may not be planted.
 
   C) Section 12-16-6, Traffic Visibility, subsection A, Corner Lots, is
amended as follows:
 
A.   CORNER LOTS: On corner lots in all zoning districts, except for buildings
in the Z5 District, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of four
feet (34’) and ten feet (10’) within twenty feet (20’) from the intersecting
property lines. Any such obstruction shall not be wider than two feet (2’).
 
   D) Section 12-16-8, Table 2 Public Darkness: the third row of the “Ambient
Light Levels” column is amended to read as follows:
 
Maximum allowed initial lamp lumens per square foot of illuminated area1
 
   E) Section 12-16-12. Refuse and Recyclable Material, subsection A, Location
and Screening, subparagraph 1, New Development, sub-sub paragraphs c and d are
amended as follows:
 
c.   Screened containers shall be located in the 3rd tier of a property, being
that area measured from a point twenty feet (20’) back from the principal
structure’s front facade and extending to the rear lot line.
d.   Screened containers shall comply with minimum setback requirements for
accessory buildings.
 
   F) Section 12-16-20 Permitted Encroachments into Setbacks. A new subsection
D is added to the end of the section, as follows:
 
D.   Heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment serving the buildings
on the same premises, except outdoor wood boilers, may encroach into required
side and rear setbacks.
 
   G) New Section 12-16-25: Outdoor Wood Boilers. This new section is added to
the end of the chapter, as follows:
 
12-16-25   Outdoor Wood Boilers
A.   An outdoor wood boiler unit is permitted only in the Z1, Agricultural
District.
B.   At the time of application for required permits, the owner or installer
shall provide proof that the unit is certified by the U. S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
C.   The outdoor wood boiler shall meet the same setbacks as required for
accessory buildings.
D.   Separation from adjacent residential uses: the outdoor wood boiler may not
be located less than:
1.   One hundred (100) feet from any property zoned Z2, Z3, Z7-3 and Z7-5.
2.   Three hundred (300) feet from any residential form or function in any
zoning district located on a lot other than that served by the outdoor wood
boiler.
3.   The zoning permit application for the unit shall identify all properties
zoned Z2, Z3, Z7-3 and Z7-5 within one hundred (100) feet and all residential
forms and functions in any zoning district located within three hundred (300)
feet of the outdoor wood boiler.
E.   The unit shall have a permanent exhaust stack that is no less than twelve
(12) feet above ground level and extends at least two (2) feet above the peak
of any roof structure of a residential form or function located within three
hundred (300) feet located on a lot not served by the outdoor wood boiler;
however, no such stack shall be required to be more than twenty-five (25) feet
high.
F.   Operation of the outdoor wood boiler, including materials allowed for
fuel, shall conform to the manufacturer’s specifications and the requirements
of the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
 
      Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
      Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
      Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its
final passage, approval and publication as required by law.
      PASSED AND APPROVED this 6 th day of January, 2026.
 
                        /s/John P. Lee
                        John P. Lee, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
First Consideration:      December 2, 2025
Second Consideration:   December 16, 2025
Third Consideration:      January 6, 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 26 - 3
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, IOWA, BY
REPEALING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 2: “GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE”,
ARTICLE C: "SOLID WASTES", SUBSECTION 12: “CHARGES”, AND ADOPTING A NEW
SUBSECTION 12 IN LIEU THEREOF
 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
Section 1: That the City Code of the City of Mason City, Iowa, should be and
the same is hereby amended by repealing Title 4, Chapter 2: Garbage, Refuse,
Recyclables and Yard Waste, Article C: "Solid Wastes", Subsection 12:
“Charges”: and adopting a new Subsection 12 in lieu thereof as follows:
 
"CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE
ARTICLE C. SOLID WASTES
 
4-2C-12:    CHARGES: Beginning with the July 1, 2026 billing date, the
following rates shall be charged by the City and collected from each single-
family dwelling and each separate dwelling unit within a multiple-family
dwelling, or owner of a "residential premises" as defined in section 4-2C-1 of
this article serviced by garbage, domestic refuse, recyclables or yard waste
collection service as provided for in this chapter.
 
  
 
Service Type                                        July 1, 2026- Until Amended
96-gallon garbage container plus biweekly 96-gallon $26.21 per month
recycling container
64-gallon garbage container plus biweekly 96-gallon $20.23 per month
recycling container
35-gallon garbage container plus biweekly 96-gallon $14.24 per month
recycling container
Cost of additional 96-gallon garbage container (if  $21.54 per month
96-gallon base level is selected)
Cost of additional 96-gallon recycling container    $4.67 per month
 
 
This charge shall be in payment for collection of garbage, recycling, and yard
waste as herein set out in section 4-2C-2 of this article. Such monthly charge
shall be billed to the owner as herein directed.
 
For each additional bag of garbage or refuse, or for large items approved for
collection by the Sanitation Division, an authorized sticker or stickers shall
be attached. The charge for each sticker and other necessary charges shall be
set via Resolution of the Council.

The Sanitation Division shall determine the number of stickers to be attached
to large items that have been approved for collection.
 
The collection of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste, as provided for
in this chapter, and maintenance of the availability of such service, whether
or not the owner or occupant of such residential premises, is hereby declared a
benefit to the said premises at least equal to the monthly charges specified in
this article. (Ord. 19-07, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-6, 7-21-2020; Ord. 21-8, 6-
15-2021; Ord. 22-06, 4-19-2022; Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
 
Section 2: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
Section 3: If any section, provision, or part of this Ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 4: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 20 th day of January, 2026.
 
                        /s/John P. Lee                                    John
P. Lee, Mayor
ATTEST:
 
/s/Aaron Burnett
Aaron Burnett, City Clerk
 
 
First Consideration:      December 16, 2025   
Second Consideration:   January 6, 2026
Third Consideration:      January 20, 2026
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 17-15
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE OFFICIAL CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF MASON CITY, CERRO
GORDO COUNTY, IOWA TO BE KNOWN AS THE "2017 CITY CODE, MASON CITY, IOWA";
PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION AND READOPTION OF ALL ORDINANCES OF A GENERAL NATURE
AND PROVIDING FOR THE RETENTION OF ALL SPECIAL ORDINANCES AND PROVIDING A
SAVING CLAUSE
   BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa:
   Section 1: The official City Code of Mason City shall be and comprise that
certain loose leaf volume published by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing
thirteen (13) titles and appropriate chapters, articles and sections within the
titles published upon order of the City Council and containing all of the
general effect ordinances of the City.
   Section 2: The ordinances of a general nature contained in this official
City Code shall be deemed to be continuous provisions and not reenactments of
the same material on the same subject. Nor shall the repeal of any general
ordinance affect or be deemed to cause any special ordinance to have been
repealed, but such special ordinances, including but not limited to franchise
ordinances, tax levy ordinances, land description ordinances or bonding
ordinances shall continue in full force and effect as though no new City Code
had been prepared and hereby adopted.
   Section 3: Amendments to the official 2017 City Code, as hereby adopted,
shall be made by ordinance amending or repealing a specific title, chapter,
article or section of this Code. Such amendments shall refer to the said
section to be amended or repealed by section number and such changes, when
adopted by the governing body, shall be incorporated into the official Code by
replacement pages, properly marked and identified and prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., for insertion in each of the official Code books in existence.
   Section 4: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
   Section 5: If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect
the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section thereof, or part
thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
   Section 6: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
   PASSED AND APPROVED this 5th day of December, 2017.
      /s/Eric Bookmeyer   
      Eric Bookmeyer, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/Kevin Jacobson   
Kevin Jacobson, Interim City Clerk
1st consideration: November 7, 2017
2nd consideration: November 21, 2017
3rd consideration: December 5, 2017
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Liability Of Officers And Agents
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Governing Body, this Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of the CITY OF MASON CITY,
IOWA. Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in any
legal document. (1985 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect. (1985
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed as ordinances
amending this Code, and which indicate the intention of the Council to make the
same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a
reference to the Code shall be understood as including them.
   B.   Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. (1985 Code)
1-1-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND AGENTS:
When the provisions of any section of this Code prohibit the commission of an
act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in
aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and
liable to the penalty set forth. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this Code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1985 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, services or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1985 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Code. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions; Rules Of Word Construction
1-3-2: Catchlines
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS; RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The City of Mason City, in the County of Cerro Gordo, in the State of
Iowa.
CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Mason City.
CITY SEAL: The seal of the City described as follows: a disk having around the
margin thereof the words "City Seal" and within the circle on the face thereof
the words "City of Mason City, Iowa".
CODE: The Code of Mason City, Iowa, and all amendments thereto.
COMPUTING TIME: In computing time, the first day shall be excluded and the last
included, unless the last falls on Sunday, in which case the time prescribed
shall be extended so as to include the whole of the following Monday.
COUNTY: The County of Cerro Gordo in the State of Iowa.
FISCAL YEAR: The Municipal fiscal year beginning on July 1 of each year and
ending on June 30 of the following year.
GENDER: Whenever the masculine gender is used, females as well as males shall
be deemed to be included.
IN THE CITY: All territory over which the City now has or shall hereafter
acquire jurisdiction.
JOINT AUTHORITY: Words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more public
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of them, unless it shall be otherwise expressed in the ordinance or
resolution giving the authority.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: Whenever any words in any section of this Code import the plural
number, the singular shall be deemed to be included and whenever the singular
number shall be used, it shall be deemed to include the plural.
OATH: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the word
"sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who
holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
OR, AND: The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or", if the
sense requires it.
OWNER: Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or
joint tenant of the whole or a part of any property, either alone or with
others.
PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and
also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns or the agent of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every species of property, except real property as defined
by this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all
chattels real.
SHALL: The word "shall" is mandatory.
STATE: The State of Iowa.
STATUTE REFERENCES: Whenever reference is made to the Iowa Code, this shall
mean and have reference to the latest edition of the Iowa Code, as amended and
supplemented.
TENSE: Words in the present tense shall include the future.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Printing and any other mode of representing words and
letters, but unless a facsimile signature is authorized when the written
signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or
bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or
in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark, witnessed as required by
law.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (1953 Code § 3-1; amd. 1985
Code; Ord. 1476, 1-15-1979; 2017 Code)
1-3-2: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person who shall be found guilty of violating the provisions of any section
of this Code now existing, or hereafter enacted, for which no other penalty is
provided, shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code sections 903.1(1)(a) and
364.3(2) in the case of simple misdemeanors or as provided in Iowa Code section
364.3(6) in the case of Municipal infractions. (Ord. 01-22, 10-16-2001; amd.
2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Definitions
1-4A-2: Violations, Penalties And Alternative Relief
1-4A-3: Civil Citations
1-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
MUNICIPAL INFRACTION: Except those provisions specifically provided under State
law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor or a
simple misdemeanor under chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, the
doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a
misdemeanor by the Code of ordinances, City of Mason City, or any ordinance or
Code herein adopted by reference, or omission or failure to perform any act or
duty required by the Code of ordinances, City of Mason City, or any ordinance
or Code herein adopted by reference, is a Municipal infraction and is
punishable by a civil penalty as provided herein.
OFFICER: Any employee or official authorized to enforce the Code of ordinances
of the City of Mason City.
REPEAT OFFENSE: A recurring violation of the same section of the Code of
ordinances. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988)
1-4A-2: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ALTERNATIVE RELIEF:
   A.   A Municipal infraction is punishable by a civil penalty of not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if the
infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord. 01-23, 10-16-2001; amd. 2017
Code)
   B.   Each day that violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the violator
constitutes a separate offense.
   C.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude
a City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. (Ord.
88-29, 12-5-1988)
1-4A-3: CIVIL CITATIONS:
   A.   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce the Code of ordinances
may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a Municipal infraction.
   B.   The citation may be served by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
   C.   A copy of the citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the District
Court. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988)
   D.   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been
committed and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the defendant.
      2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
      3.   The location and time of the infraction.
      4.   The time and place of court appearance.
      5.   The penalty for failure to appear in court. (Ord. 88-29, 12-5-1988;
amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CORPORATE LIMITS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Limits
1-5-2: Corporate Property
1-5-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits of the City of Mason City, Iowa, are hereby declared to be
as they have been legally established according to law, and shall embrace the
territory lying within the boundary of the following described perimeter:
   Beginning at the Northwest corner of Section Thirty-two (32) in Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian;
   Thence running Easterly along the North line of said Section Thirty-two
(32), and Sections Thirty-three (33), Thirty-four (34) and Thirty-five (35),
all in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty (20) West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately Three and one-fourth (31/4)
miles to the Northeast corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Northwest
Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section Thirty-five (35);
   Thence Southerly a distance of approximately three-eighths (3/8) of a mile,
   Thence easterly approximately one- quarter (1/4) mile to centerline of
Section Thirty-five (35), in Township Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty
(20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence Southerly approximately one-sixth (1/6) of a mile on centerline of
Section Thirty-five (35), in Township Ninety- seven (97) North, Range Twenty
(20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence Westerly approximately one-tenth (1/10) of a mile;
   Thence southerly four feet (4'),
   Thence westerly approximately one-sixth (1/6) of a mile to the West line of
the West one-half (W1/2) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4),
   Thence southerly to the north line of Section Two (2), in Township Ninety-
six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence Easterly along the North line of said Section Two (2) a distance of
approximately Three-fourths (3/4) mile to the Northeast corner of said Section
Two (2);
   Thence Southerly along the East line of said Section Two (2) to the
Southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Northwest Quarter
(NW1/4) of Section One (1) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty
(20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence Easterly on the South line of the North one-quarter (N1/4) of said
Section One (1) and Section Six (6) and Section Five (5), in Township Ninety-
six (96) North, Range Nineteen (19), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a
distance of approximately Two and one-half (21/2) miles to the North and South
Quarter line of said Section Five (5);
   Thence Southerly along the North and South Quarter lines of said Section
Five (5) and Section Eight (8) and Section Seventeen (17), in Township Ninety-
six (96) North, Range Nineteen (19) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a
distance of approximately two and one-quarter (21/4) miles to the center of
said Section Seventeen (17);
   Thence Westerly along the East-West quarter line of said Section Seventeen
(17) and Section Eighteen (18) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range
Nineteen (19), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, and Section Thirteen (13)
in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately two and one-half (21/2) miles
to the East Quarter corner of Section Fourteen (14), in Township Ninety-six
(96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence Southerly along the East line of said Section Fourteen (14), a
distance of approximately one-half (1/2) mile to the Southeast corner of said
Section Fourteen (14);
   Thence Westerly along the South lines of said Section Fourteen (14) and
Section Fifteen (15) in Township Ninety- six (96) North, Range Twenty (20) West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, to a point on the Southwesterly right of way
line of the Union Pacific Railroad, said Southwesterly right of way line being
approximately 1,186.3 feet East of the Southwest Corner of said Section 15;
   Thence Southeasterly along said Southwesterly right of way line to a point
on the Easterly line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of
Section 22, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.;
   Thence Southerly along said Easterly line to the Southeast Corner of said
Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter;
   Thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Northwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter and along the Northerly line of Robinson's Addition to Cerro
Gordo County, Iowa to the Northwest Corner of said Robinson's Addition;
   Thence Southerly along the Westerly line of said Robinson's Addition to the
Southwest Corner of said Robinson's Addition, said point also being on the
Northerly line of Sondergaard's Addition to Cerro Gordo County, Iowa;
   Thence Westerly along said Northerly line to a point on the Westerly right
of way line of South Delaware Avenue;
   Thence Southerly along said Westerly right of way line to a point on the
Northerly right of way line of County Road 245th Street;
   Thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line to a point on the
Northerly extension of a line 225.00 feet Easterly, measured at a right angle,
from the Westerly line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 22;
   Thence Southerly along said Northerly extension and along said line to a
point on the Northerly line of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed
filed August 1, 2001 in Book 2001 Page 6726 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo
County Recorder;
   Thence Easterly, 125.4 feet along said Northerly line to the Northeast
Corner of said tract of land;
   Thence Southerly, 150.00 feet along the Easterly line of said tract of land
to a point on the Southerly line of the North 483.62 feet of the Northwest
Quarter of said Southwest Quarter;
   Thence Easterly, 71.00 feet along said Southerly line to the Northeast
Corner of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed filed October 28, 1993
in Book 93 Page 9184 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence Southerly, 735.37 feet along the Easterly line of said tract and
along the Easterly line of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed filed
April 23, 1987 in Book 87 Page 2329 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County
Recorder to the Southeast Corner of said tract of land, said point also being
on the Northerly line of that tract of land described in Report of Change of
Title filed February 29, 1984 in Book 248 Page 200 in the Office of the Cerro
Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence Easterly, 138.62 feet along said Northerly line to the Northeast
Corner of said tract of land;
   Thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said tract of land and along the
Southerly extension of said Easterly line to a point on the Southerly line of
said Southwest Quarter;
   Thence Easterly along said Southerly line to the Southeast Corner of said
Southwest Quarter;
   Thence Easterly along the Southerly line of the Southeast Quarter of said
Section 22 to a point on the Westerly right of way line of the Union Pacific
Railroad;
   Thence Southerly along said Westerly right of way line to a point on the
Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway No. 18, said point designated as
centerline metric Station 203+20± PL, 77 meters left of centerline, as shown on
Iowa Department of Transportation Plans for Project Number NHS-18-5(80)-9-17;
   Thence Southwesterly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18 to centerline metric Station 201+02± PL, 59 meters left of centerline;
   Thence Southwesterly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18 to centerline metric Station 199+00, 51 meters left of centerline;
   Thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway No.
18 to Ramp A metric Station 1597+00.270, 26 meters left of Ramp baseline;
   Thence Northwesterly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18 to Ramp A metric Station 1595+50, 28 meters left of Ramp baseline;
   Thence Northwesterly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18 to Side Road Station 2259+50, 60 meters right of centerline Side Road
U.S. Highway 65;
   Thence Westerly across U.S. Highway 65 to Side Road Station 2259+40.000,
64.000 meters left of centerline Side Road U.S. Highway 65 as shown on Exhibit
A attached to Warranty Deed filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page 1413 in the
Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence Southwesterly, 589.52 feet along said Northerly right of way line of
U.S. Highway No. 18;
   Thence Southwesterly, 598.43 feet along said Northerly right of way line of
U.S. Highway No. 18 to a point on the Southerly line of the Northeast Quarter
of Section 28, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.;
   Thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway No.
18 and along said Southerly line to the Southwest Corner of said Northeast
Quarter of said Section 28;
   Thence Westerly along the Southerly line of the Northwest Quarter of said
Section 28 and along said Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway No. 18 to
the most Easterly point of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed and
shown in Acquisition Plat 2 of 2, both filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page
1412 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence Northwesterly, 999.32 feet along said Northerly right of way line of
U.S. Highway No. 18;
   Thence Northwesterly, 1020.66 feet along said Northerly right of way line of
U.S. Highway No. 18;
   Thence Northwesterly, 525.68 feet along said Northerly right of way line of
U.S. Highway No. 18 to a point on the Easterly right of way line of the Union
Pacific Railroad;
   Thence West across the Union Pacific Railroad to the Westerly right-of-way
line of said Union Pacific Railroad;
   Thence Northwesterly along said Northerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18 to the East line of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter in
Section 29, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M;
   Thence Southwesterly along said North right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No.
18 approximately 471 feet;
   Thence Westerly along said North right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 18 to
the Southeast corner of Parcel No. 073020000400, as depicted on a Plat of
Survey recorded as Document No. 2013-423 in the Office of the Cerro Gordo
County Recorder;
   Thence North along the Easternmost line of said Parcel No. 073020000400
484.11 feet, to a point which also lies on the East right-of-way line of Nettle
Avenue, which road is named South Taft Avenue when in the City of Mason City;
   Thence West across said Nettle Avenue right-of-way to the West right-of-way
line of Nettle Avenue;
   Thence North along said West right-of-way line of Nettle Avenue to its
intersection with the center line of 240th Street, which road is named 43rd
Street SW when in the City of Mason City;
   Thence West along said center line of 240th Street approximately 14.5 feet
to a point of intersection with a line extended south from the Northwest corner
of the intersection of Nettle Avenue and 240th Street;
   Thence North to the Northwest corner of the intersection of Nettle Avenue
and 240th Street;
   Thence East across the Nettle Avenue right-of-way to the Northeast corner of
the intersection of Nettle Avenue and 240th Street, which point is also on the
North right-of-way line of 240th Street;
   Thence East along said North right-of-way line of 240th Street to the
Southwest corner of Parcel 072030000700, which, along with Parcel No.
072030000600, is described in Document No. 9710065 recorded in the Office of
the Cerro Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence North along the West line of said Parcel No. 072030000700 to the
Northwest corner of said Parcel No. 072030000700, which point is also the
Southwest corner of Parcel No. 072030000600, which, as noted above, is
described along with Parcel No. 072030000700 in Document No. 9710065 recorded
in the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder;
   Thence North along the West line of said Parcel No. 072030000600 to the
Northwest corner of said parcel;
   Thence East along the North line of said Parcel No. 072030000600 to the
Westerly right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad;
   Thence East across said right-of-way to the Easterly right-of-way line of
the Union Pacific Railroad
   Thence Northerly along said Easterly right of way line to the Northwest
Corner of Lot 1 Golden Grain Energy First Subdivision Cerro Gordo County, Iowa;
   Thence continuing Northerly along said Easterly right-of-way line a distance
of Six hundred sixty-two and forty-five hundredths (662.45) feet,
   Thence continuing Northeasterly along said right-of-way a distance of Two
hundred forty-eight and seventy-six hundredths (248.76) feet on a nontangential
curve concave to the Southeast having a central angle of 07°30'47", a radius of
Eighteen hundred fifty-nine and eighty-eight hundredths (1,859.88) feet and a
chord azimuth of 184°08'36",
   Thence continuing Northeasterly along said right-of-way Eleven hundred
fifty-five and fifty-three hundredths (1,155.53) feet on a nontangential curve
concave to the Southeast having a central angle of 35°35'48", a radius of
Eighteen hundred fifty-nine and eighty-eight hundredths (1859.88) feet and a
chord azimuth of 25°46'23",
   Thence Northeasterly tangent to said curve 43°34'17", azimuth along said
Southeasterly right-of-way line, Six hundred sixty-four and sixty-one
hundredths feet (664.61) to the North line of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of
Section 20, Township 96 North, Range 20 West of the 5th P.M.; Thence Westerly
along the North line of said Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) to the Northwest corner
of said Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4);
   Thence Westerly along the South lines of Sections Seventeen (17) and
Eighteen (18) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, and Section Thirteen (13) in Township Ninety-six (96)
North, Range Twenty-one (21) West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, a distance
of approximately Two and one-half (2 1/2) miles to the South Quarter corner of
said Section Thirteen (13);
   Thence Northerly along the North and South Quarter lines of Sections 13 and
12 in Township 96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian
approximately One and one-half miles (1 1/2 mi.) to the center of said Section
12;
   Thence North along said North and South Quarter lines of Sections 13 and 12
to the north right-of-way line of IA 122;
   Thence Westerly along said right-of-way line to the east line of the
Northwest quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest quarter (SW ¼) of Section Twelve
(12), Township 96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence south along said East line to the Southeast corner of the Northwest
quarter (NW ¼) of the Southwest quarter (SW ¼) of Section Twelve (12), Township
96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence West along the south line of the Northwest quarter (NW ¼) of the
Southwest quarter (SW ¼) of Section Twelve (12), Township 96 North, Range 21
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, to the Southwest corner of said quarter-
quarter section, which point is also on the center line of Lark Avenue;
   Thence north along said center line of Lark Avenue to its intersection with
a line extended across Lark Avenue joining the South lines of the IA 122 right-
of-way on each side of Lark Avenue;
   Thence East to the intersection with a line extended north from the East
right-of-way line of Lark Avenue, approximately 60 feet;
   Thence North from said intersection to the North right-of-way line if IA
Highway 122;
   Thence West along said North right-of-way line of IA Highway 122
approximately 11 feet;
   Thence Northwesterly 23.78' to the easterly right-of-way line of Lark
Avenue;
   Thence North 00°11'14" West Two thousand four hundred thirty-nine and
ninety-eight hundredths feet (2,439.98') along said right-of-way line to the
north line of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of said Section 12;
   Thence North 89°55'49" East Two thousand six hundred five and thirty-eight
hundredths feet (2,605.38') along said north line to the South Quarter (S 1/4)
corner of Section 1 in Township 96 North, Range 21 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian;
   Thence Northerly along the North and South quarter line of said Section 1
approximately One (1) mile to the North Quarter (N 1/4) corner of said Section
1;
   Thence Easterly along the North lines of said Section One (1) and Section
Six (6) in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth
Principal Meridian, a distance of approximately One and one-half (11/2) miles
to the Southwest corner of Section Thirty-two (32) in Township Ninety-seven
(97) North, Range Twenty (20), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
   Thence along the West line of said Section Thirty-two (32), a distance of
approximately One (1) mile to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 05-22, 8-16-2005; amd. Ord. 23-14, 12-5-2023; Ord. 25-03, 2-4-2025)
1-5-2: CORPORATE PROPERTY:
As permitted by section 364.4, Code of Iowa, the City does hereby declare all
ordinances of the City heretofore lawfully adopted to apply and be enforced
upon the real estate located on U.S. Highway 18, three (3) miles west of the
corporate limits, commonly known as the Mason City Airport; legally described
as follows:
That part of the South Half (S1/2) of Section Thirty-three (33), Township
Ninety-seven (97) North, Range Twenty-one (21) West, and that part of Section
Four (4), the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section Five (5), the East Half (E1/
2) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of Section Eight (8) and Section Nine (9),
all in Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty-one (21) West, Cerro Gordo
County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest (SW) corner of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of
said Section Thirty-three (33); thence Easterly on an assumed azimuth from
North of 89°50'16" azimuth along the South line of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/
4) one thousand three hundred twenty-eight and three hundredths feet
(1,328.03') to the point of beginning; thence Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth six
hundred eighteen and fifty-seven hundredths feet (618.57'); thence Westerly
269°27'00" azimuth fifteen hundred feet (1500.00'); thence southerly 179°27'00"
azimuth six hundred eight and fifty four hundredths feet (608.54') to the North
line of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of said Section Thirty-three (33); thence
continue Southerly 179°27'00" azimuth two thousand six hundred eleven and
twenty-five hundredths feet (2,611.25') to the North line of the Northeast
Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of said Section Four (4);
thence Westerly along the North line of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) to the Northwest (NW) corner thereof; thence
Southerly along the West line of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the
Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) to the Northeast (NE) corner of the Southwest Quarter
(SW1/4) of said Southwest Quarter (SW1/4); thence Westerly along the North line
of said Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) to the
Southeast (SE) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southeast Quarter
(SE1/4) of said Section Five (5); thence Northerly along the East line of said
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter to the North line of the South five
hundred feet (500.00') of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of the Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4); thence Westerly along said North line to the East line of the
Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Northerly
along said East line to the Northeast corner of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4)
of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Westerly along the North line of said
Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) to the Northwest (NW) corner thereof; thence
Southerly along the West line of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) to the
Northwest (NW) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section Eight
(8); thence Easterly along the North line of said Northeast Quarter to the
Northwest (NW) corner of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Northeast
Quarter (NE1/4); thence Southerly along the West line of the East Half (E1/2)
of said Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) to a point which lies three hundred thirteen
and fifty hundredths feet (313.50') Northerly, as measured along said West
line, from the Northerly right-of-way line of old U.S. Highway 18; thence
Easterly perpendicular to said West line two hundred fourteen and fifty
hundredths feet (214.50'); thence Southerly parallel to said West line to the
Northerly right- of-way line of old U.S. Highway 18; thence Westerly along said
Northerly right-of-way line to the West line of said East Half (E1/2) of the
Northeast Quarter (NE1/4); thence Southerly along said West line to the center
line of said old U.S. Highway 18; thence Easterly along said center line to the
West line of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section Nine (9); thence
Easterly perpendicular to said West line thirty-three feet (33.00'); thence
Southerly parallel to said West line to the Northerly right-of-way line of U.S.
Highway No. 18; thence Easterly along said Northerly right- of-way line to its
intersection with a line that bears 179°27'00" azimuth from the point of
beginning; thence Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth to the point of beginning.
AND EXCEPT that part of the previously described tract described as follows:
Commencing at the Southwest (SW) corner of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of the
Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of said Section Nine (9); thence Easterly on an
assumed azimuth from North of 89°33'03" azimuth along the South line of said
Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) seven hundred sixteen and thirty five hundredths feet
(716.35'); thence Northerly 01°54'03" azimuth four hundred thirty-five feet
(435.00') to the point of beginning; thence continue Northerly 01°54'03"
azimuth four hundred twenty-five feet (425.00'); thence Westerly 271°54'03"
azimuth seven hundred feet (700.00'); thence Southerly 181°54'03" azimuth four
hundred twenty-five feet (425.00'); thence Easterly 91°54'03" azimuth seven
hundred feet (700.00') to the point of beginning.
TOGETHER WITH that part of the West Half (W1/2) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/
4) of Section Nine (9), Township Ninety-six (96) North, Range Twenty-one (21)
West, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northwest (NW) corner of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/4);
thence Southerly 179°18'20" azimuth along the West line of said Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4) one hundred seventy-three and ninety-seven hundredths feet
(173.97') to the Southerly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 18 and the
point of beginning; thence continue Southerly 179°18'20" azimuth along said
West line one thousand one hundred forty- six and forty-eight hundredths feet
(1,146.48') to the Southwest (SW) corner of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of
the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4); thence Easterly 89°36'48" azimuth along the
South line of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4)
five hundred ninety- seven and seventy-eight hundredths feet (597.78'); thence
Southerly 179°27'00" azimuth one thousand two hundred sixty- two and ninety-
four hundredths feet (1,262.94') to the Northerly right-of-way line of the
County Road; thence Easterly 85°41'00" azimuth along said Northerly right-of-
way line thirty-five and seven hundredths feet (35.07'); thence Northerly
359°27'00" azimuth nine hundred fifty-five and seventy-five hundredths feet
(955.75'); thence Easterly 89°27'00" azimuth forty feet (40.00'); thence
Northerly 359°27'00" azimuth three hundred four and sixty-seven hundredths feet
(304.67') to the South line of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter
(SE1/4); thence Easterly 89°36'48" azimuth along said South line six hundred
thirty- three and forty-eight hundredths feet (633.48') to the Southeast (SE)
corner of said Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4);
thence Northerly 359°14'17" azimuth along the East line of said Northwest
Quarter (NW1/4) of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) one thousand one hundred
thirty-eight and twenty-eight hundredths feet (1,138.28') to the Southerly
right-of-way line of said U.S. Highway No. 18; thence Westerly along said
Southerly right- of-way line one thousand three hundred five and six hundredths
feet (1,305.06') to the point of beginning.
(1985 Code)
AND EXCEPT that part of the previously described tract as follows:
The North half (N1/2) of vacated Highway 18 lying South of a tract of land
located in the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of
Section 8, Township 96 North, Range 21, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as
follows: Beginning at a point on the west line of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4)
of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 where it intersects the
North line of State Highway No. 18 continuing thence North on said line 19
rods, thence due East at right angles with said West line of the Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4) of Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 a distance of 13
Rods, thence South and parallel with the said west line of the Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4) of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4) of said Section 8 to a point
where it intersects the north right-of-way line of said Highway No. 18 before
its relocation; thence Southwesterly (SWLY) along said north right-of-way line
to the place of beginning.
(Ord. 86-21, 9-15-1986)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: The Council
1-6-2: Powers; Duties
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: Standing Committees
1-6-1: THE COUNCIL:
Composition of the City Council shall consist of one (1) Council member from
each of the four (4) wards established in section
1-9-5 of this title, together with two (2) Council members elected at large, as
provided in section 372.13, Iowa Code. (1953 Code § 6-1; amd. 1985 Code)
1-6-2: POWERS; DUTIES:
The Council shall have and exercise all legislative powers, functions and
duties conferred upon the Council by the applicable statutes of the State of
Iowa and the provisions of this Code. It shall levy all taxes, apportion and
appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts and claims. The
Council shall have and exercise general authority, either directly or through
the authority of the City Administrator, over the City waterworks, the
wastewater treatment plant, the City Library and its Board of Trustees, the
MacNider Art Museum and its Board of Trustees, City Airport and its Board of
Trustees, the City park system and the Park and Recreation Board, the Civil
Service Commission, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Community
Development Director, the Public Works Director, the City Attorney, the Finance
Director, the City Clerk and all commissions, boards and officers provided by
law and not specifically assigned to any other department. (1953 Code § 6-2;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The time for holding regular meetings of the City
Council is hereby fixed at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month, except that if any regular meeting date is a legal
holiday, an alternate date shall be designated and posted as required. (Ord.
97-10, 4-15-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings: The City Council may hold special meetings when
called by the Mayor or a majority of the members of the Council. (1953 Code §
6-4; amd. Ord. 935, 4-20-1964; 2017 Code)
   C.   Quorum: A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a
majority of the usual number of members of the Council to which the City is
entitled, except that a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a day and hour
certain. (1953 Code § 6-5)
   D.   Presiding Officer: The Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor
Pro Tem, shall preside at all Council meetings. In the absence of either of the
foregoing, the Council may appoint a Council member to chair the meeting. The
presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may have persons
creating disorder removed from the meeting. (Ord. 89-31, 12-18-1989)
1-6-4: STANDING COMMITTEES:
   A.   Establishment: The Council shall establish standing committees as they
deem necessary, consisting of three (3) or more members as appointed by the
Mayor with Council approval; the first person named shall chair the meeting(s).
All standing committees shall establish rules of procedure. The Mayor will be
an ex officio member of all committees.
   B.   Committee Reports: Reports of committees may be presented at a
subsequent Council meeting, or at any meeting the committee deems necessary. A
statement of the issues, the opinions and recommendations of the committee
shall be presented orally or in writing thereon; and any final recommendation
must be presented in the form of a proposed ordinance, resolution or motion.
(Ord. 89-31, 12-18-1989)
CHAPTER 7
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-7-1: Qualifications And Duties
1-7-2: Conservator Of The Peace
1-7-3: Reports
1-7-4: Duties
1-7-5: Mayor Pro Tem
1-7-1: QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES:
The Mayor shall be elected at large and shall be the presiding officer of the
City Council and shall have and exercise all powers and duties conferred upon
him by section 372.14, Code of Iowa, and the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 96-
26, 12-17-1996)
1-7-2: CONSERVATOR OF THE PEACE:
The Mayor may take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation,
upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists.
Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff
to suppress disorders, as provided in section 372.14, Code of Iowa. (1953 Code
§ 19-4; amd. 1985 Code)
1-7-3: REPORTS:
The Mayor shall, at the first regular meeting of the newly elected Council in
January and at such other times as he may deem expedient, report to the Council
concerning the Municipal affairs of the City and recommend the adoption of such
measures as to him may seem advisable. (1953 Code § 19-5)
1-7-4: DUTIES:
The Mayor shall also perform such other duties compatible with the nature of
his office as herein required or as may hereinafter be required by the
provisions of this Code or resolution of the Council. The Mayor may vote to
break a tie vote on motions not involving ordinances, resolutions, spending
over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or appointments made by the Council
alone, as provided in section 372.4, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 93-29, 10-5-1993)
1-7-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
Except for limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in case of absence or inability of the Mayor to
perform the duties of his office. In the exercise of the duties of his office,
the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to employ or to discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has power to appoint or
discharge. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-8-1: Bonds Of Officers
1-8-2: Blanket Bonds
1-8-3: Authority To Purchase
1-8-4: Salaries Determined
1-8-5: Salaries Of Council Members
1-8-6: Salary Of Mayor
1-8-7: Mileage
1-8-8: Gifts
1-8-1: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The Director of Finance and no others shall, prior to entering upon performance
of duties, provide an official's bond, as required by law in the penal amount
as may from time to time be fixed by the City Council, but in no event less
than the minimum penal amount of two hundred seventy five thousand dollars
($275,000.00). (Ord. 95-20, 10-17-1995)
1-8-2: BLANKET BONDS:
The following officers and no others shall be covered by a blanket bond
purchased by the City in the penal amount as may from time to time be fixed by
the City Council indemnifying and holding harmless the City against loss
occasioned by their failure to perform faithfully their respective duties:
   Attorney
   Chief of Police
   City Administrator/City Clerk
   City Engineer
   Mayor
   Mayor Pro Tem
   Operation and Maintenance Manager
All officers and employees, except those specified in this section and section
1-8-1 of this chapter, shall be covered by a blanket bond indemnifying and
holding harmless the City against loss occasioned by embezzlement or any other
dishonest act in such penal amounts as may from time to time be fixed by the
City Council. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
1-8-3: AUTHORITY TO PURCHASE:
The Mayor and Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to purchase individual
and blanket bonds as provided in sections
1-8-1 and
1-8-2 of this chapter from funds of the City legally usable for such purposes
and to carry out, in all other respects, the policy of placing under blanket
bonds all officers and employees as near as may be. (Ord. 696, 7-1-1955)
1-8-4: SALARIES DETERMINED:
The annual salaries of officials of the City shall be determined by the
Council. Said salaries shall be paid on a biweekly basis, in twenty six (26)
equal installments, and shall be in the amounts fixed by the Council from time
to time. (Ord. 1079, 7-7-1969)
1-8-5: SALARIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Increases shall commence per State Code and shall be fixed at a sum of $12,000
per year, payable bi-weekly. (Ord. 23-08, 7-5-2023)
1-8-6: SALARY OF MAYOR:
Increases shall commence per State Code and shall be fixed at a sum of $21,384
per year, payable bi-weekly. (Ord. 23-09, 7-5-2023)
1-8-7: MILEAGE:
Each officer or employee driving his own automobile on City business shall be
entitled to claim reimbursement for the expenses thereof at the current rate,
as established by the U.S. General Service Administration, per mile of actual
and necessary driving in the course of his employment. Verified and itemized
claims for such reimbursement shall be filed monthly upon forms provided by the
Finance Director and shall set out the name of the claimant, his official
capacity, the number of miles actually and necessarily driven on City business,
and any other expenses actually and necessarily incurred on behalf of the City.
Such claims shall be paid only upon approval by the Finance Director. (Ord.
1537, 3-3-1980; amd. Ord. 95-20, 10-17-1995; 2017 Code)
1-8-8: GIFTS:
No public official, public employee, or candidate, or that person's immediate
family member shall, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or
series of gifts from a restricted donor, as set out in sections 68B.2 and
68B.22, Iowa Code. "Gift" means a rendering of anything of value in return for
which legal consideration of equal or greater value is not given and received.
(Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996)
ARTICLE A. DEPUTY CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Appointment; Term
1-8A-2: Seal; Records; Documents
1-8A-3: Council Records; Ordinances
1-8A-4: Deeds; Easements; Agreements; Contracts
1-8A-5: Copy Of Records
1-8A-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Administrator/City Clerk,
subject to the approval of the City Council, as provided by subsection
1-8C-3Q of this chapter and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor
is duly appointed and qualified.
The Deputy City Clerk shall perform all the duties prescribed by this Code and
the laws of the State for the Deputy Clerk.
   A.   Exception: The Administrator/City Clerk shall authenticate all measures
or documents. Only in the absence of the City Administrator/City Clerk shall
the Deputy City Clerk be authorized to authenticate all measures or documents.
(Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8A-2: SEAL; RECORDS; DOCUMENTS:
The Deputy City Clerk shall be the keeper of the seal of the City and shall,
under the direction of the Administrator/City Clerk or other authorized
officer, affix the seal to all public instruments, or documents which by law or
provisions of this Code are required to be attested by the affixing of the
seal. The Deputy City Clerk shall have the custody of and safely keep all
public records, documents, ordinances, resolutions, orders of the Council, and
such other papers and documents which may be filed in the office or delivered
into the custody of the Deputy City Clerk. The Deputy City Clerk shall be
custodian of all bonds running in favor of the City. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8A-3: COUNCIL RECORDS; ORDINANCES:
The Deputy City Clerk shall attend all sessions of the Council and keep true
and correct minutes of the proceedings thereof in a book or books to be kept
and provided for that purpose. The Deputy City Clerk shall also file all
original drafts of ordinances and resolutions passed or adopted by the Council
and shall accurately record such ordinances and resolutions in the ordinance
book and resolution book, respectively, and shall properly index the same. The
Deputy City Clerk shall cause all ordinances requiring publication to be
published as directed therein and shall, upon publication, preserve the
original proof thereof in a book or file kept and maintained for that purpose,
all in accordance with section 380.7, Iowa Code. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; amd.
2017 Code)
1-8A-4: DEEDS; EASEMENTS; AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS:
The Deputy City Clerk shall keep a book of deeds, easements, agreements and
contracts in which the Deputy City Clerk shall cause to be recorded all deeds,
contracts, agreements and easements executed or entered into by the City, and
shall keep an index of the contents thereof. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8A-5: COPY OF RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of the Deputy City Clerk to furnish to any City officer
charged with the duty of serving any notice, order or resolution, a copy of
such notice or paper. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
ARTICLE B. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Appointment; Term
1-8B-2: Duties
1-8B-3: Chief Warrant Officer
1-8B-4: Reports
1-8B-5: Purchase Of Supplies
1-8B-6: Administrative Services
1-8B-7: Assistant Finance Director
1-8B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject
to the approval of the City Council, as provided by article C of this chapter
and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly appointed and
qualified. (Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-2: DUTIES:
The Director of Finance shall have and perform all of the powers and duties
prescribed by law and the provisions of this Code, and shall be the general
accountant of the City. He shall receive and preserve in his office all account
books, vouchers, documents, and papers relating to all accounts and
transactions of the City, its revenues, debts, and fiscal affairs; he shall be
the custodian of the bond of the Clerk and of all public records and papers
relating to his office except such as are by law placed in the custody of some
other officer. (Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-
1994)
1-8B-3: CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER:
   A.   The Director of Finance shall be the Chief Warrant Officer of the City,
and as such, is hereby authorized and directed to affix his signature to all
warrants on behalf of the City. In the absence of the Chief Warrant Officer,
the City Administrator/City Clerk shall act as his alternate to sign warrants
on behalf of the City. (Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; amd. Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994; 2017
Code)
   B.   The Director of Finance shall keep a warrant register, upon which shall
be entered the number, date of issuance, to whom issued, amount, and fund upon
which each warrant is drawn. He shall also keep a distribution ledger, showing
the number of each warrant, the fund upon which it is drawn, the purpose for
which it is drawn, and the amount appropriated for each fund, together with the
balance remaining therein, together with such other and further records and
books as may be required to keep an accurate record of all monies received by
the City, the funds to which the same are allocated, and of all monies paid out
by the City, together with the funds upon which the same are charged to.
   C.   The Director of Finance is authorized to pay routine claims for regular
monthly recurring routine bills in advance of the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-4: REPORTS:
The Director of Finance shall make a detailed monthly report to the Council,
which report shall contain a list of all warrants drawn, all receipts from any
source whatsoever, the funds to which the same were credited, and the balances
in the various funds. He shall also make a summarized monthly report to the
Council containing a statement of the receipts and disbursements in the various
funds. On or before December 1 of each year, he shall furnish a certified copy
of all annual reports required by specified officials of the State. (Ord. 1539,
3-3-1980; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994; 2017 Code)
1-8B-5: PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES:
The Director of Finance shall purchase all goods, materials, and supplies
needed by the City, and shall enter into consultations with department heads
and the City Council to determine needs for all departments of the City, and
shall enforce quality standards for goods purchased. He shall prepare detailed
claims for all purchases made by the City before payment for said goods is
made. (Ord. 1179, 3-6-1972; amd. Ord. 91-6, 4-2-1991; Ord. 94-6, 3-1-1994)
1-8B-6: ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
The Director of Finance shall be responsible for the management and operations
of the City's Data Processing Division, IT Division, GIS Director, Grant
Administrator, and the Cashier's Division. The Director shall also perform all
duties and functions as the Chief Investment Officer and Treasurer for the
City. (Ord. 13-03, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8B-7: ASSISTANT FINANCE DIRECTOR:
When authorized by the City Administrator, an Assistant Finance Director may be
appointed by the Director, subject to the approval of the City Administrator,
and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is appointed and
qualified. The Assistant Director shall, in the absence or inability of the
Director to act, perform all the duties and acts which may be required by the
Director, Mayor, or Council. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996)
ARTICLE C. CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-8C-1: Creation; Appointment And Term
1-8C-2: Removal
1-8C-3: Administration And Duties
1-8C-4: Council Not To Interfere With Appointments Or Removals
1-8C-5: Bond
1-8C-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Office of City Administrator/City Clerk is hereby created as provided by
section 372.4, Iowa Code. The City Administrator/City Clerk shall be appointed
by majority vote of the City Council for an indefinite term until removed or
until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified. The Administrator/
Clerk shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office
hereinafter set forth. At the time of appointment, the person need not be a
resident of the City or State, but during the Administrator's/Clerk's tenure of
office, shall reside within a ten (10) mile radius of the City or according to
terms of employment agreement. The City Administrator/City Clerk shall receive
an annual salary in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by the
Council. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
1-8C-2: REMOVAL:
The City Council may remove the City Administrator/City Clerk at any time by a
majority vote of the Council on the recommendation of the Mayor or on its own
initiative. Any removal shall be subject to the provisions of section 372.15,
Iowa Code. Except for removal for cause, after the completion of twelve (12)
months' service, the City Administrator/City Clerk may not be removed without
sixty (60) days' notice. (Ord. 93-18, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8C-3: ADMINISTRATION AND DUTIES:
The City Administrator/City Clerk shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor and City Council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the City. All departments of the City, except
as otherwise provided by ordinance, shall be responsible to the Administrator/
Clerk. The duties of the Administrator/Clerk shall be as follows: (Ord. 97-29,
11-18-1997)
   A.   Implement all policy directives promulgated by the Mayor, in his
executive capacity, and by the City Council, in its legislative capacity.
   B.   Supervise enforcement and execution of the City laws and supervise the
City's administrative policies and procedures including personnel and
purchasing.
   C.   Coordinate and direct all City services provided through the various
departments of the City.
   D.   Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor.
   E.   Keep the Mayor and City Council informed on the progress of City
projects, programs and policies. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
   F.   Recommend to the Council, from time to time, any measures as the
Administrator/Clerk shall deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services
within the City.
   G.   Supervise and direct the official conduct of all officials and those
employees of the City whom the Administrator/Clerk has power to appoint and
also those department heads or supervisors who report to or through the Office
of City Administrator/City Clerk.
   H.   Prepare a proposed budget annually in cooperation with appropriate
supervisory personnel of the City and all City boards, commissions or other
administrative agencies, and submit it to the Council. The Administrator/Clerk
shall be responsible for administering the budget as adopted by the Council and
ensuring all expenditures are provided for by the budget or such amendments to
the budget as may, from time to time, be approved by the Council.
   I.   Keep the Mayor and City Council fully apprised of the financial and
other conditions of the City and of future needs. The Administrator/Clerk shall
prepare and submit a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the City within thirty (30) days of the end of each fiscal year
and shall provide such other reports as the City Council may request. (Ord. 93-
28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
   J.   Cooperate with any administrative agency, board or commission of the
City and act as technical advisor when applying for grants to enable the Mayor,
City Council, boards and commissions to enhance their funding.
   K.   Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the
City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements except for
those activities subject to the management or control of an administrative
board, commission or agency. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
   L.   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget and may approve capital and repair
expenditures up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for operational needs and
up to twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for emergency needs. The
Administrator/Clerk shall negotiate and recommend to the City Council, for its
approval, all other contracts for the necessary operation of or maintenance of
City services not subject to the bidding requirements of section 26.3, Iowa
Code. On all expenditures for public improvements in excess of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) let for public bid pursuant to chapter 26, Iowa
Code, the Administrator/Clerk shall receive the sealed bids and present them to
the Council with a recommendation for awarding the contract 1 . (Ord. 07-26,
10-16-2007; amd. 2017 Code)
   M.   Conduct or supervise all business affairs of the City and cause
accurate records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods. (Ord.
93-28, 9-7-1993)
   N.   Have charge and control of the Police and Fire Departments, except that
the Mayor shall take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation
upon making a determination that a time of emergency or public danger exists as
provided in section 372.14, Iowa Code. The Mayor may, at any time, delegate in
writing to the Administrator/Clerk, such emergency powers. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-
1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
   O.   Perform all other duties as may be required by the direction of the
Council. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
   P.   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under
the Administrator's/Clerk's jurisdiction, with the approval of the City
Council. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
   Q.   Appoint or employ, classify or reclassify appointed officials, subject
to the approval of the City Council and all employees of the City, except for
the provisions of the Veteran's Preference Law, chapter 35C and Civil Service
Law, chapter 400, and except for provisions of section 372.8, Iowa Code,
governing the Office of the City Clerk and such other officials or employees
for whom another method of appointment is specifically provided by ordinance or
by State law. (Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
   R.   Have the power to discipline and to discharge summarily any official,
appointee or employee the Administrator/Clerk is empowered to appoint or employ
subject, however, to the provisions of Civil Service Law, any personnel policy
duly adopted by the Council, and subject to the right of hearing provided by
section 372.15, Iowa Code.
   S.   Summarily investigate, or cause to be investigated, the affairs and
conduct of any department, agency, officer or employee subject to the
supervision of the Administrator/Clerk. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29,
11-18-1997)
   T.   Assist the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission in the
carrying out of the Comprehensive Plan for City development and assist all
other forms of planning within the City government. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 10 of this title.
1-8C-4: COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS:
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the
appointment of any person to, or removal from, Office by the City
Administrator/City Clerk or any of the Administrator's/Clerk's subordinates, or
in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officials and
employees in the administrative services of the City. Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the City Administrator/City Clerk and neither the
Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the
City Administrator/City Clerk, either publicly or privately. (Ord. 93-28, 9-7-
1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
1-8C-5: BOND:
The City Administrator/City Clerk shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by
the Council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of all the
Administrator's/Clerk's duties and in the amount of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00). The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 93-28,
9-7-1993; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997)
ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Appointment
1-8D-2: Attorney For City
1-8D-3: Power Of Attorney
1-8D-4: Additional Duties And Responsibilities
1-8D-5: Report To Council
1-8D-6: Special Counsel
1-8D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Council shall appoint a City Attorney and any Assistant City Attorney to
serve at the discretion of the Council. Engagement of the City Attorney and any
Assistant City Attorney shall be at compensation levels and upon other terms
and conditions established by the Council. Any Assistant City Attorney shall
have duties and responsibilities assigned by the City Attorney and approved by
the City Administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the City Attorney may be
shared or divided with any Assistant City Attorney subject to approval by the
City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-2: ATTORNEY FOR CITY:
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all legal matters
affecting the City's interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings involving the City when requested to do so
by the Council or City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-3: POWER OF ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall sign in behalf of the City all appeal bonds and other
bonds and papers that may be necessary in connection with matters before any
court and the City shall be bound with respect thereto. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-4: ADDITIONAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City Attorney shall be the Chief Legal Advisor to the Council and other
City officers in respect to their duties. In connection therewith, the City
Attorney shall have the duty and responsibility to:
   A.   Upon request of the Council, Mayor or City Administrator, attend
meetings of the Council.
   B.   Draw ordinances and report to the Council respecting defects in
ordinances when they become known to the City Attorney.
   C.   Prepare documents of a legal nature regarding matters in which the City
is interested at the request of any Council member, the Mayor or City
Administrator.
   D.   Give advice or issue opinions on questions of law arising out of any
ordinance, contract, claim, dispute, demand, proceeding or matter affecting the
City, at the request of any Council member, the Mayor or City Administrator.
   E.   Provide such other legal services respecting matters affecting the City
as required by City ordinances or State law or as requested by the Council,
Mayor or City Administrator. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
1-8D-5: REPORT TO COUNCIL:
The City Attorney shall submit to the Council not later than January 31 of each
year a report on all civil cases involving the City settled or decided during
the preceding year ended December 31 and as of then pending. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-
2011)
1-8D-6: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
When deemed necessary or appropriate, special counsel may be retained by the
City upon approval by the Council. (Ord. 11-20, 11-1-2011)
ARTICLE E. CITY ASSESSOR
SECTION:
1-8E-1: Appointment
1-8E-2: Meetings
1-8E-3: Examining Board
1-8E-4: Board Of Review
1-8E-1: APPOINTMENT:
There shall be selected a City Assessor in accordance with the provisions of
section 441.1, Code of Iowa, as amended. (1985 Code)
1-8E-2: MEETINGS:
The Mayor is hereby ordered and directed to call joint meetings of the
Conference Board, consisting of the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County,
the School Board of Mason City Independent School District and the Council of
the City, from time to time as may be required by law to comply with and to put
into effect the provisions of said section 441.6, Code of Iowa, as amended.
(1953 Code § 23-5; amd. Ord. 1626, 3-15-1982)
1-8E-3: EXAMINING BOARD:
There is hereby created, as set forth in chapter 441 of the Code of Iowa, a
three (3) member Examining Board consisting of a representative from each unit
of the Conference Board, who shall serve a term of six (6) years; the purpose
of said Examining Board is to conduct examinations and certify eligible
candidates for the position of Assessor to the Conference Board. (1985 Code)
1-8E-4: BOARD OF REVIEW:
There is hereby created, as set forth in section 441.31, Code of Iowa, a Board
of Review whose purpose is to hold annual sessions during the month of May and
for an additional period as required under section 441.37, Code of Iowa, and
shall hold as many meetings as required to discharge its duties, which is to
equalize assessments on property. (1985 Code)
ARTICLE F. DEPARTMENT OF CITY ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-8F-1: Establishment
1-8F-2: City Engineer; Appointment
1-8F-3: Duties
1-8F-4: Special Assessments
1-8F-5: Assistant City Engineer
1-8F-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the department of City Engineering in the City, which
shall consist of the Engineering Division which includes the Traffic Control
Division, water supply and waterworks system, the sanitary sewer system and the
stormwater collection system of the City. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017
Code)
1-8F-2: CITY ENGINEER; APPOINTMENT:
Said City Engineer shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the
approval of the City Council and shall hold office thereafter, or until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified. Said City Engineer shall be a
registered professional engineer, registered by the Board of Engineering
Examiners of the State of Iowa, or if a registered professional engineer in
another state, be able to obtain registration in the State of Iowa within one
(1) year of appointment. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-3: DUTIES:
The City Engineer shall be responsible for the management, operation and
maintenance of the Engineering Division and the Supervisors/Superintendents of
each division, subject to the approval of the City Administrator. (Ord. 96-26,
12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-4: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
In all cases where private property is proposed to be assessed for public
improvements, it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to advise the City
Administrator/Council with reference to the value of the respective lots, parts
of lots, or parcels of land, and the property of any railway company or street
railway company whose property may be liable for such special assessment, and
to determine the amounts which may be assessed against the owners thereof.
(Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8F-5: ASSISTANT CITY ENGINEER:
   A.   Appointment, Term: When authorized by the City Administrator, an
Assistant City Engineer may be appointed by the City Engineer, subject to the
approval of the City Administrator, and shall hold office thereafter, or until
a successor is appointed and qualified. Said Assistant shall be a registered
engineer in training at time of appointment.
   B.   Supervision, Duties: The Assistant City Engineer shall be under the
direct supervision of the City Engineer, and shall perform all utilities and
engineering related duties and functions as assigned by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
SECTION:
1-8G-1: Establishment
1-8G-2: Appointment Of Director
1-8G-3: Duties Of Director
1-8G-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established the Department of Human Resources in the City, which shall
consist of the Director of Human Resources and such other employees as may from
time to time be appointed by the City Administrator. (Ord. 11-21, 11-1-2011)
1-8G-2: APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR:
The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the City Administrator
and serve under the supervision and direction of the City Administrator. (Ord.
11-21, 11-1-2011)
1-8G-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
   A.   Manage, operate and maintain Department of Human Resources.
   B.   Administer personnel system subject to personnel rules approved and
adopted by the City Council and subject to applicable City ordinances and as
directed by the City Administrator.
   C.   Make all appointments to City service in accordance with personnel
rules then in effect, unless such power is specifically assigned by law to
another appointing authority.
   D.   Act as liaison between Civil Service Commission and City and support
person for commission.
   E.   Recruit applicants for civil service and noncivil service positions.
   F.   Prepare and periodically review and revise personnel rules and
regulations for presentation to the City Council for adoption, covering titles,
classifications, working hours, leaves of absence, transfers and promotions,
cause for discharge and suspension, sexual harassment and such other subjects
as may be necessary or advisable to carry out the intent and purpose of the
City personnel system.
   G.   Negotiate and administer labor management contracts within the purview
of the State Public Employment Relations Act.
   H.   Process all Municipal employment appointments, status changes and other
personnel actions and maintain personnel records.
   I.   Coordinate employee training programs.
   J.   Ensure that all employment policies and practices of the City are
administered consistently with applicable law.
   K.   Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 11-21, 11-1-2011)
ARTICLE H. DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8H-1: Establishment
1-8H-2: Director; Appointment And Term
1-8H-3: Duties Of Director
1-8H-4: Planning And Zoning Division
1-8H-5: Transit Operations And Safety Division
1-8H-6: Building Inspections Division
1-8H-7: Code Enforcement Division
1-8H-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created and established a Development Services Department in
the City of Mason City, which shall consist of the Director of Development
Services and such other employees as may from time to time be appointed by the
City Administrator.
   A.   The Development Services Department shall be organized into the
following divisions, which shall be under the direction of the Director of
Development Services:
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Division;
      2.   The Transit Operations and Safety Division;
      3.   The Building Inspections Division; and
      4.   The Code Enforcement Division. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017
Code)
1-8H-2: DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The Director of Development Services shall be appointed by the City
Administrator. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013)
1-8H-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The Director of Development Services shall be under the direct administrative
supervision of the City Administrator, and shall have the following duties and
perform the following functions:
   A.   Direct development of the community's Comprehensive Plan, subdivision
and zoning ordinances, including the necessary research, analysis, plan
preparation, design, program development, and writing and editing of reports.
   B.   Direct development and implementation of the City's community
development plans and redevelopment plans, and coordinate with other
departments and agencies regarding housing initiatives, and assist in Building
and Zoning Code enforcement.
   C.   Direct analysis of the City's physical and socioeconomic
characteristics; direct land use, population and economic forecasts.
   D.   Act as technical advisor on planning, economic growth and development
matters to the Mayor, City Council, City Administrator, Planning and Zoning
Commission, Zoning Board of Adjustment and appear before the Council and
commission to report or advise on major planning, economic growth and community
development projects, significant economic, housing, land use and population
study findings, and new planning and development techniques being utilized in
other communities.
   E.   Work with all City departments in matters relating to planning,
economic growth and community development programs.
   F.   Work with Federal, State and adjoining local governments in
implementing the City's planning, economic growth and community development
programs.
   G.   Prepare and administer the departmental budgets; assign staff,
determine schedules, and review progress of departmental projects and
initiatives.
   H.   Review public works projects referred to the department by other City
departments, special districts, the County and other governmental agencies.
   I.   In cooperation with other departments, maintain the long range capital
needs list, prepare the capital improvements program, and aid in the
development of the annual budget.
   J.   Prepare educational and informational materials, consult with
developers, public officials, local agencies and citizens on planning, economic
growth and development matters; coordinate and review work performed by
professional consulting firms retained for planning, and development studies.
(Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013)
   K.   Manage the personnel process and related agreements for animal control
Code enforcement and stray animal shelter responsibilities under title 8 of
this Code and related duties as assigned by the Director of Development
Services.
   L.   Shall be responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of
the Development Services Department and shall appoint staff required to operate
the department subject to the approval of the City Administrator, and as
approved by the City Council, from time to time. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013; amd.
2017 Code)
1-8H-4: PLANNING AND ZONING DIVISION:
The Planning and Zoning Division shall be under the direction of the Planning
and Zoning Manager. The Planning and Zoning Division shall be responsible for
administration of all planning, zoning, subdivision and related duties and
functions as required or authorized by this Code and applicable State and
Federal regulations or statutes; zoning administration and enforcement; and
related duties as assigned by the Director of Development Services. (Ord. 13-
04, 3-5-2013)
1-8H-5: TRANSIT OPERATIONS AND SAFETY DIVISION:
The Transit Operations and Safety Division shall be under the direction of the
Transit Operations and Safety Manager.
   A.   Transit Operations: The Transit Operations and Safety Division shall
manage the City's transit functions. In addition, Division Manager shall
prepare and manage the division budget, ensure proper use of public funds, seek
improvements to the operation of the City transit system, conduct studies, and
encourage growth of the system.
   B.   Safety: The Transit Operations and Safety Manager shall coordinate the
City's safety function, to promote employee and public safety, manage and
minimize liability risk, and provide training as necessary or as required to
meet local, State and Federal guidelines and requirements. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-
2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-6: BUILDING INSPECTIONS DIVISION:
The Building Inspections Division shall be under the direction of the Chief
Building Official. The Chief Building Official shall have the following duties:
   A.   Serves as the Chief Building Official of the City. Reviews and enforces
building safety ordinances. Examines plans and inspects construction projects
to determine compliance with City ordinances.
   B.   Acts as advisor on building and Code enforcement matters to the City
Administrator, Director of Development Services, Mayor, City Council and other
City departments.
   C.   Supervises the building maintenance and repairs of City Hall.
   D.   Works with other City departments in matters relating to building codes
and Building Code enforcement.
   E.   In consultation with the Code Enforcement Division, supervises
condemnation and demolition of unsafe or abandoned structures within Mason
City.
   F.   Consults with contractors, developers, public officials, local
agencies, and citizens on Building Code matters; coordinates and reviews work
performed by architects, contractors and developers.
   G.   Other related duties as assigned by the Director of Development
Services. (Ord. 13-04, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8H-7: CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION:
The Code Enforcement Division shall be under the direction of the Code
Enforcement Manager.
   A.   The Code Enforcement Division shall perform all Nuisance Code
enforcement responsibilities under title 4 of this Code and the Housing Code
and rental dwelling unit inspection requirements under title 10, chapter 2,
article F of this Code.
   B.   The Code Enforcement Officers shall observe and investigate Nuisance
and Housing Code complaints and violations, issue and serve notice to abate,
and shall make reasonable accommodations to violators to gain compliance with
this Code.
   C.   The Code Enforcement Officers shall have authority to issue citations
and authority to act as an officer of the court when requested.
   D.   The Code Enforcement Division shall consult with the Building
Inspections Division regarding condemnation and demolition of unsafe or
abandoned structures, and shall supervise the process. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE I. BAND DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-8I-1: Employment Of Band Director
1-8I-2: Provisions Of Contract
1-8I-3: Payments From Band Fund
1-8I-1: EMPLOYMENT OF BAND DIRECTOR:
The City Administrator, subject to the approval of the Council, shall enter
into a contract of employment of a band director and for members of the
Municipal band. (Ord. 96-26, 12-17-1996; amd. 2017 Code)
1-8I-2: PROVISIONS OF CONTRACT:
The contract for the band shall provide for the furnishing of free concerts for
a reasonable period of time during the summer months and shall also provide for
the compensation to be paid to said band director and to the members of said
band. (1953 Code § 25-2)
1-8I-3: PAYMENTS FROM BAND FUND:
The compensation of the band director, members of the band, and all expenses
with reference to the band shall be paid from funds of the City legally usable
for such purposes. (1953 Code § 25-3)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Definitions
1-9-2: Candidates For City Offices
1-9-3: Runoff Elections Adopted
1-9-4: Election Costs
1-9-5: Election Wards And Precincts
1-9-6: Voting Places
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are hereby defined:
ELECTIONS: Municipal or special elections approved by the City Council,
provided by chapter 376, Iowa Code.
MAJORITY: One (1) vote more than one-half (1/2) the number of votes cast for
all candidates for a particular office, as provided in section 376.9, Iowa
Code, provided, however, that in at large elections in which more than one (1)
position is to be filled, "majority" shall be one (1) vote more than the total
number of votes cast for all candidates divided by the number of positions to
be filled. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-2: CANDIDATES FOR CITY OFFICES:
All candidates for all elective City offices shall be nominated by petition as
provided by sections 376.4 through 376.9, Iowa Code, and any amendments
thereto. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-3: RUNOFF ELECTIONS ADOPTED:
The provisions of section 376.9, Iowa Code, providing for a runoff election are
hereby adopted in lieu of the requirement for a primary in sections 376.6 and
376.7 thereof. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
Each candidate at a Municipal election receiving a majority of all votes cast
for the office sought shall be declared elected. A runoff election shall be
held only for positions unfilled because of failure of a sufficient number of
candidates to receive a majority vote in the regular City election. Candidates
for runoff are those who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for the
office for which they have filed as follows:
   A.   If no candidate for a single office receives a majority of the votes
cast for that office, the two (2) candidates receiving the largest number of
votes shall be placed upon the runoff ballot.
   B.   In an at large election to fill more than one (1) position, any
candidate receiving a "majority" of the votes as defined in section
1-9-1 of this chapter shall be declared elected. If a sufficient number of
candidates do not receive a majority of the votes to fill all of the positions,
those candidates receiving the highest number of votes less than a majority
equal to twice the number of positions remaining to be filled shall be placed
on the runoff ballot.
Any such runoff election shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of the
regular City election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City
elections.
Candidates in the runoff election who receive the highest number of votes cast
for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to fill the
positions open. (Ord. 97-24, 10-7-1997)
1-9-4: ELECTION COSTS:
The cost of any Municipal election shall be borne by the City and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1477, 1-15-1979)
1-9-5: ELECTION WARDS AND PRECINCTS:
   A.    Ward 1 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of the North City
Limits with U.S. Highway 65, thence Southeast along U.S. Highway 65 to North
Federal Avenue, thence South along North Federal Avenue to 18th Street
Northeast, thence East along 18th Street Northeast to North Pennsylvania
Avenue, thence South along North Pennsylvania Avenue to 11th Street Northeast,
thence West along 11th Street Northeast to North Federal Avenue, thence South
along North Federal Avenue to East State Street, thence East along East State
Street to its intersection with South Virginia Avenue, thence Northerly then
West along unnamed, paved East Park road to 4th Street Northeast, thence West
along 4th Street Northeast to North Carolina Avenue, thence North along North
Carolina Avenue to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West
along the City Limits to the point of beginning.
      Ward 1 Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits
with North Carolina Avenue, thence South along North Carolina Avenue to 9th
Street Northeast, thence East along 9th Street Northeast to Birch Drive, thence
Southeast along Birch Drive to its intersection with the Canadian Pacific
Railway tracks, thence northeasterly along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks
to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West and North, thence
East, North and West, thence North and West, following the City Limits line to
the point of beginning.
      Ward 1 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits
with the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence Southwesterly along the
Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to Birch Drive, thence Northwest along Birch
Drive to its intersection with 9th Street Northeast, thence West along 9th
Street Northeast to its intersection with North Carolina Avenue, thence South
along North Carolina Avenue to 4th Street Northeast, thence East along 4th
Street Northeast to its intersection with the unnamed, paved East Park road,
thence East along the unnamed, paved East Park road East and South to its
intersection with East State Street, thence East along East State Street to
South Indiana Avenue, thence South along South Indiana Avenue to 4th Street
Southeast, thence East along 4th Street Southeast to its intersection with the
East City Limits, thence North and West, and North and West, along the City
Limits to the point of beginning.
      Ward 2 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of the Union Pacific
Railroad tracks with 12th Street Northwest, thence East along 12th Street
Northwest to North Federal Avenue, thence South along North Federal Avenue to
West State Street, thence West along West State Street to South Washington
Avenue, thence South along South Washington Avenue to 2nd Street Southwest,
thence West along 2nd Street Southwest to the intersection of South Monroe
Avenue and 2nd Street Southwest, thence continuing West along a line extending
from the intersection of 2nd Street Southwest and South Monroe Avenue to the
Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along the Union Pacific Railroad
tracks to the point of beginning.
      Ward 2 Precinct 2: Beginning at the intersection of the West City Limits
with 4th Street Southwest, thence South the west City Limits to the point at
which the City Limits turn east, thence east along the City Limits until the
point at which the City Limits turn north, thence north along the City Limits
to 4th Street Southwest, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to South Pierce
Avenue, thence North along South Pierce Avenue to 2nd Street Southwest, thence
East along 2nd Street Southwest to South Taylor Avenue, thence North along
South Taylor Avenue to West State Street, thence East along West State Street
to Linden Drive, thence Southeasterly along Linden Drive to 2nd Street
Southwest, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South Jackson Avenue,
thence North along South Jackson Avenue to 1st Street Southwest, thence East
along 1st Street Southwest to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North
along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to 6th Street Northwest, thence West
along 6th Street Northwest to North Tyler Avenue, thence North along North
Tyler Avenue to 8th Street Northwest, thence West along 8th Street Northwest to
North Pierce Avenue, thence North along North Pierce Avenue to 12th Street
Northwest, thence West along 12th Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence
North along North Taft Avenue to 15th Street Northwest, thence West along 15th
Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence North along North Taft Avenue to
its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West and South along City
Limits and then West and South again along the City Limits to the point of
beginning.
      Ward 2 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the North City Limits
with North Taft Avenue, thence South along North Taft Avenue to 15th Street
Northwest, thence East along 15th Street Northwest to North Taft Avenue, thence
South along North Taft Avenue to 12th Street Northwest, thence East along 12th
Street Northwest to North Pierce Avenue, thence South along North Pierce Avenue
to 8th Street Northwest, thence East along 8th Street Northwest to North Tyler
Avenue, thence South along North Tyler Avenue to 6th Street Northwest, thence
East along 6th Street Northwest to the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence
North along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to 12th Street Northwest, thence
East along 12th Street Northwest to North Federal Avenue, thence South along
North Federal Avenue to 11th Street Northeast, thence East along 11th Street
Northeast to North Pennsylvania Avenue, thence North along North Pennsylvania
Avenue to 18th Street Northeast, thence West along 18th Street Northeast to
North Federal Avenue, thence North along North Federal Avenue to U.S. Highway
65 to its intersection with the North City Limits, thence West and South along
the City Limits to the point of beginning.
      Ward 3 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of South Washington
Avenue and West State Street, thence East along West State Street to East State
Street to its intersection with South Indiana Avenue, thence South along South
Indiana Avenue to 4th Street Southeast, thence West along 4th Street Southeast
to South Louisiana Avenue, thence South along South Louisiana Avenue to 6th
Street Southeast, thence West along 6th Street Southeast to South Federal
Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to 4th Street Southwest, thence
West along 4th Street Southwest to South Washington Avenue, thence North along
South Washington Avenue to the point of beginning.
      Ward 3 Precinct 2: Beginning at the point of intersection of the South
City Limits with the Union Pacific Railroad tracks which pass along the West
side of Georgia Hanford Park, thence West to the intersection of 27th Street
Southwest and South Federal Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to
22nd Street Southeast, thence East along 22nd Street Southeast to South
Pennsylvania Avenue, thence North along South Pennsylvania Avenue to 12th
Street Southeast, thence West along 12th Street Southeast to South Federal
Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to the Canadian Pacific Railway
tracks, thence East along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to a point from
South Pennsylvania Avenue extended South to intersect with the Canadian Pacific
Railway tracks, thence North from said point to and along South Pennsylvania
Avenue to 8th Place Southeast, thence East along 8th Place Southeast to South
Jersey Avenue, thence South along South Jersey Avenue to 9th Street Southeast,
thence East along 9th Street Southeast to South Georgia Avenue, thence North
along South Georgia Avenue to 6th Street Southeast, thence East along 6th
Street Southeast to South Virginia Avenue, thence South along South Virginia
Avenue to 19th Street Southeast, thence West along 19th Street Southeast to the
former Union Pacific Railroad property now owned by the City of Mason City for
trail purposes, thence South along the former Union Pacific Railroad property
to its intersection with the South City Limits, thence West along the City
Limits to the point of beginning.
      Ward 3 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the South City Limits
with the former Union Pacific Railroad property now owned by the City of Mason
City for trail purposes, thence North along the former Union Pacific Railroad
property to 19th Street Southeast, thence East along 19th Street Southeast to
South Virginia Avenue, thence North along South Virginia Avenue to 6th Street
Southeast, thence East along 6th Street Southeast to South Louisiana Avenue,
thence North along South Louisiana Avenue to 4th Street Southeast, thence East
along 4th Street Southeast to its intersection with the East City Limits,
thence South and West and South and West again, along the City Limits to the
point of beginning.
      Ward 4 Precinct 1: Beginning at the intersection of South Pierce Avenue
with 2nd Street Southwest, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South
Taylor Avenue, thence North along South Taylor Avenue to West State Street,
thence East along West State Street to Linden Drive, thence Southeasterly along
Linden Drive to 2nd Street Southwest thence easterly along 2nd Street Southwest
to South Jackson Avenue, thence North along South Jackson Avenue to 1st Street
Southwest, thence East along 1st Street Southwest to the Union Pacific Railroad
tracks, thence South along the Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the
intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks and a line extending West
from the intersection of 2nd Street Southwest and South Monroe Avenue, thence
East along said line to the intersection of 2nd Street Southwest and South
Monroe Avenue, thence East along 2nd Street Southwest to South Washington
Avenue, thence South along South Washington Avenue to 4th Street Southwest,
thence East along 4th Street Southwest to South Federal Avenue, thence South
along South Federal Avenue to 6th Street Southeast, thence East along 6th
street Southeast to South Georgia Avenue, thence South along South Georgia
Avenue to 9th Street Southeast, thence West along 9th Street Southeast to South
Jersey Avenue, thence North along South Jersey Avenue to 8th Place Southeast,
thence West along 8th Place Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence
South along South Pennsylvania Avenue extended South to a point intersecting
with the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks, thence West along the Canadian
Pacific Railway tracks to South Federal Avenue, thence South along South
Federal Avenue to 12th Street Southeast, thence East along 12th Street
Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence South along South Pennsylvania
Avenue to 19th Street Southeast, thence West along 19th Street Southeast to
South Federal Avenue, thence North along South Federal Avenue to 15th Street
Southwest, thence West and North along 15th Street Southwest to the
intersection of South Monroe Avenue, thence South along South Monroe Avenue to
the intersection of the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence North along the
Union Pacific Railroad tracks to the intersection of the Canadian Pacific
Railway tracks, thence West along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to
Cheslea Creek, thence North along Cheslea Creek to 4th Street Southwest, thence
East along 4th Street Southwest to South Pierce Avenue, thence North along
South Pierce Avenue to the point of beginning.
      Ward 4 Precinct 2: Beginning at the point of intersection of the South
City Limits with a line extending South from the South end of South Pierce
Avenue, thence North along said line to beginning of South end of South Pierce
Avenue and continuing North along South Pierce Avenue to the intersection of
19th Street Southwest, thence West along 19th Street Southwest to Cheslea
Creek, thence North along Cheslea Creek to the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks,
thence East along the Canadian Pacific Railway tracks to the intersection of
the Union Pacific Railroad tracks, thence Southeast along the East fork of the
Union Pacific Railroad tracks to South Monroe Avenue, thence North along South
Monroe Avenue to the intersection of 15th Street Southwest, thence South and
East along 15th Street Southwest to South Federal Avenue, thence South along
South Federal Avenue to 19th Street Southeast, thence East along 19th Street
Southeast to South Pennsylvania Avenue, thence South along South Pennsylvania
Avenue to 22nd Street Southeast, thence West along 22nd Street Southeast to
South Federal Avenue, thence South along South Federal Avenue to the
intersection of 27th Street Southwest and South Federal Avenue, thence East
from the intersection of 27th Street Southwest and South Federal Avenue to the
intersection of the City Limits and the Union Pacific Railroad, thence South,
West, South, East, South and West around the City Limits to the point of
beginning.
      Ward 4 Precinct 3: Beginning at the intersection of the West City Limits
with 4th Street Southwest which point is the center of Section 12, Township
96N, Range 21 West, thence East along 4th Street Southwest to Cheslea Creek,
thence South along Cheslea Creek to 19th Street Southwest, thence East along
19th Street Southwest to South Pierce Avenue, thence South along South Pierce
Avenue to the Southern end of South Pierce Avenue, thence South to the point of
its intersection with a line extending South from the end of South Pierce
Avenue to its intersection with the South City Limits, thence West along said
South City Limits to a point where the City Limits turn North, thence North
along the City Limits to 43rd Street Southwest, at which point the City Limits
turn East, thence East along 43rd Street Southwest to the point the City Limits
turn North, thence North along the City Limits to the point the City Limits
turn East, thence East along the City Limits to the East right-of-way line of
the Union Pacific Railroad, at which point the City Limits turn North, thence
North and Northeasterly along the City Limits to the point that the City Limits
turn West, thence West along the City Limits to the point where the City Limits
turn North, thence North along the City Limits to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 21-15, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 25-08, 4-15-2025)
1-9-6: VOTING PLACES:
The following designated locations are hereby established as voting places
within the precincts of the City, to remain in effect for all elections held in
the City of Mason City until such time as the City Council deems it necessary
and advisable to change said locations: (Ord. 91-25, 11-5-1991)
MC01  Ward 1 pct 1 Trinity Lutheran Church          213 N. Pennsylvania Ave.
MC02  Ward 1 pct 2 Highland Golf Course club house  944 17th St. NE
MC03  Ward 1 pct 3 Grace Evangelical Free Church    440 N. Illinois Ave.
MC04  Ward 2 pct 1 Cerro Gordo Courthouse boardroom 220 N. Washington Ave.
MC05  Ward 2 pct 2 First Presbyterian Church        100 S. Pierce Ave.
MC06  Ward 2 pct 3 Grace United Methodist Church    200 14th St. NW
MC07  Ward 3 pct 1 Masonic Temple                   304 1st St. SE
MC08  Ward 3 pct 2 Wesley United Methodist Church   1405 S. Pennsylvania Ave.
MC09  Ward 3 pct 3 First Covenant Church            411 S. Ohio Ave.
MC10  Ward 4 pct 1 NIACOG Building                  525 6th St. SW
MC 11 Ward 4 pct 2 Rolling Acres CR Church          340 19th SW
MC 12 Ward 4 pct 3 Newman Catholic High School      2445 19th St. SW
 
(Ord. 91-25, 11-5-1991; amd. Ord. 93-31, 10-19-1993; 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 10
CONTRACT LETTING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-10-1: General Provisions
1-10-2: Purpose And Policy
1-10-3: Definitions
1-10-4: General Principles Of Applicable Law
1-10-5: Laws And Regulations
1-10-6: Requirement Of Good Faith
1-10-7: Local Purchases
1-10-8: Prohibited Interests In Public Contract
1-10-9: Contract Letting Procedure
1-10-10: Divulging Sealed Bids
1-10-11: Opening Of Bids
1-10-12: Rejection Of Bids
1-10-13: Contract Award
1-10-14: Tie Low Bids
1-10-15: Suspension Of Bidders
1-10-16: Procedure For Suspension
1-10-17: Motion For Reconsideration
1-10-18: Ex Parte Communication
1-10-19: Judicial Review
1-10-20: Deception Relating To City Contracts
1-10-21: Penalty
1-10-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall implement the provisions of Iowa Code chapters 23A.3, 26.3,
73A, 362, 572 and 573 regulating the advertisement and award of public
improvement contracts. This chapter establishes uniform requirements for
construction contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers who perform
services or construction work for a governmental body of the City on public
improvement projects, and is to be construed, applied and enforced in
accordance with Iowa law. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the City Administrator's, or a
designee, authority to administer public improvement contracts. In order to
protect the public interest, it is the expressed purpose of this chapter to
simplify, clarify and modernize the City's contract letting procedure to
prevent fraud, misrepresentation, collusion, favoritism, discrimination,
improvidence, price fixing and bid peddling in the administration of public
contracts. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
1-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined unless the context
otherwise requires:
ADDENDA: Any written notice, typed statement or graphic instrument issued to
prospective bidders prior to the receipt of bids.
BIDDER: Any business which submits an offer or proposal on the prescribed form
setting forth the prices for the work to be performed.
BIDDING DOCUMENTS: The advertisement or invitation for bids, instructions to
bidders, the bid form and the proposed contract documents, including all
addenda issued prior to receipt of bids.
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS: The advertisement or invitation for bids, general
instruction to bidders, prebid instructions to bidders and the bid form.
BUSINESS: Any person, corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock, company, joint venture or any other private legal
entity. Business also means a contractor, subcontractor, vender or supplier.
CHANGE ORDER: A written order directing a contractor to make changes under that
clause of the contract which allows the City to order changes without consent
of the contractor, and all such change orders shall require written approval
from the Public Services Director, or a designee.
CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or
demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of
any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine
operation, standard repair or customary maintenance of existing structures,
buildings or real property.
CONTRACT: All types of City agreements, regardless of their identification and
any claim, account or demand against or agreement with a government body,
expressed or implied. The term "contract" shall not include employment
agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
CONTRACT MODIFICATION: Any written alteration approved by the Public Services
Director or a designee, in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery,
period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract
accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.
CONTRACTOR: Any business having a fully executed contract with a government
body.
DATA: Recorded information regardless of form or characteristic.
DEFECTIVE WORK: Work that is unsatisfactory, faulty, deficient or fails to
conform to the contract drawings and specifications, or does not meet the
requirements of any inspection, reference standard, test or approval referred
to in the drawings and specifications or has been damaged prior to
recommendation of final payment.
DESIGNEE: A duly authorized representative of the Public Services Director
holding an appointed position.
EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected situation or occurrence which would vitally
affect the life, safety, health or property of citizens, or cause serious loss
or injury to the City. Emergency does not mean situations or occurrences which
could have been anticipated through reasonable diligence and foresight.
EMPLOYEE: An individual drawing a salary from the City of Mason City, whether
elected or not, and any noncompensated individual performing personal services
for the City.
GOVERNMENT BODY: Any City department, commission, board, committee or agency.
GRATUITY: Consideration in any form, including but not limited to a gift,
commission, discount and bonus.
IRRESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder or a prospective bidder who fails to furnish,
upon request from the Public Services Director or a designee, proof of
qualifications, financial stability, Iowa Labor Department certification and
any other data required by this chapter. The term also means a bidder or
prospective bidder who has repeatedly made slow or unsatisfactory deliveries or
progress during prior construction contracts, or who has violated, or attempted
to violate the provisions of other City contracts.
LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: The bidder whose bid is the lowest of those bidders
possessing the skill, financial resources and the ability to faithfully perform
the work outlined in the project manual.
MATERIALLY VARIES: Any item in the project manual that is made mandatory and
nonwaivable.
PLANS: All drawings, diagrams, illustrations, schedules and other data or
information which are specifically prepared or assembled in the project manual.
PROJECT MANUAL: The bidding requirements (invitation to bid and instructions to
bidders), the contract forms (agreement, bond and certificates), the contract
conditions (general conditions, modifications to general conditions) and the
project specifications.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS: Any building or construction work, either within or
outside the corporate limits of the City, to be paid for, in whole or in part,
by the use of funds of the City, regardless of sources, including a building or
improvement constructed or operated jointly with any other public or private
agency, but excluding urban renewal and low rent housing projects, industrial
aid projects under Iowa Code chapter 419, emergency work or work performed by
employees of the City or a government body.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A business which has the capability in all respects to
perform fully the work as outlined in the project manual, and the integrity and
reliability which will assure good faith performance.
RESPONSIVE BIDDER: A business which has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects with the project manual, both as to the method and timeliness
of submission and to the substance of any contract provision.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor not involving
the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely
incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment
agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
SPECIFICATIONS: Those portions of the contract document consisting of the
mandatory written technical descriptions of materials, equipment, construction
systems, standards of workmanship as applied to the work and certain
administrative details applicable thereto.
SUPPLIER: A manufacturer, fabricator, supplier, distributor, material person or
vendor having a direct contract with the contractor or with any subcontractor
to furnish materials or equipment to be incorporated in the work by the
contractor or any subcontractor.
TARGETED SMALL BUSINESS: A business as defined in the City's Targeted Small
Business Guidelines, which is fifty one percent (51%) or more owned and daily
controlled by a female or a minority and is a mandatory requirement on all City
projects.
WORK: The entire completed construction or the various separately identifiable
parts thereof required to be furnished under the contract drawings and
specifications. Work also includes the contractor performing or furnishing
labor, materials and equipment into the construction, and performing or
providing services and submitting documentation, all as required by the
contract specifications. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994;
2017 Code)
1-10-4: GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF APPLICABLE LAW:
Unless provided elsewhere in this chapter, the principles of law and equity,
including the Uniform Commercial Code of Iowa, and laws relative to capacity to
contract, agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake or
bankruptcy shall supplement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-
1994)
1-10-5: LAWS AND REGULATIONS:
Every bidder and contractor shall give all notices and comply with all laws and
regulations of the City and State applicable to successfully performing a City
contract. If a bidder or contractor's action in connection with a contract is
contrary to the laws and regulations of the City, the contractor or bidder
shall bear all claims, costs, losses and damages caused by, arising out of or
resulting therefrom. A contractor or bidder shall be presumed to know or have
constructive knowledge of all laws and regulations of the City. (Ord. 94-3, 2-
15-1994)
1-10-6: REQUIREMENT OF GOOD FAITH:
All government bodies, businesses, bidders and contractors involved in the
solicitation, negotiation, performance or administration of a City contract
shall act in good faith and fair dealing in trade. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-7: LOCAL PURCHASES:
The City Administrator, or designee, shall establish a City policy which
requires consideration of purchasing goods, services and construction work from
Mason City owned businesses and from targeted small businesses which offer
their goods, services and construction work at a cost and consideration,
relatively equal to businesses not located in the corporate limits of Mason
City. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
1-10-8: PROHIBITED INTERESTS IN PUBLIC CONTRACT:
In accordance with Iowa Code section 362.5, no City officer or employee shall
have an interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or
material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or performed for
the officer's or employee's City. Except as provided for in subsections 3a
through 3m of section 362.5, a contract entered into in violation of this
chapter shall be void. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-9: CONTRACT LETTING PROCEDURE:
When the estimated total cost to the City of a public improvement exceeds the
sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or the adjusted competitive
bid threshold established in Iowa Code section 314.1B, the Public Services
Director, or designee, shall advertise for sealed bids for the proposed
improvement by posting a notice to bidders as provided in Iowa Code section
362.3, except that the notice to bidders may be posted not less than thirteen
(13) days and not more than forty five (45) days before the date for filing
bids. When the cost of a public improvement is less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), or the adjusted competitive bid threshold established in
Iowa Code section 314.1B, the Public Services Director, or designee, will not
be compelled to advertise for sealed bids, but shall solicit, on an equal
basis, sealed quotations from three (3) or more bidders, including targeted
small businesses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not apply
to contracts for emergency repairs to public improvements; provided, however,
that such emergency repairs shall be made with such competition as is
practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for
the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be
included in the contract file. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
1-10-10: DIVULGING SEALED BIDS:
No public officer, deputy or employee shall directly or indirectly or in any
manner whatsoever, at any time or in any manner than as provided by law, open
any sealed bid or convey or divulge to any person, business or bidder any part
of the contents of a sealed bid, on any proposed public project under this
chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-11: OPENING OF BIDS:
   A.   Receive And Open Bids: The Public Services Director, or designee, and
the City Clerk shall preside at the public meeting convened to receive, open
and announce the amount of the bids. The Public Services Director shall reject
any and all bidders who have been deemed irresponsible and unreliable under
section
1-10-16 of this chapter, based on the bidder's past work performance with the
City. Each bidder shall accompany the bid with a bid security amounting to not
less than ten percent (10%) of the estimated total contract cost of the public
improvement, or the amount of each bid. The bid security shall be submitted in
a separate sealed envelope and shall be opened by the City Clerk before the bid
is disclosed. The bidder's security shall be in the form of a cashier's or
certified check drawn on a bank in Iowa or a bank chartered under the laws of
the United States, or a certified share draft drawn on a credit union in Iowa
or chartered under the law of the United States, or a corporate surety which is
satisfactory to the City.
   B.   Bid Security: The City Clerk shall determine the legal sufficiency of
the bid security before the bidder's proposal is opened. The bid security shall
contain no condition except as provided by law. All bids that are submitted
with legally insufficient bid security shall be rejected and returned to the
bidder by the City Clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the
bidder fails to execute the contract as provided in the plans and
specifications, or by this chapter, the full amount of the bid security shall
be forfeited to the City in liquidation of damages for such failure. (Ord. 94-
3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-12: REJECTION OF BIDS:
General bids shall be for the complete work as outlined in the plans and
specifications. Every general bid shall be on the form supplied by the City. No
general bid shall be rejected because the bidder failed to submit prices for,
or information related to, any item or items for which no specific space is
provided on the form or which contains minor numerical errors. A bid containing
minor immaterial defects or minor irregularities shall be accepted and read
under advisement; provided, however, that the reading of a bid, or the reading
of a bid under advisement, shall not operate as a waiver of any immaterial
defects or deficiencies in the bid. Bids that materially vary from the project
specifications shall be rejected for any of the following reasons:
   A.   If the bid is on a form other than that which is found in the project
manual, as if the form is altered or any part thereof is detached.
   B.   If there are unauthorized additions, conditional or alternate bids, or
irregularities of any kind which make the bid incomplete, indefinite or
ambiguous as to its meaning.
   C.   If the bidder adds any unauthorized provisions in the bid reserving the
bidder a right to accept or reject an award of the contract, or adds any
provision giving the bidder a right to not enter into a contract with the City
after approval of award.
   D.   If the bid does not contain a unit price for each pay item listed in
the bid form, except in the case of authorized alternate pay items or if any
unit prices are obviously unbalanced, either in excess of or below the
reasonable market analysis values.
   E.   If the bidder knowingly submits false, misleading or deceptive data or
information with its bid proposal or commits the same for its subcontractors.
(Ord. 08-15, 11-4-2008)
1-10-13: CONTRACT AWARD:
   A.   Bid Tabulation: The City Engineer, or designee, shall submit a bid
tabulation to the City Council at a public City Council meeting which will
include a brief description of any defects or irregularities. The City Council
thereafter may waive any and all such immaterial defects or irregularities upon
determining such waiver to be in the best interest of the City. The City
Council shall reserve the right to reject any and all general bids if it
determined that the low bidder, or their subcontractors, are not competent to
perform the work as specified in the contract, and may reject any and all bids
received, fix a new date for receiving bids and order publication of a new
notice to bidders.
   B.   Notice Of Award: Should the City Council award the contract, the City
Clerk shall give the successful bidder an official notice of award within
thirty (30) days of the opening of the bids. Within fifteen (15) days after
receipt of the notice of award of contract, the successful bidder shall execute
at least three (3) counterparts of the agreement and provide the City Clerk
with a performance payment bond as required by Iowa Code chapter 573, and such
other contract documents as required by the project manual. Failure on the part
of the successful bidder to fully comply with the foregoing submissions within
twenty (20) days of receiving notice shall be considered just cause for voiding
the agreement and the bidder forfeiting its bid bond.
   C.   Disclosure Of Subcontractors: A bidder awarded a construction contract
with the City shall disclose the names of all subcontractors, who will work on
the project being bid, within forty eight (48) hours after the approval of the
contract. If a subcontractor named by a bidder awarded a City construction
contract is replaced, or if the cost of work to be done by a subcontractor is
reduced, the bidder shall disclose the name of the new subcontractor or the
amount of the reduced cost. (Ord. 08-15, 11-4-2008)
1-10-14: TIE LOW BIDS:
In the event identical low bids are received for the project from general
bidders who are deemed to be responsive and responsible, the City Council may
award the contract to a locally owned business as it deems to be in the best
interests of the City. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-15: SUSPENSION OF BIDDERS:
Based on the recommendation of the City Administrator, or designee, the City
Council may suspend a bidder, contractor or subcontractor, depending on the
severity of the offense, from participating in other City construction
contracts, or from taking part in City work as a subcontractor, for a period of
not less than six (6) months, nor more than eighteen (18) months. Any bidder,
contractor or subcontractor who violates any provision in this section shall be
suspended for a period of time after a public hearing before the City Council
Public Services Committee when it finds that the bidder, contractor or
subcontractor engaged in any of the following acts: (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
   A.   Continually failed or refused to correct deficient work or replace
substandard or unauthorized materials found by the Public Services Department,
or its agent, or fails to make prompt progress payments to subcontractors for
materials or labor in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 573.
   B.   Continually found not to be in reasonably close conformity with the
project document or failed to correct work so as to be reasonably acceptable.
(Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
   C.   Continually failed to carry on the work in an acceptable manner or
refused to comply with a written order of the Public Services Director, or
designee, within a reasonable time, or has responded to the Public Services
Director, designee, City official or employee in any manner which is either
threatening, disparaging or insulting.
   D.   Persistently failed to timely complete a contract, or sought
unreasonable extensions of time on current projects, or refused to comply with
directives of the Public Services Director, designee or the City Council.
   E.   Failed to perform the contract with skilled workers as required in the
project document, or otherwise assigned or disposed of work to an unauthorized
contractor or to subcontract any portion thereof without approval of the Public
Services Director, or a designee. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
   F.   Forfeited a bid bond or failed to enter into a contract upon an offer
of award by the City Council in response to a prior advertisement for bids for
the same project, or any combination of projects involving the same work for
which the award is currently being considered.
   G.   Failed to comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the
standard specifications or special provisions as outlined in the contract.
   H.   Persistently or repeatedly refuses or fails to comply with the City's
Target Small Business Program requirements and to effectively utilize female
and minority owned businesses on City public improvement projects, or has
wilfully disregarded the rules, regulations and directives of the Mason City
Human Rights Commission 1 .
   I.   Failed to comply with the requirements of the Federal Davis Bacon
requirements to pay prevailing wages during the course of a federally funded
project, as required by Federal law.
   J.   Been disqualified, suspended or debarred by any agency of the State,
any of its municipalities or any Federal agency.
   K.   Subcontracted, employed, or otherwise used the services of anyone who
has been disqualified by the City Council from working on City projects, or
employed or otherwise used the services of a City employee as prescribed in
section
1-10-8 of this chapter.
   L.   Been convicted of, or pled guilty to, or declared nolo contendere to, a
charge of engaging in any conspiracy, collusion, price fixing or combination
thereof, or other unlawful act in restraint of trade, or business
discrimination, or of similar charges in any Federal Court or a court of this
or any other state.
   M.   Offered, promised or given a gratuity to any person elected, selected,
appointed, employed or otherwise engaged in public service to secure or fulfill
a City contract, or has employed as its own employees during the course of the
project any of the foregoing. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 10 of this Code.
1-10-16: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION:
   A.   Suspension: Following an investigation, the City Administrator, or
authorized designee, shall determine if cause exists to suspend a bidder,
contractor or subcontractor from participating in subsequent City construction
or repair work. If the City Administrator, or designee, finds that cause exists
to suspend, such findings shall be set forth in writing with a recommendation
for suspension to the City Council Public Services Committee. The City
Administrator, or designee, shall officially serve notice on the respondent
party within five (5) working days of the finding. The notice shall set forth
in detail the reasons supporting the recommendation, and the suggested period
of suspension. The notice shall be sent to the respondent by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
   B.   Protest: Any business which receives official notification from the
City Administrator, or designee, that suspension has been recommended may
protest the finding to the Public Services Committee. The protest shall be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after receipt
of the notice. The City Clerk shall immediately schedule a hearing at which
time the business must be allowed to present evidence or argument against the
suspension. The Public Services Committee hearing shall be scheduled by the
City Clerk within ten (10) days of receipt of the written protest. Following
the suspension hearing, the Public Services Committee shall issue a proposed
decision to the City Council to either support the suspension for a time
specified by the committee, or overrule the City Administrator's, or
designee's, determination.
   C.   Action On Decision: If the City Council does not act on the Public
Services Committee's proposed decision within thirty (30) days thereafter, the
committee's decision shall be considered accepted and binding. If suspension is
the final outcome of the procedure outlined herein, the business shall be
immediately suspended. (Ord. 94-20, 8-16-1994)
1-10-17: MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION:
Reconsideration of an adverse decision of the Public Services Committee may be
requested by the contractor, appellant, or any interested party who submitted
comments during the Public Service Committee proceeding, and any agency
involving the protest. The motion for reconsideration shall contain a detailed
statement of the factual and legal grounds upon which reversal or modification
is deemed warranted, specifying any errors of law made or information not
previously considered. Such motions shall be filed not later than ten (10) days
after official service notice and receipt of such adverse decision. (Ord. 94-3,
2-15-1994)
1-10-18: EX PARTE COMMUNICATION:
No Public Services Committee member or City Council member shall receive, ex
parte, any evidence, explanation, analysis or advice, whether written or oral,
regarding any matter at issue in an appeal, nor shall any person, contractor or
employee directly or indirectly, ex parte, submit to the Public Services
Committee or City Council, any evidence, explanation, analysis or advice,
whether written or oral, regarding any matter at issue in a protest or appeal.
(Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
1-10-19: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A business adversely affected by a decision of the City may file a petition for
judicial review in the Cerro Gordo County District Court. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-
1994)
1-10-20: DECEPTION RELATING TO CITY CONTRACTS:
A business commits a prima facie violation of this chapter if, in the course of
business, it wilfully makes false statements, whether by affidavit, report or
other representation to any City official, employee, board or commission for
the purpose of influencing the acceptance of a bid or contract. A business
which wilfully prevents or attempts to prevent any City officer or employee
from performing their duty commits a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-3, 2-
15-1994)
1-10-21: PENALTY:
Any business which is found after hearing to have violated the provisions of
subsections
1-10-15I, J, K and L and section
1-10-18 of this chapter shall be disbarred for three (3) years from conducting
business with the City, or participating in any other City public improvement
for a period not exceeding three (3) years. (Ord. 94-3, 2-15-1994)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Purpose
2-1-2: Appointments; Terms
2-1-3: Qualifications
2-1-4: Chairman; Clerk; Records
2-1-5: Meeting Place; Supplies
2-1-6: Duties
2-1-7: Applicability; Exceptions
2-1-8: Hearings And Appeals
2-1-9: Judicial Review
2-1-1: PURPOSE:
The Civil Service Commission of the City shall be an administrative tribunal
created under the authority of chapter 400, Iowa Code. The purpose of said
commission shall be to preserve and protect the rights and privileges of civil
service employees within City government, and to ensure efficient, effective
and harmonious public service for residents of Mason City. The purpose of the
commission shall also be to hear and determine matters as set out in section
2-1-8 of this chapter involving the rights and privileges of civil service
employees based on the merits of each case. (Ord. 1616, 11-16-1981)
2-1-2: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS:
The Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall appoint three (3)
Civil Service Commissioners who shall hold office, one (1) until the first
Monday in April of the second year, one (1) until the first Monday in April of
the third year, and one (1) until the first Monday in April of the fourth year
after such appointment, and whose successor shall be appointed for a term of
four (4) years except that in case of a vacancy, the appointment shall be made
to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors as defined in
chapter 39, Iowa Code, and residents of the City preceding their appointment
and shall serve without compensation. A person, while on the commission, shall
not hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-
1987; amd. 2017 Code)
Civil Service Commissioners shall not buy from, sell to, or in any manner
become parties directly to any contract to furnish supplies, material, or labor
to the City in which they are Commissioners. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-1987)
2-1-4: CHAIRMAN; CLERK; RECORDS:
The commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. (Ord. 87-20,
9-21-1987)
For purposes of this chapter, the City Clerk, or a designee of the City Clerk,
shall be Clerk of the commission and custodian of all records of the
commission. If an employee is appointed Clerk of the commission who is employed
in a civil service status at the time of appointment as Clerk of the
commission, the appointee shall retain the civil service rights held before the
appointment. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a
complete individual service record of each civil service employee which record
shall be permanent and kept up to date.
When duly certified by the Clerk of the commission, copies of all records and
entries or papers pertaining to said record shall be admissible in evidence
with the same force and effect as the originals. All civil service records
shall be confidential except as otherwise provided by State law, and shall be
kept under locked file. (Ord. 87-20, 9-21-1987)
2-1-5: MEETING PLACE; SUPPLIES:
The Civil Service Commission shall hereby be authorized the use of a meeting
room within City Hall and the Council shall supply the commission with all
necessary equipment and qualified staff to enable it to properly perform its
duties. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-6: DUTIES:
The Civil Service Commission shall have and exercise the powers and duties as
set forth in chapter 400, Iowa Code. The Civil Service Commission shall adopt
rules and regulations governing the administration of the Civil Service Program
and shall also have the power to adopt, amend and rescind any other rules and
regulations necessary for the conducting of its business and for the
preparation and administration of civil service examinations. (Ord. 1616, 11-
16-1981)
2-1-7: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all appointive officers and
employees except those positions set out in section 400.6, Iowa Code, or the
most recent amendment thereto. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
2-1-8: HEARINGS AND APPEALS:
The Civil Service Commission shall have jurisdiction over suspensions,
demotions, and discharges if no grievance procedure is provided in a collective
bargaining agreement applicable to a civil service employee and shall hold
hearings on appeals regarding the same, if requested, within the terms of the
Civil Service Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 97-22, 9-2-1997)
2-1-9: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of the final actions of the commission may be sought in
accordance with section 400.27, Iowa Code. (Ord. 1616, 11-16-1981)
CHAPTER 2
CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Appointment Of Commission
2-2-2: Vacancies
2-2-3: Organization
2-2-4: Powers And Duties, Planning
2-2-5: Powers And Duties, Zoning
2-2-6: Reports
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION:
Pursuant to chapter 414, Code of Iowa, there shall be a City Planning and
Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be
citizens of the City and shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act
in matters pertaining to the development of a City plan and the amending of
City zoning ordinances, and who shall not hold any elective office in the
Municipal government. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
the approval of the City Council for terms of five (5) years following their
appointment, and shall serve without compensation except for actual expenses,
which shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-
1976; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-2-2: VACANCIES:
A member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until a successor is
appointed and approved. In the event of any vacancies on the City Planning and
Zoning Commission, the appointment of a successor shall be made by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council, and shall be for the balance of the
unexpired term. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
This commission shall annually, at its first meeting in April, choose one (1)
of its members to act as Chair of the commission, and another of its members
Vice Chair, who shall perform all the duties of the Chair during his/her
absence or disability. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations
governing its organization and procedures as may be deemed necessary. (Ord.
1355, 5-3-1976)
2-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES, PLANNING:
   A.   Approval Of Plats: When required by title 11, chapter 3 of this Code,
all plans, plats or replats of subdivisions of land embraced in Mason City or
within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, laid out in lots or plats with
the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
the public, shall first be submitted to the City Planning and Zoning
Commission, and its recommendation obtained before action by the City Council.
   B.   Approval Of Street Or Park Improvement: No plan for any street, park,
parkway, boulevard, trafficway, river front or other public improvement
affecting the City plan shall be finally approved, or the character or location
thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to the
City Planning and Zoning Commission. Such requirements for recommendations
shall not act as a stay upon action where the commission, after thirty (30)
days' written notice requesting such recommendations, has failed to file the
same.
   C.   Recommendations To Improvements: No statuary, memorial or work of art
in a public place, and no public building, public structure or appurtenance
shall be located or erected or a site for such structure obtained until and
unless the design and proposed location of such structure be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation. No permits for such
structures shall be issued without the commission having made the above
recommendation. However, such requirements for recommendations shall not act as
a stay upon action where the commission, after thirty (30) days' written notice
requesting such recommendations, has failed to file the same.
   D.   Comprehensive Plan: The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have
full power and authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies,
maps, plans or charts of the City limits which, in the opinion of the
commission, bears relation to a comprehensive plan. It shall bring its studies
and recommendations to the attention of the Council, and the commission may
publish said studies and recommendations.
      1.   For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical
development of the City, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive
studies of present conditions and future growth of the City with due regard to
its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general
purposes of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious
development of the City and its environs which will, in accordance with present
and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience and
economy in the process of development.
      2.   The plan shall be made with consideration of the smart planning
principles in section 18B.1, Iowa Code, and may include the information
specified in section 18B.2, subsection 2, Iowa Code.
      3.   Before the adoption of said Comprehensive Plan, or any part of it,
or any substantial amendment to it, the commission shall hold at least one (1)
public hearing. Legal notice of such hearing will be given by one (1)
publication not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date of the hearing. The adoption of the plan, or part, or amendment, shall
require a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the
commission.
      4.   After adoption of said plan or amendment of the same by the
commission, the plan shall be forwarded for approval by the Council. If the
commission disapproves the proposed plan or amendment thereof, it may be
adopted by the Council with an affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the
total membership of the Council.
      5.   When said plan, or any modification or amendment, shall receive the
approval of the council, the said plan shall constitute the official City plan
of the City of Mason City until subsequently modified or amended. (Ord. 1355,
5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
2-2-5: POWERS AND DUTIES, ZONING:
   A.   Recommend to the City Council the boundaries of the various original
zoning districts of the City and appropriate regulations and restrictions to be
enforced therein.
   B.   After the adoption of such zoning district boundaries, regulations and
restrictions, the City Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City
Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-
1976)
   C.   Before presenting any recommendation to the City Council, the
commission shall, with due diligence, prepare a preliminary report and hold a
public hearing thereon before submitting its final recommendation to the City
Council, in accordance with the requirements of section
12-4-2 of this Code. The City Council shall not hold its public hearings or
take action until it has received the final recommendation from the City
Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976; amd. 2017 Code)
2-2-6: REPORTS:
Immediately following the expiration of the Municipal fiscal year, the City
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a report to the City Council of its
proceedings, together with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and
the progress of its work for the preceding fiscal year. (Ord. 1355, 5-3-1976)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 1
SECTION:
2-3-1: Membership
2-3-2: Organization
2-3-3: Duties
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 12, chapter 5 of this Code.
2-3-1: MEMBERSHIP:
A Zoning Board of Adjustment, to be hereinafter referred to as the "board", is
hereby established pursuant to section 414.7, Code of Iowa. The board shall
consist of five (5) members, and two (2) alternates, each to be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, for a term of five (5)
years. Alternate members shall participate and vote on matters before the board
only when called upon to make up a quorum or comprise a full five (5) member
panel at any meeting. In no case shall they actively participate where all five
(5) regular members are present. A member whose term has expired shall continue
to serve until a successor is appointed and approved. Vacancies shall be filled
in the same manner for the unexpired term of the member whose office becomes
vacant. The members of the board shall serve without pay and shall be removable
by the Council only for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing.
(Ord. 10-16, 7-6-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
2-3-2: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall elect a Chairman from among its own members. Such Chairman, or
in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. There shall be a fixed place of meeting, and all
meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The presence of three (3)
members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and it shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
Subject to the approval of the Council, the board may employ such clerical and
technical assistance as may be needed to carry on its work; it shall have the
power to call upon any City official or department for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of any such official or
department to render such assistance as may reasonably be expected. (Ord. 10-
16, 7-6-2010)
2-3-3: DUTIES:
The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and duties outlined in section
12-5-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-16, 7-6-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-4-1: Designation Of Local Board Of Health
2-4-2: Jurisdiction Of Local Board Of Health
2-4-3: Sanitary Inspector
2-4-4: Police To Execute Orders
2-4-5: Inspection Of Premises
2-4-6: Unsanitary Conditions
2-4-7: Closing Of Premises
2-4-8: Quarantine
2-4-9: Stables And Manure
2-4-10: Violations
2-4-1: DESIGNATION OF LOCAL BOARD OF HEALTH:
Pursuant to chapter 137, Code of Iowa, the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health
shall be the local Board of Health for the City of Mason City. (Ord. 01-24, 11-
6-2001)
2-4-2: JURISDICTION OF LOCAL BOARD OF HEALTH:
All public health matters within the City shall be under the jurisdiction of
the Cerro Gordo County Board of Health, which shall have all of the powers
prescribed by sections 137.103 and 137.104 of the Iowa Code and shall also have
the power to enforce appropriate ordinances of the City within its boundaries.
(Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001; amd. 2017 Code)
2-4-3: SANITARY INSPECTOR:
The City Administrator may from time to time appoint a Sanitary Inspector to
act as the City's Health Officer.
The Sanitary Inspector shall enforce the rules and regulations of the County
Health Board within the City, shall enforce the health ordinances of the City
and shall carry out such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by
the City Administrator. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-4: POLICE TO EXECUTE ORDERS:
The Chief of Police shall execute all lawful orders of the Cerro Gordo County
Board of Health relating to health matters within the Municipal limits and
shall serve notices required in connection with the work of the Cerro Gordo
County Board of Health in the performance of its duties and responsibilities
which require police services within the City limits. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-5: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The Cerro Gordo County Board of Health, in addition to any rights or powers
established by State law, County ordinances, or by the rules and regulations of
the local Board of Health, shall have the right to examine any cellar, room, or
any other building or any place with a view to ascertain the sanitary condition
of the same, and shall have free access thereto for the purpose of examining or
removing any nuisance, source of filth, or cause of sickness. (Ord. 01-24, 11-
6-2001)
2-4-6: UNSANITARY CONDITIONS:
The Cerro Gordo County Board of Health shall have full power within the
Municipal limits, in addition to any and all powers provided by State law,
County ordinance or by local Board of Health rules and regulations, to require
all premises within the Municipal limits which are or may hereafter become
unclean or unsanitary, or the source of nuisance, to be properly cleaned and
disinfected and such nuisance removed, and to order all sources of filth,
sickness, disease or other conditions dangerous to the public or causing
discomfort to the public removed, corrected, or abated at the expense of the
owner of the property. Whenever the owner of any premises disregards any such
order of the Board of Health, the board may require that the order be complied
with, and the costs thereof assessed against the property in the manner
provided by law. (Ord. 01-24, 11-6-2001)
2-4-7: CLOSING OF PREMISES:
Whenever the owner of any property shall fail to obey the order of the Board of
Health for the removal of any unclean or unsanitary condition or any source of
filth, sickness, disease or nuisance, the board may order the occupants of said
premises to move therefrom and fix some reasonable time for compliance with
such order. If the order is not complied with, the Board of Health may forcibly
remove the occupants of said premises, and such premises shall not be again
occupied as a dwelling or place of business without the written permission of
the local Board of Health. (1953 Code § 46-72)
2-4-8: QUARANTINE:
As set forth in chapter 139A, Code of Iowa, the local Board of Health shall see
that the procedure for quarantining shall be enforced. (1985 Code; amd. 2017
Code)
2-4-9: STABLES AND MANURE:
All barns, sheds, pens or other buildings or places where animals or chickens
are kept shall be kept free and clean from manure or other filth. All manure
and other filth arising from the keeping of such animals or fowls shall be kept
in watertight bins or receptacles and shall be kept covered during the months
of May, June, July, August and September. All such manure and refuse shall be
removed from the premises at least once each week and more often if, in the
opinion of the Health Department, such removal is necessary to preserve the
health of the inhabitants of the City. (1953 Code § 46-15)
2-4-10: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or of the
rules of the local board, or any lawful order, written or oral, of said board,
or of its officers or authorized agents, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1953 Code § 46-16; amd. Ord. 951, 9-24-1964)
CHAPTER 5
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Board Created
2-5-2: Board Organization
2-5-3: Duties Of Board
2-5-4: Reports
2-5-5: Rules
2-5-6: Penalties
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED:
A Park and Recreation Board is hereby created pursuant to section 392.1, Code
of Iowa, to advise the City Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa, on the
needed facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds and
community facilities for other forms of recreation, pursuant to the Code of
Iowa. It shall also plan and oversee City programs and encourage other programs
for the leisure time of the City's residents of all ages. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-
1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-5-2: BOARD ORGANIZATION:
The board shall consist of five (5) members, all citizens of the City of Mason
City, Iowa, whose terms of office shall be for four (4) years. Each term of
office shall commence on January 2 following a regular Municipal election.
   A.   Vacancies: Any vacancy occurring on the board more than sixty (60) days
prior to the next regular Municipal election shall be filled by appointment by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council. Any person so appointed
shall serve until the next regular Municipal election at which a member shall
be elected to serve the remainder of the term for which the vacancy occurred.
   B.   Compensation: Members shall be compensated at a prorated rate of seven
hundred eighty dollars ($780.00) per year, effective January 1, 2022 and shall
further be entitled to necessary expenses including but not limited to travel
expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties. (Ord. 84-13, 4-2-1984; amd.
1985 Code; Ord. 22-01, 1-4-2022)
2-5-3: DUTIES OF BOARD:
   A.   The Park and Recreation Board shall set policies, rules, regulations,
and adopt procedures for the management of parks, recreation centers,
recreation programs, recreation buildings, pools, trails, golf courses,
campgrounds and any other facilities dedicated to park use by the City Council.
   B.   The Park and Recreation Board shall make recommendations to the Council
with regard to the acquisition, sale, lease or exchange of any property
dedicated or proposed to be dedicated to park and recreation use within the
City.
   C.   The Park and Recreation Board shall develop a plan for recreation,
recreation facilities, park development and maintenance. The board will update
and revise the plan as required.
   D.   A Park Superintendent, a Recreation Superintendent and a Golf Course
Manager shall be appointed by the City Administrator subject to the approval of
the Park and Recreation Board.
   E.   The City Administrator shall cooperate with the Park and Recreation
Board to provide for an allotment of sufficient personnel and equipment
resources to meet the park and recreation needs of the City. (Ord. 02-04, 2-5-
2002)
   F.   The Park and Recreation Board shall annually submit a capital
improvement plan to the City Administrator. (Ord. 02-04, 2-5-2002; amd. 2017
Code)
2-5-4: REPORTS:
The board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time
to time as it deems advisable, or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director in the manner of
other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of
the board and in the Finance Director's report to the Council. (Ord. 1331, 7-
21-1975)
2-5-5: RULES:
The board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the use of park or
other recreational facilities, or for the conduct of recreation programs,
subject to the approval of the rules by the City Council. Such rules shall be
either posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide
adequate notice to the using public. (Ord. 1331, 7-21-1975)
2-5-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of a board rule which has been approved by the City Council and
adopted by ordinance may be cause for denial of use of a facility or
participation in a program, but such denial which extends more than one (1) day
may be appealed to the board or to the City Council for a hearing. The
violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor if a serious offense. (Ord. 1331,
7-21-1975)
CHAPTER 6
ACTIVE LIVING AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-6-1: Commission Established
2-6-2: Organization
2-6-3: Purpose And Intent
2-6-4: Definitions
2-6-5: Powers Of Commission
2-6-6: Meetings
2-6-7: Budget
2-6-8: Termination Of Commission
2-6-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest of the citizens
to improve livability and well being in Mason City, there is hereby created the
Active Living and Transportation Commission. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The commission shall initially consist of five (5) members who shall be
residents of the City.
   B.   Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a passion for
our quality of life influenced by the land use and transportation planning
choices made to transform our community to a healthier, safer place to live
that provides access to economic opportunities. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
   C.   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total
of five (5) Commissioners. In addition, there shall be the following ex officio
member representatives: the Operation and Maintenance Manager, City Engineer,
Director of Development Services, County Conservation Director, County
Supervisor, and North Iowa Area Council of Governments (NIACOG) Regional
Planning Affiliation (RPA) Transportation Planner. Three (3) members shall
serve three (3) year terms and two (2) members shall serve two (2) year terms
after initial appointments. After establishment, future terms will be three (3)
year terms. (Ord. 17-3, 1-3-2017)
   D.   Members may serve for more than one (1) term and each member shall
serve until the appointment of a successor.
   E.   Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of
office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
   F.   Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original
selection as aforesaid.
   G.   The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a
nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
   H.   The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its
members.
   I.   Members shall serve without compensation.
   J.   A simple majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   K.   The City Administrator will designate a staff member to serve as the
Secretary for the commission. The Secretary to the commission shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the commission's proceedings.
(Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
   A.   Improve livability and well being in Mason City and provide
recommendations for land use, waterways, and transportation systems that best
support active living while promoting the aesthetic inspiration of our rural
American culture.
   B.   Become the premier Midwest micropolitan community for active living
transportation.
   C.   Develop goals and priorities to create a network of streets and public
spaces to support active living and provide education and advocacy for the
goals.
   D.   Provide recommendations for land use and transportation systems that
better support the ability to move about the community.
   E.   Establish and promote healthy food and beverage policy at City
sponsored youth sporting events.
   F.   Improve amenities and quality of life in the City to strengthen
workforce retention and attraction of the City.
   G.   Educate, advocate and enforce the community on outcomes of the active
living and transportation work.
   H.   Inform City Council of barriers to accomplishing goals, and measure and
track progress.
   I.   Make an annual report to the City Council in December of each year.
(Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Mason City Active Living and Transportation Commission, as
established by this chapter.
COMPLETE STREETS: Roads designed that are safe, comfortable and able to
accommodate diverse modes, users, and activities including walking, cycling,
public transit, automobile, nearby businesses, and residents of all ages and
abilities. Such street design helps create more multi-modal transport systems
and more liveable communities.
LAND USE: A. Protections that provide land use policies and zoning regulations
that promote, expand and protect sites for community gardens and farmers'
markets.
   B.   Establish and promote community gardens and farmers' markets and ensure
protections through City Code.
LIVEABILITY: A. The quality of life a place allows and is heavily influenced by
the land use and transportation planning choices made in the areas of built
environment and transportation.
   B.   The built environment impacts health, well being and happiness - either
positively or negatively. It is a reflection of the care and thoughtfulness put
into creating the places where we live, work, and play.
   C.   Through our work of becoming a Blue Zones Community, we know research
shows that walkable, bikeable, and livable communities are also healthier
communities, not only in terms of individual health, but also environmental and
economic health.
TRANSPORTATION: Bikes, cars, public transit, all modes of transportation, and
pedestrians mobility meeting ADA requirements.
WATERWAYS: Water features including rivers, canals and streams, lakes, and
docks. Related features include weirs, rapids. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016; amd. 2017
Code)
2-6-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Collect Organization Metrics: The commission will work with staff to
determine appropriate metrics to support successes and develop data to
determine future goals.
   B.   Assess And Prioritize: The commission shall assess and prioritize short
and long term vision and goals and develop and make recommendations to the City
Council for capital improvement projects during their annual report.
   C.   Create Partnerships: The commission will invite and seek advice from
other community, county and regional organizations.
   D.   Grant Awards: The commission will cooperate with the Federal and State
governments and any other entities in the pursuance of grants for the purchase
and improvement of properties of the commission.
   E.   Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above,
the commission may, with City Council approval and supervision:
      1.   Solicit, recommend and assist in the receipt by the City of gifts
and donations of real and personal property, including money for the purpose of
facilitating their goals and visions.
      2.   Recommend and assist in the acquisition for the City by purchase,
bequest, or donation, properties for active living use.
      3.   Recommend and assist in the negotiation of leases, and transfer or
disposition of properties in order to support active living and transportation
subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that
will preserve the property.
      4.   Promote, educate, and provide advocacy for availability and benefits
of safe and increased usage and understanding of the amenities. (Ord. 16-2, 3-
15-2016)
2-6-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least quarterly in the months of February, April,
July and November or as necessary. Time and location of the meeting shall be
determined by the commission. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016)
2-6-7: BUDGET:
The commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete desired
projects with Council approval. (Ord. 16-2, 3-15-2016; amd. 2017 Code)
2-6-8: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission, known as the ALT Commission, may be discontinued by adoption
of an ordinance proposing such action preceded by the publishing of notice, as
prescribed in section 362.3 of the Iowa Code, of such ordinance. (Ord. 16-2, 3-
15-2016)
CHAPTER 7
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-7-1: Board Established
2-7-2: Qualifications Of Trustees
2-7-3: Organization Of Board
2-7-4: Powers And Duties
2-7-5: Power To Contract With Others For Use Of Library
2-7-6: Nonresident Use Of Library
2-7-7: Library Account
2-7-8: Annual Report
2-7-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
As provided in section 392.5, Code of Iowa, the Board of Trustees of the Mason
City Public Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall consist of
seven (7) members. All Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
2-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES:
All of the members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the City of Mason City, Iowa. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION OF BOARD:
   A.   Terms Of Office: All appointments to the Board shall be for six (6)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total
number as near as possible, to stagger the terms. The present incumbents are
confirmed in their appointments and terms.
   B.   Vacancies: The position of any Trustee shall be vacant if he moves
permanently from the City, or if he is absent from six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from
the City. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
with approval of the City Council, and the new Trustee shall fill out the
unexpired term for which the appointment is made. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
   C.   Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services, but shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses
incurred while on official library business. Such reimbursement shall come from
the funds appropriated to the library. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: (Ord. 1332,
7-21-1975)
   A.   To meet and elect from its members a President and such other officers
as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but
shall not be a member of the Board. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
   C.   To direct and control all the affairs of the library.
   D.   To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to employ such
assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior to such
employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting
in favor thereof. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
   E.   To remove by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Board, the librarian and
provide procedures for the removal of assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetency or inattention to duty, subject however to the provisions of
chapter 336, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
   F.   To select, or authorize the librarian to select and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals or other
library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library
within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   G.   To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the City of
Mason City and to fix charges therefor.
   H.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations.
   I.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
library purposes by the City Council, and of all monies available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other monies
belonging to the library, including fines and rentals collected under the rules
of the Board.
   J.   To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the
conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library.
   K.   To keep a record of its proceedings.
   L.   To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises
and bequests accepted by the City by action of the City Council.
   M.   To have authority to make agreements with local County historical
associations, where such exist, and to set apart the necessary room and to care
for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The
Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials
for the preservation and protection of such articles as are, in their judgment,
of a historical and educational nature, and pay for the same out of funds
allocated for library purposes. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-5: POWER TO CONTRACT WITH OTHERS FOR USE OF LIBRARY:
   A.   Contracting: The Board may contract with any other Boards of Trustees
of free public libraries, any other City, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, Township or County,
or with the Trustees of any County Library District for the use of the library
by their respective residents.
   B.   Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the Governing
Body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
(5%) in number of the electors who voted for Governor in the territory of the
party at the last general election. The petition must be presented to the
Governing Body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. (Ord.
1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-6: NONRESIDENT USE OF LIBRARY:
The Board may authorize the use of the library by nonresidents in any one (1)
or more of the following ways:
   A.   By lending the books or other materials of the library to nonresidents
on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or upon payment
of a special nonresident library fee.
   B.   By establishing depositories of library books or other materials to be
loaned to nonresidents.
   C.   By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or
other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   D.   By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other library
materials to nonresidents. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
2-7-7: LIBRARY ACCOUNT:
All monies appropriated by the City Council from the General Fund for the
operation and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for
the library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed
by its President. The warrant writing officer is the City Finance Director.
(Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
2-7-8: ANNUAL REPORT:
The Board shall make a report to the City Council immediately after the close
of the Municipal fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the
condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number
circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further
information required by the City Council. (Ord. 1332, 7-21-1975)
CHAPTER 8
BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-8-1: Appointment; Term
2-8-2: Authority
2-8-3: Powers And Duties
2-8-4: Reports
2-8-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created a Board of Cemetery Trustees consisting of five (5)
residents of the City to be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of
the City Council, as provided by chapter 392, Code of Iowa. Said Trustees shall
be appointed and shall serve for a period of five (5) years from April 1
following their appointment, except appointments to fill vacancies for the
unexpired term of any of said Trustees. (1953 Code § 12-1; amd. 1985 Code; 2017
Code)
2-8-2: AUTHORITY:
Said Trustees shall serve without pay except they shall be paid for the actual
expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. Said Trustees
shall select from their number a Chairman and shall have authority to employ a
Superintendent, a Secretary and such other officers and employees as in their
judgment may be required for the proper management of the cemetery. (1953 Code
§ 12-2)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
There is hereby conferred upon said Board of Trustees the duty of general
management of said Elmwood-St. Joseph Municipal Cemetery, and it shall have and
exercise in connection therewith all of the powers and duties imposed by law in
connection with the management of cemeteries, except the power and authority to
levy and impose taxes. (1953 Code § 12-3; amd. 2017 Code)
All funds shall be deposited with the City Clerk to the credit of the Cemetery
Board and shall be disbursed only on order of said board by written warrants of
the City Finance Director, pursuant to mutually acceptable procedures
established by the Board of Trustees and the City Council. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance Director, in the manner
of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member
of the board and in the Finance Director's report to the Council. (1953 Code §
12-3; amd. 1985 Code)
2-8-4: REPORTS:
The Board of Trustees shall annually, on or before December 15 of each year,
file with the Finance Director a proposed estimate of expenditures for the
following fiscal year setting forth the estimated receipts, the estimated
itemized disbursements and balance on hand in all funds under its management
and control, together with askings for the amount to be raised by taxation for
cemetery purposes. Said Board of Trustees shall annually, on or before August 1
of each year, file with the Finance Director a detailed report showing the
amount of monies received by it during the preceding fiscal year, the source of
such receipts, and a statement of the expenditures made by it, and the purpose
for which same were expended. (Ord. 1478, 1-15-1979)
ARTICLE A. CEMETERY PERPETUAL CARE FUND
SECTION:
2-8A-1: Trusteeship
2-8A-2: Establishment Of Trust Fund
2-8A-3: Sale Of Interment Rights
2-8A-4: Perpetual Care Registry
2-8A-1: TRUSTEESHIP:
Pursuant to section 523I.502A, Code of Iowa, the City hereby states its
willingness and intention to act as the Trustee for the perpetual maintenance
of interment spaces in Elmwood Cemetery, a cemetery located in and wholly owned
by the City of Mason City, Iowa (referenced herein as "cemetery"). (2017 Code)
2-8A-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND:
A perpetual trust is hereby established for said Elmwood Cemetery in accordance
with Iowa Code chapter 523I, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund is
created, to be known and designated as the "Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund",
which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to twenty percent (20%)
of the gross selling price, or fifty dollars ($50.00) per individual interment
space included in the sale, whichever is more, for each sale of interment space
(s) within the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance with the
purposes and provisions of Iowa Code chapter 523I.
The Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund shall be maintained separately from all
operating funds of the cemetery and the principal of the fund shall not be
reduced voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act
and applicable administrative regulations. (2017 Code)
2-8A-3: SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS:
The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by
a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance
of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price.
The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by
the Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amount or percentage of money to be placed
in the Perpetual Care Cemetery Fund. (2017 Code)
2-8A-4: PERPETUAL CARE REGISTRY:
The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased
interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the
Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the Perpetual Care
Cemetery Fund. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 9
ART MUSEUM BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Museum Established
2-9-2: Art Museum Board Of Trustees
2-9-3: Vacancy
2-9-4: Compensation
2-9-5: Powers
2-9-6: Records
2-9-1: MUSEUM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Municipal art museum to be hereafter known as the
Charles H. MacNider Art Museum. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code)
2-9-2: ART MUSEUM BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
As provided in chapter 392, Code of Iowa, there is hereby appointed a Board of
Trustees, said Board to consist of nine (9) bona fide citizens and residents of
the City of Mason City, whose terms of office shall be for four (4) years from
July 1 following their appointment to the Board, except appointments to fill
vacancies for the unexpired terms of any of said Trustees. All appointments to
the Board shall be made by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City
Council. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
2-9-3: VACANCY:
Any Trustee who permanently moves outside of the City limits of Mason City, or
is absent from six (6) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the Board
without due explanation, such as sickness or temporary absence from the area,
shall render the office of said Trustee vacant. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985
Code; 2017 Code)
2-9-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of said Board shall receive no compensation for their services, but
shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses incurred while on
official museum business. Such reimbursement shall come from the funds
appropriated to the art museum. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code)
2-9-5: POWERS:
Such Board of Art Museum Trustees shall have and exercise the following powers:
   A.   To meet and organize by the election of one (1) of their number as
President of the Board, and by the election of a Secretary and such other
officers and committees as the Board may deem necessary.
   B.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public art museum, its
works of art, appurtenances, fixtures and buildings or rooms containing the
same, directing and controlling all the affairs of such art museum. (Ord. 950,
9-21-1964)
   C.   To employ a Director and such assistants and employees as may be
necessary for the management of said art museum and to fix their compensation
in such amount as may be fixed from time to time by said Board of Trustees.
   D.   To remove by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of such Board the Director and
to provide procedures for the removal of said assistants and employees for
misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to the duties of such employment,
subject however to the provisions of chapters 35C and 400, Code of Iowa. (Ord.
950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
   E.   To accept on behalf of the City gifts of works of art, to select and
make purchases of pictures, portraits, paintings, statuary and relics and other
objects of art, in the original and in replicas or copies, books, periodicals,
papers and journals on the subject of art, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for such art museum.
   F.   To receive, hold and dispose of all gifts, donations, devises and
bequests that may be made to the City for the purpose of establishing,
increasing or improving such art museum, but when any such gift, donation,
devise or bequest shall be conditioned upon any act of the City, the Council
must first determine whether such condition can or shall be complied with.
   G.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal bylaws, rules or regulations
not inconsistent with law for the care, use, government and management of such
art museum and the business of said Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for
the violation thereof. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964)
   H.   To have exclusive control of all funds derived from taxation allocated
by the City Council for its purposes, as provided by law, and of the
expenditure of all monies available by gift or otherwise for the erection of
art buildings or for the promotion of such art museum and of all other money
belonging to the Art Museum Fund. All funds shall be deposited with the Finance
Department to the credit of the Art Museum Board and shall be disbursed only on
orders of said Board by written warrants of the City Finance Director, pursuant
to mutually acceptable procedures established by the Board of Trustees and City
Council. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Finance
Director, in the manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be
provided to each member of the Board and in the Finance Director's report to
the City Council. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
2-9-6: RECORDS:
Said Board shall keep a record of all of its proceedings. Immediately after the
close of each Municipal fiscal year, said Board shall file with the Council a
written report which shall cover the last preceding fiscal year and contain a
statement of the condition of the art museum, the number of pictures,
portraits, paintings, statuary or relics contained in the gallery, and all
additions thereto, the amounts of fines collected, the amount of donations,
devises and bequests received during the year and the amount of money expended
in the maintenance of such art museum, together with such further information
as may be required by the City Council. (Ord. 950, 9-21-1964)
CHAPTER 10
HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-10-1: Purpose
2-10-2: Code Adopted
2-10-3: Definitions
2-10-4: Amendments To Code
2-10-5: Unfair Practices; City Contracts
2-10-6: Cost And Attorney Fees
2-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the City of Mason City, Iowa, in enacting this chapter are:
   A.   To exercise the police power of the City for the protection of public
health, safety and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good
government, and to ensure equal opportunity for all persons in their pursuit of
employment, housing, public accommodations or services and credit transactions.
   B.   To prohibit discriminatory practices, whether direct or indirect, which
inexcusably and/or unjustifiably deny any person rights and/or opportunities
because of a prohibited basis, and to provide for the execution of the policies
embodied in the Federal Civil Rights Act (titles VI, VII and VIII), the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965 (as subsequently
amended), the Vocational Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act and
to promote cooperation between the City and State and Federal agencies
enforcing those Acts; and to establish a Commission on Human Rights for the
accomplishment of such purposes; and to these ends, the provisions of this
chapter shall be liberally construed. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-2: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the complete "Mason City Human Rights Code", the
most current edition, of chapter 216, Code of Iowa, prepared and edited by the
Legislative Service Bureau. Said Civil Rights Code of the State of Iowa is, by
this reference, duly adopted as fully and completely as if set out in detail
herein except as provided in this chapter. A copy of said Code is now on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and at the Mason City Public Library for public
inspection. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to, or in place of the definitions included in chapter 216, Code of
Iowa, and for the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter:
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION: A plan whereby a set of specific, result oriented
procedures are established and to which a "person" is required to apply every
good faith effort to achieve. The objectives of those procedures are equal
opportunity in public and private employment, housing, public accommodation,
credit transactions and City contracts.
AGENT OR COMMITTEE'S AGENT: A Commissioner designated by the commission.
AWARDING AUTHORITY: Any City department, agency, commission, authority, board
or person, or any authorized employee, officer or Director of any of the
foregoing, including any purchasing agent of the City of Mason City who makes
or enters into any contract agreement for the provision of any goods or
services of any kind or nature whatsoever for and on behalf of the City of
Mason City.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Human Rights Commission created by this chapter.
COMPLAINANT: Any person filing a complaint with the commission.
CONTRACT: Any agreement which is awarded, let, procured or entered into with,
or on behalf of, the City of Mason City or any awarding authority thereof.
CONTRACTOR: Any contractor, supplier, vendor, redeveloper or other person who,
through a contract or other arrangement, has received, is to receive, or is
receiving funds, or in-kind contributions from the City of Mason City or any
awarding authority thereof, and shall also include any subcontractor who
performs services for the City under a City contract.
PROHIBITED BASIS: Discrimination based upon race, color, familial status,
religion, nationality, sex, marital status, age, sexual orientation, gender
identity, disability or ancestry, but also refers to the characteristics of
individuals with whom the person or class of persons or individual deals or
associates. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-4: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   In all instances, the Mason City Human Rights Code, or commission shall
be substituted in place of all mention of the Iowa State Civil Rights Code,
and/or commission with the exception of section 216.19.
   B.   In all instances, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Mason City
shall be substituted in place of all mention to the Governor and General
Assembly or Senate of the State of Iowa.
   C.   In all instances, the City of Mason City shall be substituted in place
of all mention to the State of Iowa.
   D.   Section 216.3 Commission Appointed and section 216.4 Compensation and
Expenses, shall be and the same are hereby repealed in their entirety and the
following is adopted in lieu thereof as provisions of the Mason City Human
Rights Code: (Ord. 14-15, 2-16-2014)
Human Rights Commission: There is hereby established, under section 216.19, in
the City of Mason City, Iowa, a commission to be known as the Human Rights
Commission, which shall consist of three (3) members from various racial,
religious, cultural and economic groups in the City.
Members of said commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
the commission, subject to the approval of the City Council for a term of two
(2) years, with the term of office expiring on January 1. Vacancies resulting
in an unexpired term on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, for the unexpired term. Any
Commissioner may be removed from office by the Mayor for cause.
The commission will elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its
membership. A quorum shall consist of two (2) Commissioners. The commission
shall adopt, amend or rescind rules as necessary for the conduct of its
meetings and proceedings.
   E.   Section 216.6.6.a Unfair Employment Practices should be and the same is
hereby amended as to read:
Any employer who regularly employs two (2) or more individuals. For purposes of
this subsection, individuals who are members of the employer's family shall not
be counted as employees.
   F.   Any other section of the Mason City Human Rights Code notwithstanding,
any complaint filed with, or under the jurisdiction of, the Mason City Human
Rights Commission, shall be referred to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission for
all proceedings and dispositions specified by the Mason City Human Rights Code
and the Iowa Civil Rights Code. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
2-10-5: UNFAIR PRACTICES; CITY CONTRACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any contractor or an awarding authority to
discriminate against a subcontractor, supplier, or service provider on a
prohibited basis. The commission shall establish administrative rules governing
the implementation of this provision. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-2014)
2-10-6: COST AND ATTORNEY FEES:
Except as otherwise provided in Iowa Code section 216.15, subsection 8, and
section 216.16, subsection 6, costs including attorney fees shall be allowed as
of course to the prevailing party unless the court otherwise directs. In any
administrative or court proceeding which is brought by the commission under
Iowa Code section 216.17, subsection 3 against the respondent in connection
with the final agency action, or enforcement thereof, the court shall award
reasonable administrative costs incurred by the commission in connection with
such administrative proceeding, and reasonable litigation costs incurred in
connection with such court enforcement proceeding. An award under this section
shall be made only for reasonable litigation and administrative costs which are
allocable to the commission and not to any other party. (Ord. 14-15, 12-16-
2014)
CHAPTER 11
RIVER CITY TREES COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Establishing Commission
2-11-2: Organization
2-11-3: Duties
2-11-4: Meetings
2-11-5: Budget
2-11-6: Termination Of Commission
2-11-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council of the City has deemed it to be in the public interest of
the citizens of the City to establish a tree commission, there is hereby
created the River City Trees Commission. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017
Code)
2-11-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The River City Trees Commission shall consist of representatives of the
Elmwood-St. Joseph Cemetery, the Parks Department or Park Board. The commission
will also consist of two (2) at large members who shall be citizens of the City
and appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. Members
are appointed to serve two (2) year terms and may elect to continue to serve.
The commission members shall serve without compensation.
   B.   The Street Supervisor, Grant Administrator and Volunteer Program
Coordinator shall serve as staff advisors to the commission on commission
projects within City areas; and, as staff advisor to the commission, the Street
Supervisor shall recommend and advise the commission on any projects that fall
within areas under the jurisdiction of the Street Supervisor. (Ord. 94-28, 12-
6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
2-11-3: DUTIES:
   A.   The commission shall investigate, study, review and analyze the urban
reforestation needs of the City. The commission will work toward the
reforestation and education of the residents of Mason City. The commission will
coordinate its efforts with the appropriate City departments.
   B.   The commission may report to the City Council from time to time, the
results of said studies and the commission's recommendations.
   C.   Said commission shall have the power to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning its meetings and all other matters pertaining to the
business of said commission as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994)
2-11-4: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least semiannually or as many times as necessary.
(Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
2-11-5: BUDGET:
The commission will apply for grants and raise funds to complete projected
projects. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994)
2-11-6: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
The administrative agency known as the River City Trees Commission may be
discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action and publishing
notice as prescribed in section 362.3, Iowa Code, of such ordinance and of a
date, time and place of a public hearing on the proposal, which such
discontinuance shall not be sooner than thirty (30) days following said
hearing. (Ord. 94-28, 12-6-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 12
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Establishing Commission
2-12-2: Organization
2-12-3: Purpose And Intent
2-12-4: Definitions
2-12-5: Powers Of Commission
2-12-6: Meetings
2-12-7: Budget
2-12-8: Demolition Review
2-12-9: Termination Of Commission
2-12-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest of the citizens
to provide for recognition and promotion of historic sites, there is hereby
created the Historic Preservation (HP) Commission. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The commission shall initially consist of seven (7) members who shall
be residents of the City.
   B.   Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive
interest in historic preservation, and possess interest or expertise in
architecture, architectural history, City planning, building rehabilitation,
conservation in general or real estate.
   C.   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total
of seven (7) Commissioners. Commissioners shall serve a four (4) year term.
   D.   The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a
nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
   E.   The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its
members.
   F.   Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of
office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
   G.   Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve
until the appointment of a successor or their resignation.
   H.   Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original
selection as aforesaid.
   I.   Members shall serve without compensation.
   J.   A simple majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   K.   Development Services Director or his/her designee will serve as the
Secretary for the commission. The Secretary to the commission shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the commission's proceedings.
(Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
   A.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the
public through the recognition, enhancement, and perpetuation of sites and
districts of historical and cultural significance.
   B.   Safeguard the City's historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by
preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural significance.
   C.   Stabilize and improve property values.
   D.   Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past.
   E.   Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors as
well as the support and stimulus to business thereby provided.
   F.   Strengthen the economy of the City.
   G.   Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people
of the City. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-4: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING: Any structure such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar
construction, created principally to shelter any form of human activity.
"Building" may also be used to describe a historically and functionally related
unit, such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn.
BUILDING CODE: Title 10 of this Code.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer charged with the administration and enforcement
of the Building Code, or a duly authorized representative.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Historic Preservation Commission, as established by
this chapter.
DEMOLITION: Any activity requiring a building permit(s) which results in the
permanent destruction and removal of a building or structure, up to and
including the foundation of a building or structure.
DEMOLITION PERMIT: An official certificate of permission issued by the building
official or designee, to an applicant which authorizes the performance of a
specified demolition activity.
DISTRICT: A contiguous or dis-contiguous area possessing a significant
concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or
objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: An area which contains a significant portion of
archaeological sites, buildings, structures and/or other improvements which,
when considered as a whole, possesses integrity of location, design setting,
materials, workmanship, feeling, and association; and
   A.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high
artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction;
   B.   Is associated with events that have made significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our local, State, or national history;
   C.   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity
based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials,
or combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area;
   D.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
   E.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
HISTORIC SITE: An archaeological site, structure, or building which:
   A.   Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history;
   B.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
   C.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction; or that represents a work of a master; or that possesses high
artistic values; or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction; or
   D.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT: Any structure, building, site, property, object or
item which is determined by the Mason City Historic Preservation Commission,
National Park Service or State of Iowa Historic Preservation Office to possess
integrity and meet one or more of the following:
   A.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high
artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction;
   B.   Is associated with events that have made significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our local, State, or national history;
   C.   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity
based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials,
or combinations thereof, which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area;
   D.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
   E.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES: National Park Service maintained list of
all historically significant places in the United States; list contains
historic districts and historic properties.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - LISTED DISTRICT: An area designated by
the National Park Service that contains a significant portion of buildings,
structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and
association, and is determined to be historically significant.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES - LISTED PROPERTY: Generally one property,
which is smaller in land area than a historic district, which is designated by
the National Register of Historic Places and which contains a significant
building, structure or other improvements which, when considered as a whole,
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and is determined to be historically significant.
OBJECT: The term used to distinguish from buildings and structures those
constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in
scale and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature or design,
moveable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment.
SECRETARY OF INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION: Criteria adopted by the
Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior, used to determine if
a rehabilitation project is consistent with the historic character of the
structure(s) and, where applicable, the district in which it is located, taking
into consideration economic and technical feasibility. The intent of the
Standards is to assist the long-term preservation of a property's significance
through the preservation of historic materials and features.
SITE: The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation
or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished,
where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value
regardless of the value of any existing structure.
STRUCTURE: The term used to distinguish from buildings those functional
constructions made usually for purposes other than creating human shelter.
(Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018; amd. Ord. 23-4, 4-4-2023)
2-12-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Studies And Records: The commission may conduct studies for the
identification and designation of historic districts and sites. The commission
shall maintain records of all studies and inventories for public use.
   B.   Listing On Register: The commission may make a recommendation to the
State Historic Preservation Officer for the listing of a historic district or
site in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public
hearing thereon.
   C.   Designation Of Sites And Districts: The commission may investigate and
recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and final approval
by the City Council, the adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and
historic districts if they qualify as defined herein.
   D.   Review: The commission shall review and act upon all applications
pursuant to the procedures established by this chapter, other requirements of
this city code, and other applicable laws.
      1.   The commission shall review the exterior construction, addition, or
alteration of properties within the Z5 Central Business zoning district, as
specified in chapter 12-13 of this city code, and is empowered to issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness for any such work.
      2.   In determining the appropriateness of any such construction,
addition, or alteration, the commission shall determine that the project is
consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation,
taking into consideration the economic and technical feasibility relative to
any repair, renovation, preservation, or alteration of historic elements. To
aid the Historic Preservation Commission in making a determination, the
standards and guidelines published in the "Rehabilitation" chapter of "The
Secretary of the Interiors Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,"
published by the U. S. Department of the Interior National Park Service,
Technical Preservation Services, 2017 edition.
   E.   Recommendations: The Historic Preservation Commission may further the
efforts of historic preservation in the City by making recommendations to the
City Council and City commissions and boards on preservation issues when
appropriate, by encouraging the protection and enhancement of buildings or
structures with historical, architectural or cultural value, and by encouraging
persons and organizations to become involved in preservation activities.
   F.   Educate: The Historic Preservation Commission may educate the public at
large on the benefits of historic preservation and build a preservation ethic
and public awareness.
   G.   Consult: The Historic Preservation Commission shall consult on proposed
changes to land use and zoning within the local historic districts, when
requested by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council.
   H.   Obligate: The Historic Preservation Commission shall not obligate
itself or the City in any financial undertaking unless authorized to do so by
the City Council.
   I.   Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above,
the commission may, with City Council approval:
      1.   Accept or recommend acceptance of unconditional gifts and donations
of real and personal property, including money, for the purpose of historic
preservation.
      2.   Acquire or recommend acquisition by purchase, bequest, or donation,
fees and lesser interest in historic properties, including properties adjacent
to or associated with, historic properties.
      3.   Preserve or recommend the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation,
maintenance, and operation of historic properties under the ownership or
control of the commission or the City.
      4.   Lease, sell, and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic
properties, or recommend that the City lease, sell or otherwise transfer or
dispose of historic properties, subject to rights of public access and other
covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property.
      5.   Recommend that the City contract with the Federal or State
government or other organizations.
      6.   Cooperate with the Federal and State governments in the pursuance of
the objectives of historic preservation.
      7.   Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the
City.
      8.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic properties within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018; amd. Ord.
23-04, 4-4-2023)
2-12-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet quarterly or more often, as necessary. Time and
location of the meeting shall be determined by the Chair. Meetings of the
commission shall be held in accordance with the Iowa Open Meetings Law. (Ord.
18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-7: BUDGET:
The City Council may, from time to time, allocate funds to the commission. The
commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete projected projects.
(Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-8: DEMOLITION REVIEW:
   A.   Subject To Review: Demolition of the following buildings or structures
shall be subject to demolition review:
      1.   Any building or structure that is fifty (50) years old or older.
      2.   Any building, structure, object or site, either contributing or non-
contributing, that is located in a Register of Historic Places - listed
district or a locally designated historic district.
      3.   Any building, structure, object or site individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or designated as a local landmark.
   B.   Forward Application: The building official shall, upon receipt of an
application for a permit to demolish a building, structure, object, or site
meeting the terms of subsection A of this section, immediately forward said
application to the Development Services Director, or designee.
   C.   Determination: Within fifteen (15) business days, during the time and
place of a public meeting, the Historic Preservation Commission shall determine
if the building, structure, object, or site subject to demolition is
historically significant. The fifteen (15) business days shall begin on the
date the application is received.
   D.   Placing A Hold: If the building, structure, object or site is
determined to be historically significant, the Historic Preservation Commission
may place a hold of up to, but no more than sixty (60) calendar days, on the
issuance of the demolition permit. During this hold, which begins the following
calendar day after the hold is placed, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall work with the property owner to explore the following alternatives to
determine if any are feasible:
      1.   Designation as a local historic landmark.
      2.   Rehabilitation utilizing State or Federal tax incentives.
      3.   Adaptation of the building or structure to a new use or
incorporating the building or structure into redevelopment plans.
      4.   Finding a new owner who is interested in preserving or
rehabilitating the building or structure.
      5.   Moving the building or structure to an alternative location.
      6.   Salvaging building materials.
      7.   Additional documentation of the building or structure prior to the
issuance of a demolition permit.
   E.   Criteria: If the Historic Preservation Commission places a hold, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall indicate which criteria per section
2-12-4 of this chapter makes the building or structure historically significant
(as defined in said section
2-12-4 of this chapter) as part of the permanent minute record of the Historic
Preservation Commission.
   F.   Notify Building Official: The Development Services Director or designee
shall notify the building official of the determination of historic
significance by the Historic Preservation Commission and in the event a hold is
placed, indicate what date the hold expires.
   G.   Notice: The Development Services Director or designee shall place
notice of any hold on the Historic Preservation Commission webpage.
   H.   Action To Structures During Hold Period:
      1.   During the hold, no permit for demolition of any building,
structure, object or site on the tax assessment parcel which has any building,
structure, object or site subject to a hold shall be granted.
      2.   During the hold, no permit for the erection of a new building,
structure, or object on the tax assessment parcel which has any building or
structure subject to a hold shall be granted.
   I.   Expiration Or Release Of A Hold: Upon meeting the above requirements,
or upon a determination by the Historic Preservation Commission at a public
meeting that a hold may be released prior to the expiration of the hold, or
upon expiration of the 60-day hold period, the owner of the subject property
may resume the demolition permit process.
   J.   Approval Of Redevelopment Plan Required: Any building, structure,
object or site determined to be historically significant, or that is located
within a locally designated historic district or historic site, or that is
located within a National Register of Historic Places - listed district, or
that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places shall not be granted
a demolition permit until plans for use or development of the site after
demolition have been filed with the City of Mason City and have been found to
comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a City-required permit. All
approvals necessary for the issuance of a development permit must be granted
and any appeals shall be concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition
permit.
   K.   Exceptions From Demolition Review: Any building, structure, object or
site, or portion thereof, which is determined by the Mason City building
official to be an imminent threat to the health or safety of the public and is
ordered demolished by the Mason City building official shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
2-12-9: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission, known as the Historic Preservation Commission may be
discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such action and publishing
notice as prescribed in section 362.3, Iowa Code, of such ordinance and of a
date, time and place of a public hearing on the proposal, which such
discontinuance shall not be sooner than thirty (30) days following said
hearing. (Ord. 18-10, 11-6-2018)
CHAPTER 13
HOUSING AUTHORITY BOARD
SECTION:
2-13-1: Purpose
2-13-2: Composition And Membership
2-13-3: Powers And Duties
2-13-4: Appropriations
2-13-1: PURPOSE:
The City of Mason City elects to create a public body corporate and politic to
be known as the "Municipal Housing Agency" and named the "Mason City Housing
Authority" and to have its powers and authority in connection with the housing
assistance programs exercised by the Mason City Housing Authority Board
(hereafter referred to as "board"). (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
2-13-2: COMPOSITION AND MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Composition: The board shall consist of five (5) Commissioners from the
community. All attempts will be made to maintain participation by real estate
professionals, lending institutions, social service organizations, law
enforcement and accounting backgrounds to lend their expertise to housing
related issues. The five (5) Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the majority of the Council. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006,
eff. 7-1-2006)
   B.   Term Of Office: All Commissioners shall serve five (5) year terms, with
terms staggering so that one (1) vacancy occurs each year. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-
2006, eff. 7-1-2006; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Filling Vacancies: If any Commissioner from the board shall leave for
any reason, the Mayor shall appoint a successor subject to the majority
approval of the Council.
   D.   Compensation: All Commissioners shall serve without compensation except
for their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the board.
   E.   Rules And Regulations: The board shall adopt such rules and regulations
governing its organization and procedures, as may be required by local, State
and Federal laws.
   F.   Committees: The board may establish any committee deemed necessary for
the execution of its powers or duties as permitted by local, State and Federal
laws.
   G.   Removal Of Board Members: For inefficiency, or neglect of duty, or
misconduct in office, a Commissioner may be removed by a majority vote of the
City Council only after a hearing before the City Council, and after the
Commissioner shall have been given a copy of the charges at least ten (10) days
prior to such hearing, and after the Commissioner shall have had an opportunity
to be heard in person or by counsel. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
2-13-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 403A, it shall be the duty of the board to
provide and coordinate the federally subsidized public housing programs. All
powers and responsibilities, including the signatory authority of the annual
contributions contract, shall vest with the board. Actions taken by the board
shall be final and not subject to administrative review. The board shall
implement policies to effect its duties. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
2-13-4: APPROPRIATIONS:
The board shall have the authority to make decisions relating to the
administration, operation, operating budget, and management of Federal public
housing programs and Section 8 Tenant Based Rental Assistance Programs and to
expend for and on behalf of such public housing authority all sums of money so
appropriated. All such expenditures shall be made pursuant to and in
conformance with the board's established policies and procedures. The board
shall have no power to contract debts beyond its budget set for the fiscal year
in which the debt is to be paid. (Ord. 06-5, 4-4-2006, eff. 7-1-2006)
CHAPTER 14
MEETINGS
SECTION:
2-14-1: Posting Of Meeting Agendas, Packets And Minutes
2-14-2: Board And Commission Membership Guidelines
2-14-1: POSTING OF MEETING AGENDAS, PACKETS AND MINUTES:
All boards and commissions shall post all meeting notices, agendas, and packets
on the official website of the City of Mason City at least twenty four (24)
hours prior to the commencement of the meeting.
Minutes of all such meetings, including all supplements and amendments thereto,
shall also be posted within forty eight (48) hours following their approval.
This requirement shall in no way replace, supersede or negate the requirements
of the Iowa Open Meetings Law. (Ord. 12-13, 11-6-2012)
2-14-2: BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP GUIDELINES:
Commission membership guidelines:
   A.   All members of a City of Mason City board or commission must reside in
the City limits of Mason City.
   B.   Citizens will only serve on one City of Mason City board or commission
at a time unless otherwise designated by this Code. (Ord. 18-3, 5-1-2018)
CHAPTER 15
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-15-1: Establishing Commission
2-15-2: Organization
2-15-3: Purpose And Intent
2-15-4: Definitions
2-15-5: Powers Of Commission
2-15-6: Meetings
2-15-7: Budget
2-15-8: Termination Of Commission
2-15-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
As the City Council has deemed it to be in the public interest to have well-
researched and trusted advisory on matter involving science and technology,
there is hereby created the Science and Technology Advisory Commission. (Ord.
18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The commission shall initially consist of five (5) members who shall be
residents of the City.
   B.   Members of the commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a passion for
science, technology, education, safety, and quality of life.
   C.   The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a total
of five (5) Commissioners. In addition, there shall be the following ex officio
member representatives: Mason City Information Technology representative, City
Engineering representative, and a representative from Operations and
Maintenance Department for Mason City. Three (3) members shall serve three (3)
year terms and two (2) members shall serve two (2) year terms after initial
appointments. After establishment, future terms will be three (3) year terms.
   D.   Members may serve for more than one term and each member shall serve
until the appointment of a successor.
   E.   Vacancies occurring in the commission, other than expiration of term of
office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member
replaced.
   F.   Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original
selection as aforesaid.
   G.   The Mayor and City Council may appoint a member of the Council as a
nonvoting ex officio member to such commission.
   H.   The commission shall appoint a Chairperson and Vice Chair from its
members.
   I.   Members shall serve without compensation.
   J.   A simple majority of voting members of the commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business.
   K.   The commission will designate a member to serve as the Secretary. The
Secretary shall be responsible for maintaining written records of the
commission's proceedings. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this commission shall be to:
   A.   Upon request, advise City staff, the Mayor, and the City Council on
designated matters concerning the purchase, sale, or implementation of items of
a highly technological or scientific nature.
   B.   Present new technology which will improve the efficiency of government,
the well-being of citizens, or reduce the cost of doing Municipal business.
   C.   Give opinions covering a wide-range of scientific topics on a case-by-
case basis as requested by City staff, or City Council.
   D.   When the subject under review is outside the scientific comfort zone of
commission members, experts in the field shall be sought out and consulted.
   E.   Develop ideas and strategies to enhance the technological advancement
of the City and its citizens.
   F.   Make an annual report to the City Council in December of each year.
(Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-4: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Mason City Science and Technology Advisory Commission, as
established by this chapter.
SCIENCE: Any field of study of a scientific nature. This includes such fields
as chemistry, physics, electronics, geology, astronomy, etc.
TECHNOLOGY: Any topic of an advanced or emerging scientific nature. This
includes such fields as computer science, renewable energy, artificial
intelligence, automation, etc. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
   A.   Collect Organization Metrics: The commission will work with staff to
determine appropriate metrics to support successes and develop data to
determine future goals.
   B.   Assess And Prioritize: The commission shall assess and prioritize short
and long term vision and goals and develop and make recommendations to the City
Council for capital improvement projects during their annual report.
   C.   Create Partnerships: The commission will invite and seek advice from
other community, County and regional organizations.
   D.   Grant Awards: The commission will cooperate with the Federal and State
governments and any other entities in the pursuance of grants for the purchase
and improvement of City property and capital.
   E.   Other Powers: In addition to those duties and powers specified above,
the commission may, with City Council approval and supervision:
      1.   Solicit, recommend and assist in the receipt by the City of gifts
and donations of real and personal property, including money for the purpose of
facilitating their goals and visions.
      2.   Recommend and assist in the acquisition for the City by purchase,
bequest, or donation, properties of a scientific and/or technological nature.
      3.   Promote, educate, and provide advocacy for responsible use of
technology. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-6: MEETINGS:
The commission shall meet at least quarterly or more frequently if necessary.
Time and location of the meeting shall be determined by the commission.
Meetings will be open to the public. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-7: BUDGET:
The commission may apply for grants and raise funds to complete desired
projects with Council approval. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
2-15-8: TERMINATION OF COMMISSION:
Such commission may be discontinued by adoption of an ordinance proposing such
action preceded by the publishing of notice, as prescribed in section 362.3 of
the Iowa Code, of such ordinance. (Ord. 18-6, 7-2-2018)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Purpose
3-1-2: Application Of Title
3-1-3: Expiration Of Licenses
3-1-4: Assignment, Transfer Of License
3-1-5: Violation
3-1-6: Denial Of License, Appeal
3-1-7: Revocation Of License
3-1-8: Revocation, Denial, Suspension Hearing
3-1-9: Notice Of Denial, Revocation, Suspension
3-1-1: PURPOSE:
As set forth in chapter 364, Code of Iowa, the purpose of this title is to
assure that in the conduct of certain activities, vocations, public amusements
and professions licensed and regulated by this Code, the public health, safety
and welfare will be protected and maintained. (1985 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION OF TITLE:
Unless otherwise provided or the context indicates a different intention, the
provisions of this title apply to all licenses required by the provisions of
this Code or other ordinances of the City. (1985 Code)
3-1-3: EXPIRATION OF LICENSES:
Except as specifically otherwise provided, all yearly licenses shall expire on
March 31 following the date of their issuance. In cases where the license is
requested during the month of March, it is lawful for the City Clerk to issue a
license for the current license year and the following license year upon
payment of the annual license fee. (1985 Code)
3-1-4: ASSIGNMENT, TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses may be issued or transferred by the City Clerk unless City Council
approval is specifically required. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-5: VIOLATION:
Any person who engages in any of the vocations, businesses or acts for which a
license is required without having first secured a license so to do, or who
continues in or re-engages in any of such businesses, vocations or acts after
the revocation or expiration of the license issued therefor, without securing a
renewal of the expired license or the issuance of a new license is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1985 Code)
3-1-6: DENIAL OF LICENSE, APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police, the City Clerk, the
Mayor, or the City Council in the denial of a license as provided in this
title, shall have the right of appeal to the Council or Hearing Board as may be
otherwise provided. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council
shall set a time and place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the petitioner therefor in the same manner as
provided for notice of hearing upon revocation. The decisions and order of the
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (1985 Code)
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City Council may revoke a City issued license if, in their judgment, any
business, vocation or act conducted or to be conducted under and by virtue of
said license is or will be detrimental to public safety or morals or liable to
lead to the violation of any ordinance or law, or provoke a breach of the
peace, or if any such licensee or any of his agents makes any false or
misleading statements or representations in the furtherance of the business
conducted under said license, or violates any ordinance or law in the conduct
of the business for which such license is issued. The revocation of any such
license shall be considered sufficient cause to forbid any issuance of another
license under this Code to the licensee whose license has been revoked. (1985
Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-8: REVOCATION, DENIAL, SUSPENSION HEARING:
If the City Clerk or City Council forbids the issuance of any license or seeks
to revoke or suspend any license, they shall first give the applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, notice of their intended action and specify a
time and place of hearing at which the applicant or licensee may show cause and
be heard in behalf of the granting or continuance of said license by the City
Council. Following hearing, the application or license may be denied, revoked,
suspended for a period of time, continued with conditions or unconditionally
continued. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-1-9: NOTICE OF DENIAL, REVOCATION, SUSPENSION:
The holder of any license shall be served with notice of time and place of
hearing on the denial, suspension or revocation of said license in the manner
of service of original notices. Such notice shall clearly state the grounds
upon which suspension, denial or revocation is sought. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definition
3-2-2: License Required
3-2-3: Application For License
3-2-4: Display Of License
3-2-5: Hours Of Operation
3-2-6: Fees And Duration Of License
3-2-1: DEFINITION:
For use within this chapter, the following term is hereby defined:
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: A place in which a shooting gallery, throwing gallery,
bowling lanes, billiard or pool tables, game tables and/or coin-operated game
tables are located and may be played, conducted for, engaged in or performed by
the general public, and to which the general public is admitted or is in
attendance. It does not include places that the general public is not free to
enter into or which admission is restricted to members of a club, fraternal
organization, religious or educational group. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973)
3-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public shooting gallery,
throwing gallery, bowling lanes, billiard or pool halls, or businesses which
have game tables and/or any coin-operated games upon the premises without first
applying for and securing a license from the City Clerk as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1218, 5-7-1973; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for every such license shall be in writing, and shall state the
name of the owner or owners and, if a corporation, the names of the officers
and directors of the corporation proposing to operate the same; the name and
address of the manager; the address of the location where the business is to be
operated and the hours which the same will be open, together with any other
information which may be required by the City Clerk and the Chief of Police in
determining the fitness of the applicant to operate such business. (Ord. 1218,
5-7-1973; amd. 1985 Code)
3-2-4: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license to have game tables, coin-operated games, billiard or pool tables
or throwing or shooting galleries shall be displayed in a prominent place and
ready for inspection by the local authority or the general public. (1985 Code)
3-2-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person or business licensed as herein described in this chapter, while
operating under an "alcoholic beverage" license, shall operate or permit his
business to be operated after two o'clock (2:00) A.M. or before six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. on any day, except that on Sunday, the hours of operation shall not be
after two o'clock (2:00) A.M. or before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 93-27,
9-7-1993)
3-2-6: FEES AND DURATION OF LICENSE:
   A.    An applicant may apply for an annual license. The annual license shall
be valid until March 31 of each year, at which time it shall expire.
   B.   The fees for licenses under this section shall be set by resolution of
the Council. (Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
CHAPTER 3
BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Purpose
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Eligibility For Liquor Control License, Wine Or Beer Permit
3-3-4: Procedures For Review Of Liquor Control License, Wine Or Beer Permit
3-3-5: Beer And Wine Permits; Classes
3-3-6: Liquor Licenses; Classes
3-3-7: Class B Wine Permits
3-3-8: Application; Contents; Bond
3-3-9: License And Permit Fees
3-3-10: Prohibited Interest
3-3-11: Separate Locations; Class B Or C Beer Or Class B Wine Permits
3-3-12: Civil Liability
3-3-13: Nature Of License Or Permit; Surrender And Transfer
3-3-14: Action By Council
3-3-15: Terms Of Licenses And Permits
3-3-16: Prohibited Sales And Acts
3-3-17: Advertisements For Alcoholic Liquor, Wine Or Beer
3-3-18: Suspension And Revocation
3-3-19: Effect Of Revocation
3-3-20: Appeal And Hearing
3-3-21: Penalties
3-3-22: Hearing On Suspension Or Revocation
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration of licenses
and permits and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the
sale and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor, and to ensure the protection of
the safety, health, tranquility and general welfare of this community, as set
out in chapter 123, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by State law, Iowa
Code section 123.3 and any revisions thereto, such definitions shall apply to
their use in this chapter and are hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 91-28, 12-
17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-3: ELIGIBILITY FOR LIQUOR CONTROL LICENSE, WINE OR BEER PERMIT:
Liquor control license regulations and action by local authorities and the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverages Division (IABD) on applications for liquor control licenses
are established by Iowa Code sections 123.30, 123.32 and 123.75 and any
revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-4: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF LIQUOR CONTROL LICENSE, WINE OR BEER PERMIT:
   A.   The City shall accept applications for regular IABD licenses, except
Class E liquor licenses as long as they are also a holder of a BE license, only
when the following conditions are met: (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994)
      1.   All required State forms and the City's investigative form, said
form to be submitted to the Chief of Police at least ten (10) days prior to the
submission of the application for City Council approval, are properly completed
and in order.
      2.   The appropriate licensing fee established by the State of Iowa has
been paid.
      3.   Written consent has been given by applicant that members of the
Fire, Police, and Health Departments and the building inspector may enter upon
the premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of
State law and this chapter.
      4.   No licensee shall have or maintain any interior access to
residential or sleeping quarters unless permission is granted by the
Administrator of the IABD in the form of a living quarters permit.
      5.   The premises of a Class B beer permit and classes of liquor licenses
or wine permits where consumption on the premises is allowed shall, at the time
of the application, and continue to be equipped with sufficient tables and
seats to accommodate twenty five (25) persons at one time.
      6.   The premises of a licensee must be located within a district now or
hereafter zoned for business or commercial purposes and conform to the zoning
requirements of this City. However, a premises which is not in complete
compliance with all regulations may be conditionally approved under subsection
A3 of this section and the following subsections.
   B.   The City Clerk shall coordinate an investigation of each application to
determine the appropriate City recommendation to the IABD. The City Clerk shall
provide a copy of the completed local authority investigative form to the
appropriate City department for investigation and report. Reports from such
departments shall be included in each staff recommendation to the City Council.
   C.   The City Clerk may make an unfavorable or conditionally favorable
recommendation to the City Council on any application, if:
      1.   The applicant has a record of violations of State alcoholic liquor
laws;
      2.   The applicant has a record of use of controlled substances or
excessive use of alcoholic beverages;
      3.   The applicant has a record of violations of criminal law or
ordinances connected in time, place and manner with a liquor establishment or
which demonstrate a disregard for law;
      4.   The applicant has maintained, or allowed to exist, an establishment
which creates or is a public nuisance, or other violation of this Code, or
Federal or State law which causes, permits or suffers disorderly or violent
acts, (litter, noise, vandalism, vehicular or pedestrian traffic congestion),
or other locational problems, in the proximity of such establishment;
      5.   The applicant has not maintained the premises in accordance with the
Building Code, Fire and Life Safety Code of the City and the State;
      6.   The applicant seeks licensing of premises which would not be
consistent with City land use designations;
      7.   The applicant has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to
cooperate with the City or neighbors to resolve "driving under the influence of
liquor" concerns or community disputes related to a licensed establishment; or
      8.   There is any other specific reason consistent with the purposes of
these provisions which the City Clerk concludes warrants an adverse
recommendation to the City Council based upon public health, safety, welfare,
convenience or necessity.
   D.   All regular IABD license original applications and renewals shall be
included on a Council agenda. If the City Clerk makes an unfavorable or
conditionally favorable recommendation, or if a City Council member requests, a
public hearing shall be held to allow all interested parties a reasonable
opportunity to be heard by the City Council.
   E.   Before the City Council recommends denial of a liquor license, wine or
beer permit application, notice of the public hearing must be given to the
applicant either personally or by certified mail postmarked not later than ten
(10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the hearing;
      2.   A copy of the recommendation of the City Clerk, together with all
supporting reports and documents; and
      3.   A statement that information about procedures and rights of parties
may be obtained from the Office of the City Clerk.
   F.   If a public hearing is scheduled, the City Clerk shall publish, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City, a notice specifying the time,
date and location of the hearing and business name and address of applicant.
The notice shall inform the public that testimony may be given for or against
the application.
      1.   When a public hearing, before the City Council, is held:
         a.   The applicant and the City Clerk or other designated City
official shall have the right to present written and oral evidence and shall
have the right to rebut opposing evidence;
         b.   The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence relevant
to the recommendation of the City Clerk, unless the City Council decides to
hear additional evidence;
         c.   After consideration of all relevant evidence, the City Council
shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial
evidence relative to the criteria contained in this section and shall be final.
In the case of an adverse recommendation, the City Clerk shall make findings of
fact which shall be forwarded to the IABD along with the City Council's
recommendation against the application.
   G.   If the City Council finds that an applicant does not meet the criteria
established by this section, the Council may make a favorable recommendation
with a letter of warning. The City Clerk shall deliver to the applicant, in
person or by certified mail, a summary of the reports relating to the
application, and a notice to correct the problems cited. A copy of this notice
and summary shall be sent to IABD. During the following license period, the
City Clerk, or a designated City official, shall monitor the progress of the
applicant in correcting such problems and report to the City Council. At the
time of the next license renewal, the applicant shall have the burden of proof
to establish that the license should receive a favorable recommendation for
renewal. If the City Council finds that the applicant has not made sufficient
progress in correcting the conditions which resulted in the letter of warning,
the Council may then make an unfavorable recommendation to IABD without further
public hearing.
   H.   If the City Council makes an unfavorable recommendation on any license
application, the Council shall not consider a new application from the same
applicant while an administrative or court appeal relating to such license is
pending. The applicant may resubmit an application to the Council in less than
six (6) months from the date of an unfavorable recommendation by the Council
only if the conditions which caused such recommendation have been remedied.
(Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-5: BEER AND WINE PERMITS; CLASSES:
Beer and wine permits shall be classed as established by Iowa Code section
123.124 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-6: LIQUOR LICENSES; CLASSES:
Liquor control licenses shall be classed as established by Iowa Code section
123.30 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-7: CLASS B WINE PERMITS:
Class B wine permits, classes, and authority are established by Iowa Code
section 123.173 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017
Code)
3-3-8: APPLICATION; CONTENTS; BOND:
Application contents and actions by local authorities on application are
established by Iowa Code sections 123.31 and 123.32 and any revisions thereto.
(Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-9: LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES:
Fees shall be submitted with the respective application as set by statute or
administrative rules. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-10: PROHIBITED INTEREST:
Limitations on business interests are established by Iowa Code section 123.45
and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-11: SEPARATE LOCATIONS; CLASS B OR C BEER OR CLASS B WINE PERMITS:
Separate locations for Class B or C permits is established by Iowa Code
sections 123.140 and 123.178 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-
1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-12: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Civil liability is established by Iowa Code section 123.92 and any revisions
thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-13: NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; SURRENDER AND TRANSFER:
Nature of permit or license surrender, and transfer regulations are established
by Iowa Code section 123.38 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991;
amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-14: ACTION BY COUNCIL:
The City Council shall approve or disapprove the application. Action taken by
the City Council shall be endorsed on the application. (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
However, if a holder of a Class E liquor license also holds a BE license (which
is required to have Council approval), it will not be necessary for the Class E
liquor license to be approved by Council. In accordance with the IABD, a
renewal of a Class E liquor license can be done by telephone; provided, that
the applicant has met all the conditions for simplified renewal required by the
IABD of the Class E liquor license. (Ord. 94-5, 3-1-1994)
3-3-15: TERMS OF LICENSES AND PERMITS:
Terms of licenses and permits are established by Iowa Code sections 123.34 and
123.35 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-16: PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS:
Miscellaneous prohibitions are established by Iowa Code section 123.49 and any
revisions thereto, except as specifically modified under local authority, as
follows: (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
   A.   Permit or allow any live person to appear in any licensed premises in a
state of nudity, as herein defined, to provide entertainment, to provide
service, to act as a hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an employee in
any capacity; or to permit or allow any live person to remain in or upon any
licensed premises in a state of nudity, as herein defined.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nudity" means the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or the human female
breast including the nipple or any portion below the nipple, with less than
full opaque covering. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
3-3-17: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
Advertisement provisions for alcoholic liquor, wine or beer are established by
Iowa Code section 123.51 and any revisions thereto, except as specifically
modified. All signs formerly erected shall be removed by the owner of the
premises. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-18: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
Suspension or revocation of licenses or permits is established by Iowa Code
sections 123.32 and 123.39 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991;
amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-19: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
Effect of revocation is established by Iowa Code sections 123.32 and 123.40 and
any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-20: APPEAL AND HEARING:
Appeal and hearing guidelines are established by Iowa Code section 123.32 and
any revisions thereto. The City's appeal and hearing guidelines related to
licenses and permits are established under chapter 1 of this title and section
3-3-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-21: PENALTIES:
Penalties are established by Iowa Code sections 123.39, 123.47 and 123.50 and
any revisions thereto. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3-22: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The City Council shall conduct its hearing on suspension or revocation in the
following manner:
   A.   The licensee or permit holder, and the surety on the licensee's or
permittee's bond, shall be served with written notice containing a copy of the
complaint against the licensee or permittee, the chapter provision(s) or State
Statute(s) allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for a hearing on
the matter.
   B.   The City Council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the licensee or
permit holder and the complainant(s) shall be present, the purpose of which is
to determine the truth of the facts alleged on the complaint. Should the
licensee or permit holder or their authorized representative fail to appear
without good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination on the merits of
the complaint.
   C.   The licensee or permit holder shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his or her own behalf, and to
cross-examine adverse witnesses.
   D.   The City Council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence
into the revocation or suspension proceeding, and shall give all admitted
evidence its natural probative value.
   E.   In the event that criminal charges have been brought against the
licensee or permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis
for the revocation or suspension complaint, the Council shall await a judgment
in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary suspension
hearing required by this section. Neither a conviction nor an acquittal in the
criminal action shall be conclusive for purposes of the revocation or
suspension proceeding held under this section. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991)
   F.   The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of
law, and shall revoke or suspend a license or permit under this section only
when, upon review of the entire record, it finds evidence of a substantial
violation of this chapter or State law. Iowa Code sections 123.32, 123.39 and
123.40 and any revisions thereto establish hearing, suspension, and revocation
regulations. (Ord. 91-28, 12-17-1991; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL UNDER LEGAL AGE
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Definitions
3-3A-2: Minor Consumption
3-3A-3: Affirmative Defense Of Violation
3-3A-4: Penalties
3-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use within this article, the following words and terms are defined:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE OR BEER: As set out in section 123.3
of the Code of Iowa.
CONSUME: The ingestion of an alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine, or
beer and the physical condition of having ingested the alcoholic liquor, wine,
or beer. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
3-3A-2: MINOR CONSUMPTION:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to:
   A.   Consume any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine or beer.
   B.   Appear in public after having consumed any alcoholic liquor, alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
   C.   Purchase, attempt to purchase, or individually or jointly have
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in their possession or control as established
by Iowa Code section 123.47 and any revisions thereto. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002;
amd. 2017 Code)
3-3A-3: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE OF VIOLATION:
It is an affirmative defense to a violation of section
3-3A-2 of this article that the person under legal age consumed the alcoholic
liquor, alcoholic beverage, wine or beer in the household of the person's
parent or guardian and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the person's
parent or guardian at or during a legally protected religious observance, or
situations where persons under legal age are lawfully in possession of
alcoholic beverages for lawful sales to others during the course and scope of
employment. The exceptions outlined in this section shall not apply under
circumstances in which the underage person leaves the home, religious
gathering, or place of employment. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
3-3A-4: PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of section
3-3A-2 of this article may be prosecuted either in the jurisdiction where the
violation occurs or the jurisdiction where evidence of consumption is observed.
(Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002)
   B.   A violation of this article is a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of at least two hundred dollars ($200.00) but not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding thirty
(30) days. (Ord. 02-01, 1-15-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
CIGARETTES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Permit Required
3-4-2: Application For Permit
3-4-3: Expiration Of Permit
3-4-4: Permit Fee
3-4-5: Refund
3-4-6: Permits Not Transferable
3-4-7: Permit Required For Each Place Of Business
3-4-8: Vending Machines
3-4-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
As set forth in chapter 453A, Code of Iowa, it shall be unlawful for any person
to sell cigarettes, cigarette papers, wrappers or tubes at retail without first
having obtained a permit. Permit forms are available online from the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverage Division website or at the City Clerk's Office. Tobacco
establishments must submit the completed form to the City Clerk. The City Clerk
has authority to issue tobacco permits. (1953 Code § 82-1; amd. 1985 Code; 2017
Code)
3-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a retailer's cigarette permit shall be in writing upon
forms provided by the Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division. (Ord. 1483, 2-5-1979;
amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-3: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Expiration dates for cigarette permits is established by Iowa Code section
453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-3; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-4: PERMIT FEE:
Permit fees are established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any revisions
thereto. (1953 Code § 82-4; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-5: REFUND:
Refund provisions are established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any
revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-5; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-6: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Nontransfer of permits is established by Iowa Code section 453A.13 and any
revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-6; amd. 2017 Code)
3-4-7: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS:
Permit required for each place of business is established by Iowa Code section
453A.13 and any revisions thereto. (1953 Code § 82-7; amd. 1985 Code; 2017
Code)
3-4-8: VENDING MACHINES:
Cigarette vending machine regulations are established by Iowa Code chapter 453A
and section 453A.36 and any revisions thereto. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 5
JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: New Junk Businesses
3-5-3: License Required
3-5-4: License Fee
3-5-5: Fence Required
3-5-6: Operation Of Business Restricted
3-5-7: Notice Of Violation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
JUNK: Any secondhand or used parts of any automobiles, trucks, tractors or any
other motor vehicles, machinery or any other equipment; and any used or
obsolete automobiles or trucks not currently licensed, except that this shall
not preclude the legal storage of such unlicensed vehicle within a proper
enclosure or building by virtue of the surrender of the license plates to the
County Treasurer; and scrap iron or other metals, bottles, glass, rags, rubber,
paper and all other articles usually or customarily bought or sold by junk
dealers.
JUNK BUSINESS: The operating of the business of a junk dealer.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who conducts or operates a business of buying or
selling any secondhand parts of automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other
motor vehicles, machinery or equipment of any kind or nature whatsoever, or the
wrecking and dismantling of any used, unlicensed automobiles or trucks, or the
wrecking and dismantling of any used tractors, machinery or mechanical
equipment of any kind, and/or the purchase and sale or storage of any scrap
iron, metals, bottles, rags, rubber, paper, glass or any other materials or
things usually or customarily bought or sold by persons engaged in the junk
business.
JUNKYARD: A place where junk, waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards,
house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for use of salvaged house
wrecking, structural steel materials, and equipment. (Ord. 1052, 5-6-1968; amd.
2017 Code)
3-5-2: NEW JUNK BUSINESSES:
It shall be illegal to establish a junk business or junkyard in any part of the
City after July 1, 2010. Those junk businesses or junkyards legally established
prior to July 1, 2010, that have been in continuous operation up to the present
may continue operation, subject to the requirements of this chapter, including
licensing, and the requirements of the zoning ordinance, title 12, chapter 6 of
this Code related to nonconforming uses. (2017 Code)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junk business or junkyard
meeting the requirements of this chapter without first procuring from the City
a license therefor and paying a license fee as hereinafter provided. Said
license shall be issued upon written application of such person desiring to
conduct such business. (1953 Code § 73-2; amd. 2017 Code)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee to be paid by the junk dealer shall be an annual fee in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council, payable on or before
March 31 of each year, application therefor to be filed with the City Clerk;
and such license fee must be paid in full, prior to the issuance of any license
to such junk dealer. (1953 Code § 73-3; amd. 2017 Code)
3-5-5: FENCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to operate or conduct his business
upon any premises or in any building unless said premises are completely
enclosed with a fence at least eight feet (8') in height, constructed of such
material that will completely obscure said premises from the view of the
public, which conforms to the requirements of section
12-16-4 of this Code, to be approved by the building official, and to be
maintained and painted in good condition so as to avoid an unsightly
appearance. (Ord. 1125, 9-8-1970; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-5-6: OPERATION OF BUSINESS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Junk To Be Kept Within Fence: It shall be unlawful for any person to
display, advertise, buy or sell any junk except within the enclosure of the
lot, yard, building or other premises used for said junk business. (1953 Code §
73-5)
   B.   Use Of Street And Private Property: It shall be unlawful for any
secondhand or used parts of automobiles, trucks, tractors or any other motor
vehicles, machinery or equipment, obsolete, unlicensed automobiles or trucks,
scrap iron or other metals, bottles, glass, rags, rubber, paper and any other
junk to remain for a period longer than one (1) hour upon any part of the
public street in front of or adjacent to the place of business of any junk
dealer, or upon any private property not enclosed with a fence as defined in
section
3-5-5 of this chapter, except that any such use of a public street or private
property shall not be prohibited for a currently licensed automobile, truck or
other motor vehicle. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "street" shall
include the driveway, parking and sidewalk of any street, and shall include the
entire width of the street from property line to property line, and shall
include avenues, alleys and all public thoroughfares and grounds. (Ord. 1125,
9-8-1970)
3-5-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
In case any police or other officer of the City shall find any junk dealer
violating the provisions of this chapter, he shall give such junk dealer a
written notice to appear before the City Council at one (1) of its regular
meetings to show cause why the Council shall not revoke the license of such
junk dealer. (1953 Code § 73-7)
CHAPTER 6
AUCTIONEERS AND AUCTION SALES
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application For License
3-6-4: License Fees
3-6-5: Prohibited Acts
3-6-6: Auction House; License Required
3-6-7: Exceptions
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall be defined and construed to
mean:
AUCTION HOUSE: Any place of business where merchandise, except new merchandise
unless it is new merchandise which has been assessed Personal Property Tax or
is replacement stock of merchandise inventory which was assessed a Personal
Property Tax in Cerro Gordo County, is regularly and periodically sold at
auction as a permanent and principal business to be conducted at such
establishment.
AUCTION SALE: The offering for sale or the selling of personal property to the
highest bidder or the offering for sale or selling of personal property at a
high price and then offering the same property at successively lower prices
until a buyer is secured, and conducted in the manner set forth in section
554.2328, Code of Iowa.
AUCTIONEER: Any person offering for sale or selling merchandise at an auction
sale.
NEW MERCHANDISE: All merchandise or personal property not previously sold at
retail. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1956; amd. 1985 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or cause or permit to be sold at
any auction sale any merchandise unless such sale is conducted by an individual
who has applied for and obtained an auctioneer's license from the City or
unless such sale is made at a regularly licensed auction house. (Ord. 756, 12-
17-1956; amd. 1985 Code)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant or renew an auctioneer's license
for a period not exceeding one (1) year and expiring March 31 of the following
year, to any individual applying therefor. The application for such license
shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following
information: (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
   A.   Proper legal name of applicant, date of birth, and phone number(s).
   B.   Permanent residence and business address of applicant.
   C.   A clear photocopy of a government issued photo identification card.
   D.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any Municipal ordinance and, if so,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
   E.   Experience in the field of auctioneering and/or special training in the
auctioneering field.
Upon such application being filed with the Clerk, the Clerk shall immediately
refer the same to the Chief of Police who shall cause to be made such
investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility as
he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. (Ord. 756, 12-17-
1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-6-4: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for licenses under this section shall be set by resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 1100, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-6-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following acts, omissions and practices in connection with auction sales
are hereby prohibited:
   A.   The use of deceit, fraud and misrepresentation in the sale or offering
for sale of any property.
   B.   The substitution of another article for that bid upon by the
prospective purchaser. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957)
   C.   The use of false bidders to increase bidding prices without the bidder
actually intending to purchase the item. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   The use of any variety of mechanical or excessive vocal sound to
attract attention in violation of title 8, chapter 6 of this Code.
   E.   The use of any false or misleading advertising matter.
   F.   A sale by a person other than a licensed auctioneer named in the
application.
   G.   Failure to exhibit an auctioneer's license to a police officer on
demand at the place where the auction is being conducted.
   H.   Offering property for sale which has once been struck off to the
highest bidder.
   I.   No auction shall be conducted in a manner which will cause streets or
sidewalks to be blocked. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-6-6: AUCTION HOUSE; LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct an auction house
without having first obtained a license therefor. The application for an
auction house license shall give the name or names and addresses of the owners
of the business and the names and addresses of persons who are to conduct such
auctions, the place of business where the business is to be located, and such
other information as the City Clerk may require. All such licenses shall expire
on March 31 following the date of issuance. A person holding an auction house
license shall not be subject to the provisions of section
3-6-2 of this chapter. The fees for licenses under this section shall be set by
resolution of the Council. (Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-6-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not extend to the sale at public auction
of livestock, farm machinery or farm produce or other items commonly sold at
farm sales or to sales conducted by charitable or nonprofit organizations which
have met the criteria of chapter 504A of the Code of Iowa and Federal Internal
Revenue Service requirements, or to the sales of property made by sheriffs,
constables, coroners, marshals, executors, guardians or assignees of involved
debtors or bankrupts or by any other person required by law to sell personal
property. This chapter shall not apply to any auction sale held and conducted
in connection with a recognized auctioneer's school, conducted in Mason City,
for the training of auctioneers or prospective auctioneers, provided no more
than four (4) such school sales shall be permitted during any calendar year.
(Ord. 756, 12-17-1957; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CLOSE OUT AND GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Application Requirements
3-7-3: License Required
3-7-4: License Application Procedures
3-7-5: License Fees
3-7-6: Period Of License
3-7-7: Extension Of License Period
3-7-8: Duties Of Licensee
3-7-9: Exceptions
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter shall be defined and construed to
mean:
ADVERTISE: Any and all methods chosen to convey notice directly or indirectly
to the public that any of the sales mentioned herein are being offered, or are
intended to be offered. It includes, but is not limited to, the following
methods of advertising: oral, written, printed documents or publications, live
or recorded, electronic, and over the internet.
CLOSE OUT OR GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: Any sale in which the public is led to
believe that the sale will include goods damaged by fire, smoke, water, or
other means regardless of whether the business intends to cease operation; that
goods offered are offered to dispose of such inventory prior to the close or
cessation of business; or any of the following types of sales: adjuster,
adjustment, assignee, bankrupt, benefit of creditors, benefit of trustee, loss
of lease, forced out of business, quitting business, or liquidation. It shall
also include sales by a person or business which is closing one (1) of multiple
sales locations within the City.
GOODS: Any goods, wares, securities, services or merchandise, both tangibles
and intangibles, or other property capable of being the object of a sale
regulated hereunder.
LICENSE: A formal written permission issued by the City Clerk pursuant to this
chapter to any person to carry on any sale as defined herein. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-
1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-2: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each written application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale pursuant
to this chapter, made to the City Clerk, shall contain the following
information: (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975)
   A.   The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of
the sale.
   B.   The location and address of the place where such sale is to be held.
   C.   The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
   D.   The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
(Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall hold a close out or going out of business sale without first
obtaining a license. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-4: LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
All license applications under this chapter shall be made in writing to the
City Clerk on a form obtained from said Clerk. Upon receipt of an application
for a license, and payment of the prescribed fee, the City Clerk may issue a
license. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
3-7-5: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for licenses under this section shall be set b y resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-7-6: PERIOD OF LICENSE:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975)
3-7-7: EXTENSION OF LICENSE PERIOD:
Within the last ten (10) days of the period of any previous license, an
application for extension of said license may be made to the City Clerk upon
payment of a fee set by resolution of the Council for each day the license
period is extended over the original thirty (30) days; provided, that no such
single period of extension shall exceed the period of the original license. In
no event shall the license period plus the maximum extension period exceed
sixty (60) days. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-7-8: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall:
   A.   Comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws.
   B.   Not use deceit, fraud, or misrepresentation in either such sale or
advertising for such sale.
   C.   Have a valid City close out or going out of business license available
for inspection on scene.
   D.   Clearly separate all goods listed as objects of the sale from any other
goods present and available for sale not so listed, by properly identifying
goods for sale, by tags attached thereto or some other appropriate means
reasonably calculated to apprise the public of the status of all goods. (Ord.
1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
3-7-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Such sales as described in this chapter shall not be deemed to include sales by
the Sheriff, by an executor or guardian, or by any party pursuant to a court
order.
The North Iowa Events Center property, with prior approval by the North Iowa
Events Center management, or the North Iowa Fair Association doing business as
the North Iowa Events Center, are exempted from City close out or going out of
business licensing requirements so long as they have prior authorization from
the proper regulating body that oversees the property and respective event(s).
This does not waive civil liability responsibility from the respective event
organizer or the property owner. (Ord. 1329, 8-14-1975; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 8
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Purpose
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: License Required, Fee
3-8-4: Eligibility For Pawnbroker's License
3-8-5: Conditions For Approval Of License; Premises
3-8-6: Application For License
3-8-7: Investigation Of Applicant
3-8-8: Simplified Application For Renewal
3-8-9: Bond
3-8-10: Nature Of License Or Permit
3-8-11: Suspension And Revocation
3-8-12: Records Kept
3-8-13: Report To Police
3-8-14: Prohibited Transactions
3-8-15: Time To Redeem
3-8-16: Property To Be Held; Report To Chief Of Police
3-8-17: Unlawful To Operate Without License
3-8-18: Penalty
3-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for administration of licenses and
permits and for local regulation and procedures for the conduct of a
pawnbroker's business for the protection of the safety, morals and general
welfare of this community. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property or other thing of value, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other things of value, on condition of selling the same back at a
stipulated price, or who receives actual possession of personal property as
security for loans with or without a bill of sale is hereby defined as and
declared to be a pawnbroker.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER: Any person who meets all of the following
requirements:
   A.   He has financial standing and good reputation as will satisfy the City
Council that he will comply with all Iowa laws and ordinances of this City
applicable to his operation.
   B.   He does not possess a Federal gambling stamp.
   C.   He has not had a pawnbroker's license under this chapter revoked within
the last two (2) years.
   D.   He is a citizen of the United States and a resident of Iowa, or
licensed to do business in Iowa, in the case of a corporation.
   E.   He has not been convicted of a felony. However, if his conviction of a
felony occurred more than five (5) years before the application for a license
or permit, and if his rights of citizenship have been restored by the Governor,
the Council may determine that he is a person of good moral character
notwithstanding such conviction.
   F.   If a person is a corporation or partnership, the requirement of this
subsection shall apply to each of the officers, directors or partners and to
any person who directly or indirectly owns or controls ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of stock of such corporation or has an interest of ten
percent (10%) or more in the ownership or profit of such business.
   G.   For purposes of this provision, an individual and his spouse shall be
regarded as one (1) person. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-3: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
Before engaging in business, a pawnbroker shall apply for and obtain a license
from the City and shall pay therefor a yearly license fee set by resolution of
the Council, said license shall expire on March 31 following the date of its
issuance; provided, that if said license be issued after October 1 of any year,
the said license fee for the remainder of the year shall be one half of the
yearly license fee. No refund shall be allowed for any premature surrender or
revocation of any such license. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-
2024)
3-8-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR PAWNBROKER'S LICENSE:
Upon meeting any requirements imposed by State law and the ordinances of this
City, a person who is of good moral character, as defined by State law and this
chapter, may apply for a pawnbroker's license. In the case of a corporation or
partnership, the officers of the corporation or the partners of a partnership
shall be persons of good moral character as defined by State law and this
chapter. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-5: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF LICENSE; PREMISES:
An applicant for a pawnbroker's license, as a further condition for approval,
must give consent in writing on the application that members of the Fire,
Police and Health Departments and the building official may enter upon the
premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the provisions of State
law or the ordinances of this City.
   A.   No pawnbroker's license shall be approved for any premises which do not
conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions and health and fire
regulations.
   B.   The premises for which a pawnbroker's license is sought must be located
within the district now or hereafter zoned for business purposes and conform to
the zoning requirements of the City.
   C.   No pawnbroker's shop shall be located within one thousand two hundred
feet (1,200') of an active or operating public or private educational
institution.
   D.   All licenses provided for in this chapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the holder of the permit and shall at all
times be subject to inspection.
   E.   No pawnbroker's shop shall be operated in conjunction with or share a
common exterior access with any arcade, coin- operated amusement center or
other establishment housing or using coin-operated amusement devices open or
available to minors.
   F.   No coin-operated video or amusement games of any type shall be operated
on the premises of a licensed pawnshop. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
   G.   No alcoholic liquor, alcoholic beverage or intoxicating liquor, as
defined in Iowa Code, shall be sold, consumed or kept on the premises of the
holder of a pawnbroker's license and no pawnshop shall be established or
maintained upon or within any premises or building in which it shares a common
access or entrance with any establishment selling or serving alcoholic
beverages or holding a liquor control license or beer permit. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-
1983; amd. 2017 Code)
3-8-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a pawnbroker's license shall be in writing on a form
provided by the City Clerk and subscribed and sworn to by one (1) of the
owners, setting forth the name of each person who is an owner of said business
or, if a corporation, the names of the officers and directors of the
corporation, and the principal place of business thereof, stating the name and
address of the manager, the address of the business location, and such other
information as may be required in order to investigate the good character of
the applicant. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of an original application for a pawnbroker's license by the City
Clerk, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police who shall conduct an
investigation and shall submit a written report on the application and a
recommendation to the Mayor as to the approval of the license. It shall be the
duty of the health inspector, the building official and the Fire Chief/
Inspector to inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the
requirements of the City, and no license shall be approved until or unless an
approving report has been filed with the Mayor by such officers. (Ord. 1672, 3-
7-1983)
3-8-8: SIMPLIFIED APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL:
Upon receipt of an application for the renewal of a pawnbroker's license, it
shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police only, who shall conduct an
investigation and shall submit a written report on the application as to the
truth of the facts answered in the application and a recommendation to the
Mayor as to approval of the license or permit. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-9: BOND:
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued until a bond, for the period said
license is in effect, shall first be filed, which said bond shall be in a sum
set by resolution of the Council, conditioned that said business will be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the
State of Iowa, and that such pawnbroker will account for and deliver to any
person legally entitled thereto any goods, wares or merchandise or other things
of value which may have come into his hands in such business as pawnbroker, or
in lieu thereof, he will pay money to the person entitled thereto for the
reasonable value thereof. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-8-10: NATURE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A pawnbroker's license shall be a purely personal privilege and shall be
revocable for cause. It shall not constitute property nor be subject to
attachment and execution nor be alienable or assignable, and in any case, it
shall cease upon the death of the licensee. However, the Mayor, in his
discretion, may allow the executor or administrator of a licensee to operate
the business of the decedent for a reasonable time not to exceed the expiration
date of the license. Every license shall be issued in the name of the applicant
setting forth the location on which the business is located and no person
holding a license shall allow any other person to use the same or operate the
business on any other location. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-11: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A pawnbroker's license may be suspended for a period up to one (1) year, or
revoked by the Mayor, without refund, following notice to the licensee and
hearing by the City Council, for good cause, upon finding of any of the
following causes:
   A.   Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for such
license.
   B.   Any change in the ownership or interest in the business operated under
a pawnbroker's license, which change was not previously reported to and
approved by the Mayor.
   C.   Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving
such license or permit when originally issued.
   D.   The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee to render any report
or permit any inspection required by this chapter.
   E.   A finding by the City Council, after hearing, that such business is
being managed, conducted or maintained in a manner that is detrimental to the
public health, morals or welfare. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-12: RECORDS KEPT:
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be plainly written, at the
time of each loan or purchase, an accurate account or description in the
English language of the goods, articles or things pawned, pledged or purchased;
the amount of money loaned or paid therefor; the date received; the name,
residence and a brief description of the person pawning, pledging or selling
the same; which book, plus the pawned or purchased articles, shall at all
reasonable times be open to the inspection of any law enforcement officer.
Every pawnbroker purchasing or receiving on deposit for loan any article or
personal property or other thing of value shall give to the person selling or
depositing the same a plainly written or printed ticket or receipt therefor,
showing the terms of said sale or loan, and a copy of the entrance in the book
required herein to be kept. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-13: REPORT TO POLICE:
It shall be the duty of each pawnbroker to make out and deliver to the Chief of
Police each day before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon a legible and
correct copy of each transaction transacted during the preceding day, as in the
pawnbroker's book required herein to be kept. Provided, however, that no
pawnbroker shall be required to furnish such information with reference to
property purchased from merchants, manufacturers or bona fide wholesale dealers
having an established place of business when such property or goods are
accompanied by a bill of sale or invoice, which must be shown to any law
enforcement officer upon demand. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-14: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to purchase or receive any property,
goods or other thing of value from any minor without the written consent of the
parents or the guardian of said minor, or from any person who, at the time of
making the transaction, is under the influence of intoxicating drugs or
liquors, or from any feeble minded person or person of unsound mind. (Ord.
1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-15: TIME TO REDEEM:
No pawnbroker shall sell or dispose of any pawned or pledged article until the
same shall remain in his possession for thirty (30) days after the pledge or
deposit thereof, and the same may be redeemed by the depositor or pledgor at
any time within said thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-16: PROPERTY TO BE HELD; REPORT TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
No personal property or other thing of value received on deposit or pledged by
any pawnbroker shall be permitted to be redeemed for the period of forty eight
(48) hours after the delivery to the Chief of Police of the statement of
transactions herein referred to. Whenever the Chief of Police or any member of
the Police Department shall notify any such pawnbroker not to sell any item of
property so received, nor to permit the same to be redeemed, such property
shall not be sold or redeemed and must be retained in the possession of the
pawnbroker for at least thirty (30) days after the receipt of such notice or
until such article has been released in writing by the police officer giving
the notice. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-17: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker
or to maintain any sign usually known as a pawnbroker's sign, such as three (3)
balls, or in any manner to advertise to loan money on pledge or deposit of
personal property or other thing of value without first having applied for and
obtained a pawnbroker's license and without having complied with the
regulations regarding signs contained in title 10, chapter 2, article G and
title 12, chapter 20 of this Code. (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
3-8-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to imprisonment in
the County Jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1672, 3-7-1983)
CHAPTER 9
PEDDLERS, VENDORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-9-1: License Required
3-9-2: Definitions
3-9-3: License Application
3-9-4: General Regulations
3-9-5: Investigation And Issuance Of License
3-9-6: Identification Card
3-9-7: License Fees
3-9-8: Nuisance
3-9-9: License Not Transferable
3-9-10: Time Restriction
3-9-11: Revocation Of License
3-9-12: License Exemptions
3-9-13: Penalty
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler/vendor, transient merchant or solicitor to
engage in business, sell or take orders for sale of merchandise, without first
securing a proper license to so engage as herein required.
Exemption: Established merchants, organizations, businesses, vendors or
peddlers participating in organized celebrations, promotions, sales or other
events approved by the City Council; authorized representatives of charitable
or nonprofit organizations which have a place of business in Cerro Gordo
County, Iowa, operating under the provisions of chapter 504A of the Code of
Iowa or authorized and organized under statutes or regulations of the United
States government, or approved by the Internal Revenue Service; route delivery
persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or make special sales
(i.e., Schwan's, Avon); and nonprofit clubs and lodges when not ordinarily
conducted as a business that do not meet the requirements of chapter 504A of
the Iowa Code and are located in Cerro Gordo County, Iowa. Iowa Code section
9C.4 has additional exemptions for transient merchants only (not vendors or
solicitors). (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
PEDDLER/VENDOR: Any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers
for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house
or upon the public street.
SOLICITOR: Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house
or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods,
services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Iowa Code section 9C.1 and any revisions thereto defines
the term transient merchant and lists State requirements for applicants. This
section of the Iowa Code also lists specific exemptions that do not require a
transient merchant license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 19-14, 11-19-2019)
3-9-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Except as provided in this chapter, before any transient merchant permit under
this chapter shall be issued, each applicant for a transient merchant license
shall file with the City Clerk proof of a valid State issued transient vendor
permit, and an acknowledgment from the Iowa Secretary of State that the bond
required 1  of all transient merchants operating anywhere within the State of
Iowa has been filed and will remain valid through the time the merchant is
operating within the City.
Applicants for a peddler/vendor, transient merchant or solicitor's license
shall file with the City Clerk an application in writing, signed by the
applicant, upon a form furnished by the City Clerk. Said application shall
state their legal name, date of birth, permanent and local place of residence,
phone number(s), a brief physical description of the applicant, a picture or
drawing of the vehicle or cart to be used, if any, and the license plate
number, the place from which the business will be conducted, if any, the nature
of the business, and a brief description of the commodities or articles
proposed to be sold, or the services to be rendered. Said application shall
also contain a brief statement as to the method by which the applicant will
conduct his business and a place for the applicant to indicate whether or not
the applicant has an Iowa retailer's sales tax permit and, if so, the
applicant's sales tax permit number. Said application shall also state the
period of time for which a license is desired, not to exceed one (1) year for a
peddler/vendor's or solicitor's license and not to exceed sixty (60) days for a
transient merchant's license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 9C.4.
3-9-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Licensee shall maintain a distance of seventy five feet (75') from the
entrance of any business which is selling the same type of product as the
peddler/vendor. Mobile vendors may be prohibited in areas where sidewalks are
not wide enough to accommodate both pedestrians and the vendor.
   B.   There shall be maintained a distance of not less than twenty feet (20')
between vendors.
   C.   The vendor's operation shall not impede the free flow of pedestrian
traffic along sidewalks or plaza right-of-way, nor shall they interfere with
pedestrian movement into or out of retail establishments.
   D.   No pushcart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet (4') in width,
eight feet (8') in length, and eight feet (8') in height. All pushcarts must be
aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion. Each pushcart shall be capable of being moved and kept under
control by one (1) person traveling on foot. The City Administrator may grant a
special license to a handicapped person to operate a pushcart propelled by an
electric motor; provided, that the applicant meets all other conditions for a
license. During transit of the pushcart (whether it be towed by vehicle,
carried by trailer, or pushed by hand) the pushcart operator shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle as provided by
law except as to the provisions which by their very nature can have no
application.
   E.   The applicant shall have obtained all necessary permits required by the
State of Iowa Department of Health or other applicable regulatory agency.
   F.   The construction of an addition to an existing store front for
permanent, temporary or seasonal use of abutting public right-of-way shall
require an encroachment permit as specified in title 5, chapter 1, article C of
this Code.
   G.   All peddlers and solicitors are only permitted to go door-to-door
between sunrise and sunset.
   H.   No person, firm, corporation or other organization shall sell, display,
or otherwise offer for sale any merchandise or other materials on any sidewalk,
street, public right-of-way, or other public property without first obtaining
approval by the City Council or by a duly authorized representative.
Application for such license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. The
Clerk shall refer such application to the appropriate City departments for
review and report. Said application along with the appropriate department
reports shall then be forwarded to the City Council or to a duly authorized
representative for action to approve or disapprove. Persons, firms,
corporations or other organizations having valid contracts with the City
authorizing activities hereinbefore described are excepted from the terms of
this subsection for the activities specifically authorized in the contract.
   The City Council reserves the right to require the relocation of any
licensed pushcart or transient merchant to a new location in the event public
safety or congestion so requires, based on the discretion of the Council.
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 19-14, 11-19-2019)
3-9-5: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The applicant shall complete the application form as required and shall submit
two (2) copies to the Chief of the Police Department who shall cause such
investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he
deems necessary for the protection of the public good and in connection
therewith may, in his discretion, require the photographing and fingerprinting
of any such applicant.
   A.   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons therefor and
return the said application to the City Clerk who shall notify the applicant
that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
   B.   If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on such application his approval and return the same to
the City Clerk who shall thereafter issue the license subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter. Such license shall contain the signature and seal
of the City and show the name and address of the licensee, the class of license
issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold thereunder, the date of
issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the
license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used under such
license. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-6: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
The City Clerk, at the time of issuing the license, shall issue to each
licensee an identification card which shall identify the type of license
issued, the period for which the license is issued and the number of the
license; in addition, the name and address of the licensee and the name of the
business firm the licensee represents. Such identification card shall, during
all times the licensee is engaged in the activity for which the license is
issued, be carried by the licensee and displayed to any person requesting
identification. (1985 Code)
3-9-7: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for licenses under this section shall be set by resolution of the Council.
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-9-8: NUISANCE:
The practice of peddlers/vendors, solicitors, or transient merchants, whether
licensed or not as required by this chapter, of going in and upon private
residences and property without having been requested or invited to do so by
the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences and
property, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise and/or disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is punishable as such nuisance as a simple
misdemeanor.
No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall conduct his/her business in such a
way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting
property owner or tenant, or create or become a public nuisance, increase
traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life, or
property, or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police, sanitation, or
emergency vehicles. Furthermore, no vehicle shall remain in any one (1) place
for a period longer than necessary to make a sale after having been approached
or stopped for that purpose. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
3-9-9: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application. (2017 Code)
3-9-10: TIME RESTRICTION:
All licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only
between the following hours: Monday through Saturday, nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and Sunday, one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. (2017 Code)
3-9-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Reasons: The Clerk may revoke a license issued under this chapter for
the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent Statements: The licensee has made fraudulent statements
in the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
      2.   Violation Of Law: The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
      3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health Or Safety: The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order or morals.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation; Right To Appeal: The Clerk shall cause notice of
the license revocation to be served in person by the Police Department or by
mail to the licensee's local address, which notice shall specify the reason(s)
for such action. The licensee may appeal the revocation of the license to the
City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing with the Clerk a
written request for an appeal to the City Council. The City Council may affirm,
modify or reverse the decision of the Clerk to revoke such license. If a
license is revoked, no refund of any license fee paid shall be made. Upon the
revocation of a license, the licensee is not eligible for the issuance of a new
license under this chapter for a period of one (1) year from the date the
license revocation is served in person or deposited in the U.S. mail. (2017
Code)
3-9-12: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Government Officers: Officers and employees of the United States, the
State of Iowa, or any subdivision or agency thereof, while in the performance
of their official duties.
   B.   Public Utilities: Representatives of any public utility lawfully doing
business in the City, while acting in such capacity.
   C.   Route Salespersons: Newsboys and route salespersons who call routinely
on customers on a regular basis or on an established route.
   D.   Charitable Organizations: Any organization which is acting under the
authority of chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa and which has obtained tax exempt
status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   E.   Resale Or Institutional Use: Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purpose of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
   F.   Nationally Recognized Nonprofit Organizations: Members of any Boy
Scout, Girl Scout, Campfire, 4-H Club, FFA and similar nationally recognized
nonprofit organizations, if the sales are to benefit the organization in its
recognized operation and/or programs.
   G.   Community Improvement Or Benefit: Persons making door to door sales for
the purpose of a community improvement or benefit, approved by the City
Council, on behalf of nonprofit, tax exempt organizations.
   H.   School Students: Students representing local K-12 schools conducting
projects sponsored by organizations and recognized by such schools.
   I.   Youth Sports Organizations: Local area youth sports organizations.
(2017 Code)
3-9-13: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter for any particular
provision or section, any person violating any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 10
VEHICLES FOR HIRE, TAXICABS, LIMOUSINES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Licensing Required
3-10-2: Definitions
3-10-3: Application For License
3-10-4: Background Investigation Needed Of Drivers
3-10-5: Inspection Of Vehicles
3-10-6: Liability Insurance
3-10-7: License Fees
3-10-8: Misrepresentations
3-10-9: Rates Posted
3-10-10: Prepayment Of Fare
3-10-11: Receipts Delivered
3-10-12: False Order
3-10-13: Duty Of Passenger To Pay Fare Or Charge
3-10-14: Vehicle Identification
3-10-15: Taximeter Option
3-10-16: Operation Of Vehicle For Hire
3-10-17: Enforcement
3-10-18: Penalties
3-10-19: Effect Of Enactment Of This Chapter
3-10-1: LICENSING REQUIRED:
   A.   License: No person shall operate or maintain or use any vehicle for
hire without holding a minimum of a valid chauffeur's license for a passenger
vehicle less than a sixteen (16) passenger design under the laws of the State
of Iowa.
   B.   Inspection: No person shall operate, or maintain or use any vehicle for
hire without first having the vehicle pass an inspection by the Chief of Police
or his designee and obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be
transferable for use on any other vehicle other than the vehicle for hire
originally licensed unless authorized by the City Clerk and only after that
vehicle has passed an inspection. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   An outside or non-resident vehicle for hire company and its driver/
operator not permitted by the City may only drop off passengers within the City
limits. The outside/non-resident vehicle for hire company and driver/operator
shall not pick up a passenger without first complying with the requirements of
this chapter.
      2.   Vehicles and drivers/operators legally contracted by a business or
company to transport employees or other passengers as needed.
      3.   Vehicles and drivers/operators used to transport patients to and
from medical appointments or care facilities while being compensated either in
part or in full by Medicare, Medicaid, Tricare, or any other like medical
provider or insurance company. (2017 Code)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
LIMOUSINE: A vehicle which carries passengers for a fare determined on the
basis of time or a flat fee.
TAXICAB: A vehicle which carries passengers for a flat rate or fare determined
by a taximeter as required under section
3-10-15 of this chapter.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE: Any vehicle which carries passengers for compensation
including, but not limited to, limousines and taxicabs. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for license shall be in writing made by the owner thereof to the
City Clerk and shall contain the name and address of the owner, the make,
model, year of manufacture, engine and factory numbers and Iowa State motor
vehicle license number of each motor vehicle proposed to be licensed. (Ord. 10-
21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-4: BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION NEEDED OF DRIVERS:
The City Clerk, upon receiving an application for a license, shall have the
Chief of Police or Chief’s designee investigate the statements contained
therein and shall investigate the reputation and character of the applicant to
determine whether or not they are a proper person to engage in business as
proposed.
No person shall operate, or maintain or use any vehicle for hire without first
paying the required initial background investigation fee to the Police
Department, or the renewal fee payable to the City Clerk for annual drivers
before being authorized by the Chief of Police or Chief’s designee. Fees
required under this section shall be set by resolution of the Council. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-10-5: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Upon application for a license, each vehicle for hire shall be thoroughly
inspected by the Chief of Police or his/her designee to determine whether said
vehicle is in a thoroughly safe and sanitary condition for the transportation
of passengers. This inspection shall be done on an annual basis, or more often
if necessary. If an inspection reveals such vehicle to be unfit for use in
public transportation, or if such vehicle does not comply with the provisions
of this chapter, no license shall be issued therefor.
The inspection also includes additional spot or surprise checks, if needed. If
a spot or surprise inspection reveals such vehicle is unfit for use in public
transportation the license will be suspended until the vehicle is made fit for
use in public transportation. An inspection is also required after the vehicle
has been involved in a motor vehicle collision or has sustained something other
than minor or superficial damage to ensure the vehicle is still safe for public
transportation.
If, after an inspection, any vehicle for hire is determined by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee to be in unsafe condition, then the vehicle shall
immediately be removed from service by the driver and the licensee. The vehicle
for hire shall not be operated thereafter until the unsafe condition has been
remedied and the Chief of Police or his/her designee has reinspected such
vehicle and authorized its return to service. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-6: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No license for any vehicle for hire shall be issued until there has been filed
with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance showing issuance of a liability
insurance policy covering specifically a "vehicle for hire" for the period of
said license, with minimum limits for a single personal injury or death, for
multiple injuries or deaths, and for property damage set by resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-10-7: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee shall be set by resolution of the Council and shall be payable
to the City Clerk for each vehicle for hire license. Said license shall expire
on March 31 following the date of issuance. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017
Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-10-8: MISREPRESENTATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any fictitious information or to
practice any fraud, misrepresentation or subterfuge in any application for a
license or in order to secure any license provided for by this chapter. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-9: RATES POSTED:
The owner and operator of each vehicle for hire shall keep the rates of fares
charged clearly posted at all times somewhere in plain view of the passengers
of the vehicle. The posted rates shall not obstruct the view of the windshield
or either window immediately to the left or right of the driver's seat. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-10: PREPAYMENT OF FARE:
Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall have the right to demand prepayment of
a legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid. (Ord. 10-
21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-11: RECEIPTS DELIVERED:
Upon request of any passenger, the operator of any vehicle for hire shall give
such passenger a receipt showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the
operator, number of the vehicle and time and distance of journey; said receipt
to be signed and dated by the operator. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-12: FALSE ORDER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false telephone call or order of
any kind or nature for any vehicle for hire service whatsoever. (Ord. 10-21,
12-7-2010)
3-10-13: DUTY OF PASSENGER TO PAY FARE OR CHARGE:
Anyone inside a vehicle for hire is presumed to be receiving a service, based
on compensation, from the driver/operator, and it shall be unlawful for any
person who receives a vehicle for hire service in Mason City, Iowa, to fail or
refuse to pay any lawful fare or charge due to a vehicle for hire driver. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-14: VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:
Each vehicle for hire shall display a license tag furnished by the Chief of
Police or his/her designee on the lower passenger's side of the windshield.
Each vehicle for hire shall display on each side of said vehicle the name of
the company it represents in plainly distinguishable letters that are at least
four inches (4") high. These letters must be permanently painted or otherwise
permanently affixed. Magnetic lettering will only be allowed on a temporary
basis, not to exceed one (1) month from time of inspection, and only under the
authority of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Taxicabs may also have a
permanently mounted yellow or amber lighting display upon the roof of each
vehicle with appropriate wording indicating it is a vehicle for hire and
legibly affixed thereto. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-15: TAXIMETER OPTION:
   A.   Inspection And Sealing:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, or his designated
representative, to inspect each taximeter at least once each year and more
often as he may deem proper and to cause the same to be sealed. All taximeters
shall be so adjusted as to register within five percent (5%) the current charge
for the distance traveled.
      2.   The expense to have the taximeter inspected, calibrated,
recalibrated and/or certified annually will be the responsibility of the
vehicle for hire owner/operator. A copy of the taximeter's maintenance records
and certification shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his/her designee
and placed with the annual inspection report. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
   B.   Installation: The taximeters shall be installed in such a position
within the taxicab so as to be within the plain view of the passengers and the
dial thereon shall be equipped with a flag or other device indicating whether
or not said cab is in service.
   C.   Charges Based On Taximeters: The charges for the use of the taxicabs
shall be based upon the charge shown on the taximeter, except charges for
taxicabs hired on an hourly basis.
   D.   Use Of Taximeters Required: It shall be unlawful for any driver of any
taxicab, while carrying passengers, to display the flag attached to the
taximeter in such a position as to denote that such vehicle is not employed or
to throw the flag of the taximeter in recording position while such vehicle is
not actually employed, or to fail to throw the flag of such taximeter in a
nonrecording position at the termination of each and every service. (Ord. 10-
21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-16: OPERATION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE:
   A.   Passengers: A "passenger" is a person within a vehicle for hire who is
not the driver/operator. Any passenger is automatically presumed to be
receiving a service based on compensation.
   B.   Termination Or Refusal Of Transportation: A driver of a vehicle for
hire may terminate the transportation of a passenger or refuse to transport a
potential passenger if the driver reasonably believes the driver's life, safety
or property is in danger.
   C.   Tobacco Use Prohibited: Use of tobacco within a vehicle for hire is
prohibited under Iowa Code chapter 142D.
   D.   Use Of Cellphone, Text Messaging Device, Sound System, Or Radio By
Driver: No driver, while the vehicle for hire is occupied by a passenger, shall
play a sound system or radio if the passenger or passengers request that the
driver not do so. Additionally, no driver shall use a cellphone or text
messaging device while the vehicle for hire is in motion or is occupied by a
passenger unless a hands free device is available.
   E.   Receiving And Discharging Passengers: No driver shall stop a vehicle
for hire, or any portion thereof, on the traveled portion of any highway,
street, or other place open to use by the public for vehicular travel, to
receive or discharge any passenger or their belongings, except where motor
vehicle parking, where stopping is specifically permitted by law or where it is
otherwise safe to do so. When so permitted, the driver shall park or stop the
vehicle for hire in the manner permitted by law. No driver shall load or unload
passengers or their belongings in a manner that impedes or interferes with the
orderly flow of vehicular traffic.
   F.   How Passengers Of Vehicle Are To Enter Or Leave Vehicle For Hire: A
driver should not permit any potential passenger to enter a vehicle for hire,
or permit a passenger to exit a vehicle for hire, from the left side, except
when the vehicle for hire is at the left curb of a one-way street or when the
vehicle for hire is parked or standing perpendicular to the curb at a location
where such parking or standing is permitted.
   G.   Restriction On Number Of Passengers In Any Vehicle For Hire: A driver
shall not permit more persons to enter a vehicle for hire in excess of the
seating capacity thereof, as rated by the vehicle for hire's manufacturer,
including the driver.
   H.   Acceptance Of Additional Persons: Whenever any vehicle for hire is
occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy
such vehicle for hire, unless the passenger, having been requested by the
driver, gives affirmative permission to the driver to do so.
   I.   Deception Of Passengers: A driver shall not deceive any passenger, or
potential passenger, as to the destination, route, rate of fare, or any other
provision of this chapter.
   J.   Trips To Be Made By Most Direct Route: A passenger may request that a
driver take a passenger specified route to the passenger's destination. If a
passenger does not specify a route, then a driver shall take the most direct
route from the point of pick up to the destination. A driver may suggest, and a
passenger may approve, a less direct route.
   K.   Compliance With Lawful Requests Of Passengers: All drivers shall comply
with all reasonable and lawful requests of passengers.
   L.   Lost Personal Property: All personal property found in a vehicle for
hire at the end of a trip shall be immediately returned by the driver or
license holder to the passenger who left the item(s) in the vehicle for hire,
if the identity of the passenger is known or can be reasonably ascertained.
Otherwise, the personal property shall be deposited by the driver with the
license holder at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty.
   M.   Alcohol And Controlled Substances: No driver shall ingest or be under
the influence of alcoholic beverages, controlled substances or other habit
forming drugs while operating a vehicle for hire. No driver shall transport in
a vehicle for hire alcoholic beverages or controlled substances other than
those carried in possession of a paying passenger.
   N.   Solicitation: No driver shall solicit potential passengers by word,
signal or otherwise.
   O.   Use Of Vehicle For Hire For Unlawful Purposes: No driver or vehicle
owner or license holder shall use, or permit to be used any vehicle for hire
for any unlawful purpose.
   P.   Drivers To Be Clean And Neat: Every driver of a vehicle for hire while
on duty shall be clean and neat in dress and in person.
   Q.   Safety Equipment Required: All vehicles for hire shall be equipped with
three (3) DOT traffic triangles, a fire extinguisher and a first aid kit.
   R.   Compliance With Laws And Ordinances: Every vehicle for hire shall be
operated in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws,
ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
3-10-17: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the City Attorney or his/her
designee, the Chief of Police or his/her designee or by any other law
enforcement officer. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-18: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any vehicle owner or driver who violates any provision of this chapter,
or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense.
   B.   Any person, other than a vehicle owner or driver, who violates any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder,
shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, and
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense. (Ord.
10-21, 12-7-2010)
3-10-19: EFFECT OF ENACTMENT OF THIS CHAPTER:
Every license in effect on the date of the enactment of this chapter shall
continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-21, 12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 11
SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: State Certification Of Contractors And Installers Required
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
Iowa Administrative Rules chapter 277 (2013) and Iowa Code supplement (2013)
and any subsequent revisions thereto establish definitions related to alarm
systems, alarm contractors and alarm installers. (Ord. 13-29, 9-17-2013)
3-11-2: STATE CERTIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS AND INSTALLERS REQUIRED:
Iowa Administrative Rules chapter 277 (2013) and Iowa Code supplement (2013)
and any subsequent revisions thereto establish State requirements for alarm
system contractors and installers. Inquiries regarding the Alarm System
Contractor and Installer Certification Program may be addressed to:
Alarm System Contractor and Installer Certification Program
Fire Marshal Division
Iowa Department of Public Safety
215 East 7th Street
Des Moines, IA 50319
Inquiries may be addressed by electronic mail to alarminfo@dps.state.ia.us, or
by telephone to (515)725-6145. (Ord. 13-29, 9-17-2013)
CHAPTER 12
SIDEWALK CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Qualifications; License
3-12-2: Application For License
3-12-3: Requirements For License
3-12-4: Grade Application Required
3-12-5: Inspection
3-12-6: Permits Required
3-12-1: QUALIFICATIONS; LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair sidewalks or do any
concrete work upon a portion of public property without first having obtained a
sidewalk contractor's license as provided in this chapter; provided, however,
that no license shall be required of employees of the City in the exercise of
their respective duties nor to persons acting under direct contract with the
City. It shall be unlawful for any person other than employees of the licensee
to operate under his license. (Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code)
3-12-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for said sidewalk contractor's license shall be filed with the
City Clerk, which application shall describe the qualifications and experience
of the applicant in sidewalk construction. (Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985
Code)
3-12-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE:
   A.    Bond: The application shall be accompanied by a bond, for the period
said license is in effect, in a sum set by resolution of the Council,
conditioned that the applicant shall indemnify the City against any damages
which may occur or injury which may result because of the want of reasonable
care or lack of reasonable skill in the performance of such work, and further
conditioned that all walks constructed by the applicant shall be in accordance
with the plans and specifications therefor, and the provisions of this Code.
Said bond shall also be conditioned to maintain the sidewalks for a period of
three (3) years after completion.
   B.   Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public
liability insurance acceptable to the City, to be in full force and effect for
the period of said license, with minimum limits for property damage, for a
single personal injury or death, and for multiple injuries or deaths set by
resolution of the Council, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety
bonds.
   C.   Fees: The fee for each sidewalk contractor’s license shall be set by
resolution of the Council.
   D.   Term Of License: Licenses, bonds and insurance shall be good for the
period expiring March 31 following the issuance thereof.
Upon being satisfied that the application, bond and insurance comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.
(Ord. 1098, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-14, 8-4-1992; 2017 Code; Ord. 24-
3, 2-20-2024)
3-12-4: GRADE APPLICATION REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally
owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any sidewalk contractor or any other
person without first obtaining a grade application for doing such work from the
Engineering Department. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
3-12-5: INSPECTION:
All concrete construction shall be inspected by the Engineering Department. All
work shall conform to the established grade therefor provided by the City
Engineer and shall follow all requirements set forth in title 5, chapter 1,
articles A, B and C of this Code. (1985 Code; amd. Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017
Code)
3-12-6: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally
owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any City licensed sidewalk contractor or
any other person without first obtaining a permit.
   A.   Fees: The permit shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given
to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Office of the City Engineer. Permit
shall show the name of the applicant, the exact location of the concrete
construction, and such other information as the City Engineer may require. The
fees for permits under this section shall be set by resolution of the Council.
   B.   Owner's Permit: In cases where the owner of property or properties
desires personally to do sidewalk work upon public rights-of-way immediately
adjacent to and abutting premises of which the owner has been established as
the legal deed holder or contractor purchaser, said owner may appear before the
City Engineer, or his designated representative, and upon establishing that he
is competent to do the specific work for which permit is desired, and upon
obtaining the permit and grade for said work to be done, said owner may then
commence work. All work completed by the owner shall be inspected as provided
in section
3-12-5 of this chapter.
   C.   Term Of Permit: Permit is valid for thirty (30) days from the date of
issuance for all sidewalk work. Sidewalk not replaced within thirty (30) days
of issuance may be replaced, without notice to the contractor or homeowner, by
a City appointed sidewalk contractor. Extensions past the thirty (30) days from
the date of issuance shall only be granted by the City Engineer. The
replacement of sidewalk removed in the course of underground utility work shall
be replaced by the permit holder within thirty (30) days of completion of the
underground work. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
CHAPTER 13
EXCAVATING CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-13-1: License Required
3-13-2: Application For License
3-13-3: Requirements For License
3-13-4: Permit Required
3-13-5: Inspections
3-13-6: Owner's Permit
3-13-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, blast, excavate in, or break up any
street, alley or public ground without first having obtained an excavator's
license as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that no license shall
be required of officers of the City in the exercise of their respective duties
nor to persons acting under direct contract with the City. It shall be unlawful
for any person other than employees of the licensee to operate under his
license. (1953 Code § 81-1)
3-13-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for an excavator's license shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk. Said application shall give the name, age, residence and experience of
the applicant and such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Clerk. (1953 Code § 81-2)
3-13-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Fee: The application for an excavator's license shall be accompanied by
the license set by resolution of the Council.
   B.   Bond: Each application for an excavator’s license shall be accompanied
by a bond, for the period said license is in effect, in a sum set by resolution
of the Council and conditioned that the excavator will replace any street
surfaces or installations of public utilities in streets in as good condition
as they were before the excavation, will hold the City harmless on account of
claims by any person as a result of such excavation activities and pay any and
all damages for which the excavator is legally liable as a result of such
excavation activities. Blasting activities will only be allowed with special
advance permission of the City Engineer and with a bond furnished in an
appropriate amount to be determined based on the specific circumstances
associated with that blasting.
   C.   Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public
liability insurance acceptable to the City to be in full force and effect for
the period of said license, with minimum limits for property damage, for a
single personal injury or death, and for multiple injuries or deaths set by
resolution of the Council, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety
bonds. Said liability insurance shall contain coverage for all excavating
operations performed by the licensee. Blasting activities will only be allowed
with special advance permission of the City Engineer and with proof of
insurance in an appropriate amount to be determined based on the specific
circumstances associated with that blasting.
   D.   Term Of License: All excavators' licenses shall expire on March 31
following the date of their issuance. (Ord. 1099, 2-2-1970; amd. 1985 Code;
2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
3-13-4: PERMIT REQUIRED 1 :
   A.   Excavations: No excavation within the limits of any street, alley or
Municipally owned property by any excavator, contractor or any other person
shall be opened without first securing a permit for doing such work, from the
Engineering Department. The permit shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy
being given to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Office of the City
Engineer. Permit shall show the name of the applicant, the exact location of
the concrete construction, and such other information as the Engineering
Department may require. (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Connections: It shall be unlawful for any person to cut the surface of
any street for the purpose of making connections with or repairs to any gas,
water, sewer or underground electrical construction located beneath such street
without first securing a permit therefor from the Engineering Department. (1953
Code § 62-1; amd. Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; 2017 Code)
   C.   Repairing Cut In Street: The person cutting or opening any street shall
replace the surfacing, whether concrete pavement or otherwise, under the
supervision of and in accordance with the plans and specifications of the
Engineering Department and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The work of connecting to or repairing any gas, water, sewer or underground
electrical construction shall also be done in accordance with plans and
specifications and under the supervision and control of the Engineering
Department. (1953 Code § 62-3; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; 2017
Code)
   D.   Fees: Fees for the following permit types shall be set by resolution of
the Council:
      1. Sanitary sewer.
      2.   Private wastewater disposal system.
      3.   Storm sewer collection system.
      4.   Water distribution system.
      5.   Driveway approach.
      6.   Sidewalk.
      7.   Street cutting.
      8.   Test well drilling.
   E.   Test Well Drilling: Permit fees for test well drilling shall be five
dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 92-19, 11-3-1992; amd. Ord. 97-7, 3-4-1997; 2017 Code;
Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapters 1 and 2, respectively, of this Code for water and
  sewer connections.
3-13-5: INSPECTIONS:
All sewer and water service connections shall be inspected by the Office of the
City Engineer, and no such service shall be filled in or used until after
inspection and approval of the City Engineer. For inspection, the excavator
shall have the main connection entirely exposed and the full line of the
service shall be exposed at intervals of ten feet (10'). (1953 Code § 81-7;
amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
3-13-6: OWNER'S PERMIT:
In cases where the owner of property or properties desires personally to do
sidewalk work upon a public right-of-way immediately adjacent to and abutting
premises of which the owner has been established as the legal deed holder or
contract purchaser, said owner may appear before the City Engineer and upon
establishing that he is competent to do the specific work for which permit is
desired, and upon obtaining the permit and grade for said work to be done, said
owner may then commence work. All work completed by the owner shall be
inspected as provided in section
3-13-5 of this chapter. (1985 Code; amd. Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 14
TREE TRIMMING CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definition
3-14-2: License Required
3-14-3: License Fee; Insurance
3-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Tree trimming contractors" shall mean any person who, for compensation, cuts
or trims any tree or limbs or branches of any tree, who cuts or removes the
roots of any tree or who treats diseases of any tree. (Ord. 1592, 2-17-1981;
amd. 1985 Code)
3-14-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every tree trimmer shall, annually before engaging in work on any tree on or
overhanging any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property or on
any tree whose height is greater than the distance from the base of such tree
to any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, obtain a
license therefor from the City Clerk. Said license shall expire on March 31 of
each year. (Ord. 1592, 2-17-1981; amd. 1985 Code)
3-14-3: LICENSE FEE; INSURANCE:
   A.   Fee: Application for such licenses shall be made upon forms provided by
the Clerk and each applicant shall pay an annual license fee set by resolution
of the Council at the time of making such application.
   B.   Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public
liability insurance acceptable to the City to be in full force and effect for
the period of said license, with minimum limits set by resolution of the
Council for property damage, for a single personal injury or death, and for
multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City, on account of any and all damage or injury, including death, to real
or personal property, whether public or private, which arises out of or is
connected with or caused by such tree trimming contractor or contractor’s
agents in the performance of this business. (Ord. 93-3, 1-19-1993; amd. 2017
Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
CHAPTER 15
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS
SECTION:
3-15-1: Intent
3-15-2: Definitions
3-15-3: Tax Abatement For Buildings Of Certain Organizations
3-15-4: Exceptions
3-15-5: Application For Exemption
3-15-6: Prior Approval
3-15-7: Repeal Of Ordinance
3-15-1: INTENT:
The City Council declares it to be the intention of this chapter to provide for
a property tax exemption for "speculative shell buildings" as provided by
section 427.1(27) of the Code of Iowa. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002; amd. 2017 Code)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this chapter:
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION: A. An organization, which meets the
membership requirements set forth below, formed within a City or County or
multicommunity group for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
      1.   To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
      2.   To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
      3.   To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
      4.   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
   B.   For purposes of this definition, a "community development organization"
must have at least fifteen (15) members with representation from the following:
      1.   A representative from government at the level or levels
corresponding to the community development organization's area of operation.
      2.   A representative from a private sector lending institution.
      3.   A representative of a community organization in the area.
      4.   A representative of business in the area.
      5.   A representative of private citizens in the community, area, or
region.
SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDING: A building or structure owned and constructed or
reconstructed by a community development organization, a not for profit
cooperative association under Iowa Code chapter 499, without a tenant or buyer
for the purpose of attracting an employer or user which will complete the
building to the employer's or user's specification for manufacturing,
processing, or warehousing the employer's or user's product line. (Ord. 02-03,
2-5-2002)
3-15-3: TAX ABATEMENT FOR BUILDINGS OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS:
New construction of shell buildings by community development organizations, not
for profit cooperative associations under chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa for
speculative purposes or the portion of the value added to buildings being
reconstructed or renovated by community development organizations, not for
profit cooperative associations under Iowa Code chapter 499 in order to become
speculative shell buildings may be exempt from taxation pursuant to Iowa Code
section 427.1(27). Such exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in
which the building is first assessed for property taxation or the assessment
year in which the reconstruction or renovation first adds value and all
subsequent years until the property is leased or sold or until the exemption is
terminated by ordinance of the City Council. Eligibility for an exemption as a
speculative shell building shall be determined as of January 1 of the
assessment year. However, an exemption shall not be granted a speculative shell
building of a not for profit cooperative association under Iowa Code chapter
499 if the building is used by the cooperative association, for other than as a
speculative shell building. If the shell building or any portion of the shell
building is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building which is leased
or sold shall not be entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent
years. An application shall be filed pursuant to section 427B.4 of the Code of
Iowa in the manner required by section
3-15-4 of this chapter for each project for which an exemption is claimed.
(Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-5: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
An application shall be filed for each speculative shell building resulting in
actual value added for which an exemption is claimed in the manner provided by
section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa. The application for exemption shall be
filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1 of the
assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of
Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director
of Revenue. (Ord. 02-03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-6: PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council for prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption. The City Council, by ordinance, may give its
prior approval of a tax exemption for a new construction if the speculative
shell building is in conformance with the zoning plans for the City, provided
such ordinance shall not be finally adopted until at least thirty (30) days
after a public hearing as required by Iowa Code section 427B.1. Such prior
approval shall not entitle the owner to said exemption until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate. However,
if the tax exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may
submit an amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject. (Ord. 02-
03, 2-5-2002)
3-15-7: REPEAL OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter may be repealed by the City Council when in its opinion
continuation of the exemption granted ceases to be of benefit to the City, but
all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (Ord. 02-03, 2-
5-2002)
CHAPTER 16
PARTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: Intent
3-16-3: Amount Of Exemption
3-16-4: Application
3-16-5: Prior Approval
3-16-6: Repealer
3-16-7: Exceptions
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms used in this chapter:
ACTUAL VALUE ADDED: The actual value added as of the first year for which the
exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements to
machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the Assessor as
of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New buildings and structures and includes new buildings and
structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing
building or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure, unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those
products which determination shall receive prior approval of the City Council
upon the recommendation of the Iowa Development Commission.
NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT: New machinery and equipment assessed as real
estate pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, of the Iowa Code,
unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or
operating process to maintain or expand existing operational status. (Ord. 03-
2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-2: INTENT:
The City Council declares it to be the intention of this chapter to provide for
a partial property tax exemption for actual value added to industrial real
estate by the new construction of industrial real estate and the acquisition of
or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to
section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, of the Iowa Code, as set forth in
House File 650 of the 68th General Assembly. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-3: AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from taxation
shall be as follows:
   A.   For the first year: Seventy five percent (75%).
   B.   For the second year: Sixty percent (60%).
   C.   For the third year: Forty five percent (45%).
   D.   For the fourth year: Thirty percent (30%).
   E.   For the fifth year: Fifteen percent (15%).
   F.   After the fifth year, there shall be no exemption and the granting of
the exemption hereunder for new construction constituting complete replacement
of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value of
the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the
industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added. (Ord.
03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-4: APPLICATION:
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed. The application for exemption shall be filed
by the owner of the property with the local Assessor by February 1 of the
assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of
Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the
improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director
of Revenue. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
3-16-5: PRIOR APPROVAL:
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council for prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. The City Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for a new
construction if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans
for the City and after public hearing as by law provided. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to said exemption until the new construction has
been completed and found to be qualified real estate. However, if the tax
exemption for new construction is not approved, the person may submit an
amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-
2003)
3-16-6: REPEALER:
This chapter may be repealed by the City Council when in its opinion
continuation of the exemption granted ceases to be of benefit to the City but
all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (Ord. 03-2, 2-
18-2003)
3-16-7: EXCEPTIONS:
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law. (Ord. 03-2, 2-18-2003)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-3: Other Conditions Regulated
4-1-4: Notice To Abate Nuisance Or Condition
4-1-5: Contents Of Notice
4-1-6: Method Of Service
4-1-7: Request For Hearing And Appeal
4-1-8: Abatement In Emergency
4-1-9: Abatement By Municipality
4-1-10: Powers Of Code Enforcement Division
4-1-11: Collection Of Costs
4-1-12: Installment Payment Of Cost Of Abatement
4-1-13: Municipal Infraction
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
GARBAGE: Food waste; discarded or useless material.
JUNK: Secondhand, worn or discarded articles.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the
senses, or an obstacle to the free use of property, so as essentially to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. The following,
although not all inclusive, are declared to be nuisances:
   A.   The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other places for the
exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious fumes, offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and
dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
   B.   The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to
accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
   C.   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
   D.   The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any
river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural
course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   E.   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise the
public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying
grounds.
   F.   Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and lewdness,
gambling houses, or houses resorted to for the use of controlled substances or
houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
   G.   Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets.
   H.   Any object or structure hereafter erected within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the limits of any Municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including
takeoff and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use
or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   I.   The accumulation of items including, but not limited to, the following:
old or scrap rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, tires, waste,
used lumber or salvaged wood; inoperable machinery, electronics, or appliances
or parts of such machinery, electronics, or appliances; iron, steel, or other
old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old
or discarded household goods or hardware, except if stored inside a completely
enclosed structure. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or rear yard
is not considered a nuisance.
   J.   The depositing or storing of "garbage" or "recyclables" (as defined in
section
4-2A-1 of this title) whether it is within a totally enclosed structure or not
is prohibited except for the normal accumulation of garbage and recyclables
stored for weekly City garbage collection.
   K.   The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   L.   Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines, brush, dead wood, or other
vegetation in the City, so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard,
pursuant to article A of this chapter.
   M.   Trees infected with Dutch elm disease 1 .
   N.   Planting cotton bearing cottonwood trees or any other cotton bearing
poplar trees is hereby prohibited in the City of Mason City.
   O.   Effluent from septic tank or drainfield running or ponding on the
ground in the open.
   P.   Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk, public
ground, or in any ditch, waterway or gutter so as to obstruct the drainage.
   Q.   Junk vehicles as set out in title 8, chapter 5 of this Code.
   R.   All diseased animals.
   S.   All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
   T.   Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24) hours
after death, as set forth in section 167.15, Iowa Code.
   U.   Pollution of any public well as set out in title 6, chapter 1, article
B of this Code, or cistern, stream or body of water by sewage, creamery or
industrial wastes, or other substances.
   V.   Any building or portion thereof in which any of the following listed
conditions exist either individually or in combination with each other to the
extent of being injurious to health, indecent, or offensive to the senses, or
an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance:
      1.   Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents,
      2.   General dilapidation or improper maintenance,
      3.   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer,
      4.   Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Those premises on which an
accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage,
offal, filth, vermin harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials and
similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards, and
those premises lacking adequate light, air, and heating or sanitary facilities
(including running water and operable plumbing), thereby rendering them unfit
for human habitation, occupancy, and use,
      5.   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors,
      6.   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering,
      7.   Broken, rotten, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings,
      8.   Likelihood of any portion or member or appurtenance thereof to fail
or become detached or dislodged or to partially or completely collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property, and
      9.   Inoccupancy for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute
such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance, a harborage for
vagrants, and/or hazard to the public.
   W.   The shoveling, raking, throwing, dumping or depositing of any garbage,
refuse, dirt, yard wastes, solid wastes or any other materials into any stream,
river or creek or upon any stream, river or creek banks.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title.
REFUSE: Worthless or useless part of something.
RUBBISH: Useless waste or rejected matter.
TRASH: Something worth little or nothing; junk, rubbish, refuse and garbage.
(Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-11, 11-17-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 3 of this Code.
4-1-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided in this chapter or may be
prosecuted as a Municipal infraction, or both. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-3: OTHER CONDITIONS REGULATED:
The following actions are required and may also be abated in the manner
provided in this chapter:
   A.   The removal of diseased trees or dead wood, but not diseased trees and
dead wood outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public street.
   B.   The numbering of buildings 1 .
   C.   The connection to public drainage systems from abutting property when
necessary for public health or safety.
   D.   The connection to public sewer systems 2  from abutting property, and
the installation of sanitary toilet facilities and removal of other toilet
facilities on such property as set out in subsection
6-2-5C of this Code.
   E.   The maintenance of public property outside lot and property lines by
the abutting property owner as set out in in Section
5-1H-1 of this Code. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988; amd. Ord. 22-10, 8-2-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 1 of this Code.
2 2. See title 6, chapter 2 of this Code.
4-1-4: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE OR CONDITION:
Whenever an authorized Municipal officer has probable cause to believe that a
nuisance or other condition which is listed in section
4-1-1 of this chapter exists, he or she may cause to be served upon the
property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor, a written notice
to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice. In the
alternative, an authorized Municipal officer may cause to be served upon the
property owner a citation for a Municipal infraction setting forth a specific
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
A notice to abate shall contain the following:
   A.   A description of the alleged nuisance or other condition.
   B.   The location of the alleged nuisance or condition.
   C.   A statement that if the property owner wishes to dispute the
determination that a nuisance or other condition as prohibited by this chapter
exists, such property owner or the property owner's representative shall make a
written request to the Code Enforcement Division on or before the time
prescribed in the notice which shall be not more than ten (10) days from the
date of notice. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   A statement that if no request for hearing is made within the
prescribed time that the nuisance or other prohibited condition shall
conclusively be presumed to exist.
   E.   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
prohibited condition.
   F.   The required time within which the owner must complete the abatement.
   G.   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as directed
and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City may
abate the nuisance or other condition and assess the cost against such person
and/or property. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-6: METHOD OF SERVICE:
The notice to abate shall be served either by: a) personal delivery; or b)
posting the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises where the nuisance
exists and sending a copy of the notice by regular United States mail. (Ord.
08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-7: REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL:
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may have a hearing as to
whether a nuisance or prohibited condition exists. A request for a hearing must
be made in writing and delivered to the Code Enforcement Division within the
time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
or prohibited condition exists and it must be abated as ordered.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director of Development Services shall
render a written decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists. If the Director of Development Services finds that a nuisance or
prohibited condition exists, he or she must order it abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal from this decision may be had by
immediately filing a written notice with the City Clerk. This appeal will be
heard before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance or prohibited
condition is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY:
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any action that
may be required under this chapter without prior notice, and assess the costs
as provided herein. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-9: ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPALITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The expense account shall be fully
itemized, verified and filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on
behalf of the Municipality. (Ord. 88-30, 12-5-1988)
4-1-10: POWERS OF CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION:
The Code Enforcement Officers designated by the Development Services Director
may enter onto and into open unobstructed property and structures to
investigate, locate, and identify nuisances that said department has cause to
believe exist on real estate in the City. The designated employees of the
division shall have full authority to declare a condition to be a public
nuisance and issue appropriate notices provided for by this chapter.
Thereafter, the division shall take action as required and permitted by this
chapter. Designated division employees shall have all powers and authority
necessary to cause the abatement of the nuisance under Federal, State and local
laws. (Ord. 13-06, 3-5-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1-11: COLLECTION OF COSTS:
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to
abide by the notice to abate and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one (1) month, the costs shall be certified to the County
Auditor and it shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general
property taxes. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-12: INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT:
If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds one hundred
dollars ($100.00), the City may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten
(10) annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same
interest rates provided for assessments against benefited property. (Ord. 08-
04, 5-20-2008)
4-1-13: MUNICIPAL INFRACTION:
In addition to or in lieu of serving the owner with a notice to abate an
alleged nuisance or condition, the authorized Municipal officer having probable
cause to believe that such nuisance or other prohibited condition exists may
cause the creation or maintenance of the alleged nuisance or other condition to
be prosecuted as a Municipal infraction in accordance with the provisions of
title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code and may seek in addition to or in
lieu of the civil penalties imposed for Municipal infractions, a court order
granting the City appropriate relief to abate or to halt the violation. A
wilful failure of a defendant to pay a civil penalty or a violation of the
terms or any other order of court granting appropriate relief is punishable as
contempt. (Ord. 08-04, 5-20-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A. WEEDS
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Nuisance Declared
4-1A-2: Duty To Destroy Weeds
4-1A-3: Enforcement
4-1A-4: Notice Of Abatement
4-1A-5: City Abatement; Fees; Assessment Of Costs
4-1A-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The dense growth of weeds, vines, brush or any other similar vegetation or
grass more than one foot (1') in height, on property located within the City
limits is hereby declared a hazard to public safety and health and a public
nuisance. (Ord. 913, 6-3-1963; amd. 1985 Code)
Exception: Public property set aside as a natural area and private property
along a controlled corridor.
The Development Services Department encourages the use of native grasses,
forbs, shrubs, and trees on riparian areas adjoining streams and rivers.
However, noxious weeds as designated by Iowa Code must be controlled. (Ord. 95-
13, 8-15-1995; amd. 2017 Code)
4-1A-2: DUTY TO DESTROY WEEDS:
The property owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, shall cut,
destroy or otherwise control weeds and other growth which constitutes a health,
safety or fire hazard thereon at the expense of said property owner. (Ord.
1529, 1-21-1980)
4-1A-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Development Services is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017
Code)
4-1A-4: NOTICE OF ABATEMENT:
   A.   In the event a property owner fails to control, destroy or cut weeds or
other growth which constitutes a nuisance, the Development Services Department
may serve a notice upon the property owner as determined from the records of
the County Auditor by one (1) or more of the following, as necessary:
      1.   Posting a notice on the front door or main entry to the building;
      2.   Personal service, if the owner can be served within City limits;
      3.   United States first class mail, if the owner lives within any zip
code that is within or contiguous to the boundaries of Cerro Gordo County;
      4.   United States certified mail with return receipt, if the owner
cannot be served according to any of the above methods.
   B.   The notice shall direct that said nuisance be abated within five (5)
business days after the completed service of notice. Said notice shall set
forth those actions which are required of the property owner. The notice shall
state that, if the same owner of the same property receives more than two (2)
notices to abate in a calendar year, then any subsequent founded complaint may
be abated by the City without prior notice. (Ord. 1529, 1-21-1980; amd. 1985
Code; 2017 Code)
4-1A-5: CITY ABATEMENT; FEES; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
   A.   In the event the property owner fails to perform the action required in
the notice of abatement within the time prescribed therein, then the City may
perform the required action.
   B.   Fees for City abatement, when necessary, shall be as set forth by
resolution of the City Council, including actual costs of abatement and
administrative costs. Abatement and administrative fees may be increased for
multiple violations on the same property under the same ownership in any one
(1) calendar year. If more than six (6) violations occur while the property is
under the same ownership in a calendar year, the owner may also be charged with
a Municipal civil infraction, as required in title 1, chapter 4, article A of
this Code.
   C.   Should the owner fail to pay fees charged for violations of this
chapter within a specified and reasonable time, the City may assess the costs
thereof against the property for collection in the same manner as a property
tax, pursuant to the provisions of section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1529, 1-
21-1980; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE
ARTICLE A. DEFINITIONS, LICENSING AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
4-2A-1: Definitions
4-2A-2: Licenses Required
4-2A-3: Vehicles For Hauling Solid Waste, Garbage, Refuse, Recyclables Or Yard
Waste
4-2A-4: Storage
4-2A-5: Hauling Solid Waste, Refuse, Yard Waste Or Recyclables
4-2A-6: Penalty
4-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GARBAGE: Waste from the storage, preparation, cooking and serving of food and a
normal accumulation of combustible material associated with household
operation.
RECYCLABLES: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard, corrugated
cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and aluminum cans,
plastic milk, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) and
other items as deemed necessary by the Public Services Department and the
Sanitation Division.
REFUSE: All refuse not classified as garbage including, but not limited to,
both combustible and noncombustible material including paper, wood, wood
furniture, bedding, tin cans, metal, furniture, dirt, glass, crockery, ashes,
dead animals and solid industrial and commercial waste. Refuse shall in no way
include garbage as defined herein and as also defined in section
4-2C-1 of this chapter, tires, or containers containing toxic liquids such as
paint, paint thinners, etc.
YARD WASTE: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs,
bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden
development and maintenance. This definition does not include tree stumps.
(Ord. 90-28, 12-18-1990; amd. Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   License: Every mixed solid waste hauler and every recycler, doing
business in the City, shall obtain an annual license to do so; however, no
license shall be required by an employee of the City or one under contract with
the City for hauling garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste. The license
fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Inspection: All vehicles used by the licensee to transport solid waste
or recyclables shall be inspected by the city code official. The code official
shall find:
      1.   Each transport vehicle is leak proof.
      2.   Any transport vehicle other than an enclosed box or enclosed packing
vehicle shall show the ability to cover loads with a tarpaulin or other cover
or enclosure to prevent loss of contents, dust, or debris during transport.
      The code official shall certify on the application form that each
transport vehicle used by the licensee meets the above requirements.
   C.   Insurance: The applicant shall file and maintain with the City evidence
of satisfactory public liability insurance covering all solid waste collection
operations and all vehicles and equipment to be used, in the following minimum
amounts:
      1.   Bodily injury - Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per person
and one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence.
      2.   Property damage - One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).
      Each insurance policy shall include a provision requiring the insurance
carrier to notify the City of the expiration, cancellation, or other
termination of coverage at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of
such action. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024; Ord.
24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2A-3: VEHICLES FOR HAULING SOLID WASTE, GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES OR YARD
WASTE:
It shall be unlawful to haul or transport solid waste, as defined in section
4-2C-1 of this chapter, garbage, refuse, yard waste or recyclables on any
public way unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded or the load securely
covered or encased in containers properly equipped so as to prevent any of its
load from dropping, leaking or otherwise escaping from the vehicle.
Yard waste and recyclables must be separated from garbage, refuse or solid
waste as set out by the Cerro Gordo County Solid Waste Agency regulations.
(Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-4: STORAGE:
No storage of solid waste, garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste shall be
permitted in vehicles parked in residential districts overnight or on weekends.
(Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-5: HAULING SOLID WASTE, REFUSE, YARD WASTE OR RECYCLABLES:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the owner from hauling solid
waste, refuse, yard waste or recyclables accumulating on premises of the owner;
provided, such materials are disposed of at the designated Cerro Gordo County
Solid Waste Agency landfill or a recyclable processing site in accordance with
this chapter. This chapter does not intend to prevent the owner from hauling
yard waste to the landfill or to land apply if done according to State
regulations. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2A-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision, section or paragraph of this article
regarding "mandatory commercial and industrial collection - recyclable waste"
or rules, regulations or resolutions promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and/or a Municipal infraction and may be prosecuted as
a misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or both. Upon conviction, any violator
shall be punished pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, "General Penalty", and title
1, chapter 4, article A, "Municipal Infractions", of this Code. Each day a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, should the
licensed hauler continue to violate the terms of this Code, the licensee shall
face revocation of said license. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
ARTICLE B. SANITARY LANDFILLS
SECTION:
4-2B-1: Definitions
4-2B-2: Sanitary Landfill Sites
4-2B-3: Rules And Regulations
4-2B-4: Unlawful Disposal Of Solid Waste
4-2B-5: Posted Instructions
4-2B-6: Excluded Solid Waste Materials
4-2B-7: Payment For Disposal Of Solid Waste In City
4-2B-8: Schedule Of Fees
4-2B-9: Payment Of Unpaid Charges
4-2B-10: Deposits Required
4-2B-11: Enforcement
4-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
AGENCY: The landfill of North Iowa Agency.
GARBAGE: The solid or semisolid animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods including cans, bottles and
cartons in which it was received, and wrappings in which it may be placed for
disposal.
NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All types of premises other than residential premises
as herein defined, including, but not in limitation of, all premises used for
residential premises containing more than two-family dwelling units, and all
premises used for commercial or industrial purposes, and premises used for
mobile home parks.
OWNER: In addition to the record title holder, includes any person residing in,
renting, leasing or occupying any premises and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall
be joint and several.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust, or other legal entity having proprietary interest in a
premises or other legal entity having responsibility for an act.
RECYCLABLES: All types of newspapers and inserts, paperboard, corrugated
cardboard, clear glass food and beverage containers, tin and aluminum cans,
plastic milk, water, orange juice and windshield washer fluid jugs (#2HDPE) and
other items as deemed necessary by the Public Services Department and the
Sanitation Division.
REFUSE: All refuse, junk, trash, paper, yard wastes or other substances
offensive to sight or smell, or detrimental to the best interests of the
community, except dead animals not killed for food.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All single-family dwellings and two- family dwellings.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded materials resulting from commercial,
industrial, domestic and agricultural operations and normal community
activities. Wastes which are solid or semisolid containing insufficient liquid
to be free flowing are considered to be solid wastes, and include in part the
following: garbage, refuse, ashes and other residue of incineration, street
refuse or sweepings, dead animals, solid animal waste, abandoned automobiles,
agricultural, commercial and industrial wastes, construction and demolition
wastes and certain sewage treatment solid residue.
YARD WASTES: All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs,
bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden
development and maintenance. Does not include tree stumps. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-
1970; amd. Ord. 1147, 3-1-1971; Ord. 90-28, 12-18-1990; Ord. 93-16, 8-17-1993;
Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2B-2: SANITARY LANDFILL SITES:
By virtue of contract dated on December 7, 1970, between the City and the
agency, the sanitary landfill sites now and hereafter operated by the agency
are hereby designated as the public disposal sites for all garbage, refuse and
solid wastes collected within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 1134, 12-
7-1970)
4-2B-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations governing the use of the sanitary landfill sites
shall be as determined by the agency to be in the best interests of the general
public. The landfill sites shall normally be open to the public on such days
and hours as the agency may designate; however, the agency may alter the days
and hours so scheduled to satisfy unusual conditions or emergencies. The agency
shall be responsible for the operation of the landfill sites in a manner which
will assure sanitary and safe conditions at all times. Operation of the
landfill sites shall comply with all regulations of all local, State, County or
Federal agencies which may have jurisdiction over such operation. (Ord. 1134,
12-7-1970)
4-2B-4: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
No person shall permanently dispose of solid wastes of any kind upon any land
within the corporate limits of the City unless such land has been designated by
the agency as a public landfill site; provided, however, that the prohibition
contained in this section shall not apply to the deposit of inert wastes not
potentially injurious to health or the public welfare where permission to make
such a deposit has been obtained from the owner or responsible agent, nor to
the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud, ashes or similar
materials, provided all other applicable local and State laws have been
complied with. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-5: POSTED INSTRUCTIONS:
No person shall deposit any solid waste at any agency landfill site except in
compliance with posted instructions or instructions of an attendant in charge.
(Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-6: EXCLUDED SOLID WASTE MATERIALS:
Certain materials may be excluded from those refuse materials which may be
deposited at an agency landfill site. These excluded materials include
recyclable materials as defined in section
4-2B-1 of this article and may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky
objects which may require special processing prior to disposal; trees and tree
limbs, unless they have been cut into pieces not exceeding ten feet (10') in
length; burning materials containing hot or live coals; hazardous materials and
other materials which the agency deems necessary to exclude. However, hazardous
materials may be deposited upon the receipt of written permission of a
responsible official or attendant of the agency and subject to any special
instructions issued with said permission. Hazardous material shall include:
explosive materials, materials contaminated by infection or disease, fly ash or
other fine material which may present a special hazard to landfill, personnel,
equipment or to the public. (Ord. 93-26, 8-17-1993)
4-2B-7: PAYMENT FOR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE IN CITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the agency or the City on its
behalf, to receive payment of any kind or request payment of any kind for the
disposal of any solid waste at any sanitary landfill site within the City.
The charging of a fee for the collection of any garbage or other solid waste
from a customer by a private refuse collector shall not be construed as a
violation of this section since the disposal is considered to be incidental to
the total collection and disposal service; provided, however, such collection
and disposal shall be conducted entirely by forces with equipment owned or
operated by the private refuse collector. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
4-2B-8: SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Fees paid to or for the benefit of the agency for the use of the public
landfill facilities shall be in accordance with the posted and published
schedule of fees of the agency or the City, as provided in the contract
referred to in section
4-2B-2 of this article as follows:
Effective August 2, 1982, a charge in the amount of seventy two cents ($0.72)
per month shall be charged by the City and collected from each "residential
premises" or the "owner" of such premises and from each "nonresidential
premises" or the "owner" thereof, as said terms are defined in this article.
With respect to residential premises, a separate monthly charge as herein
provided shall be made for each separate dwelling unit within a two-family
dwelling. With respect to nonresidential premises which are multiple-family
dwellings (i.e., multiple-family dwellings have more than 2 separate family
units) and mobile home parks, a separate monthly charge as herein provided
shall be made for each separate family unit within such dwelling and each
separate mobile home site within a mobile home park; provided, however, that
the owner of such multiple-family dwelling or mobile home park has made request
for garbage and domestic refuse collection service for such premises by the
City in the manner provided for in section
4-2C-9 of this chapter.
The charge herein provided for shall be for the use of the sanitary landfill
facilities of the City and such monthly charge shall be billed to the "owner"
as herein defined. (Ord. 1648, 8-2-1982)
4-2B-9: PAYMENT OF UNPAID CHARGES:
Bills for landfill charges shall be rendered to public utility consumers by
adding to the water and garbage service a statement showing the amount of the
charge or rate for landfill service as herein provided. All landfill charges
which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing
thereof shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount, and ten percent
(10%) of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom. If any
landfill service bill shall not be paid by the twenty fifth day after the date
of delivery or mailing, the property served shall be subject to immediate
discontinuance of service. (Ord. 1641, 7-19-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
4-2B-10: DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
Deposits shall be required for solid waste collection service, at the
discretion of the Finance Director as provided for in subsection
6-1A-1D of this Code. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996)
4-2B-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and all police officers of the
City to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1134, 12-7-1970)
ARTICLE C. SOLID WASTES
SECTION:
4-2C-1: Definitions
4-2C-2: Collection By City
4-2C-3: Container Specifications
4-2C-4: Treatment Pending Collection
4-2C-5: Location Of Containers
4-2C-6: Accumulations Hazardous To Health Or Property
4-2C-7: Public Nuisance
4-2C-8: Prohibited Practice
4-2C-9: Premises From Which Refuse, Garbage, Recyclables And Yard Waste
Collections Not Made By City
4-2C-10: Hauling Solid Waste, Domestic Refuse, Recyclables Or Yard Waste
4-2C-11: Enforcement
4-2C-12: Charges
4-2C-13: Payments
4-2C-14: Deposits
4-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
                      The types of waste which normally originate in the
                      residential household. It shall typically include, but
DOMESTIC REFUSE:      not be limited to, wastepaper, rags and clothing and
                      refuse that is not identified as an accepted recyclable
                      material by the Sanitation Division. It shall not include
                      dead animals or animal excrement.
                      Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
                      and serving of foods, including cans, bottles and cartons
GARBAGE:              in which it is received and wrappings in which it may be
                      placed for disposal, including waste that is not
                      identified as an accepted recyclable material by the
                      Sanitation Division.
                      In addition to the record title holder, includes any
                      person residing in, renting, leasing or occupying any
OWNER:                premises and as between such parties the duties,
                      responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
                      imposed shall be joint and several.
                      An individual, or group or association of individuals; a
PERSON:               firm or any member thereof; a corporation or any
                      executive officer, manager, person in charge or employee
                      thereof.
                      Materials such as paper, cardboard, plastic, glass and
RECYCLABLES:          metal, identified by the Sanitation Division of the
                      Operations and Maintenance Department to be recyclable,
                      based upon materials accepted by contracted recyclers.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: All single-family dwellings and two- family dwellings.
                      Unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
                      commercial, industrial, domestic and agricultural
                      operations and normal community activities. Wastes which
                      are solid or semisolid containing insufficient liquid to
SOLID WASTE:          be free flowing are considered to be solid wastes and
                      include in part the following: refuse, ashes and other
                      residue of incineration, street refuse or sweepings, dead
                      animals, solid animal waste, agricultural, commercial and
                      industrial wastes, construction and demolition wastes and
                      certain sewage treatment solid residue.
                      All organic debris (e.g., grass clippings, leaves, tree
                      limbs, bark, branches, flowers, etc.) which is produced
YARD WASTE:           as part of yard and garden development and maintenance;
                      does not include tree stumps. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd.
                      Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
 
4-2C-2: COLLECTION BY CITY:
The City shall collect only garbage, domestic refuse, recyclables and yard
waste from all residential premises as hereinabove defined in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of this article. The City shall not collect solid
waste as herein defined.
   A.   Garbage And Domestic Refuse: Garbage and domestic refuse shall be
collected once weekly.
   B.   Yard Waste: Yard Waste shall be collected once a week from April 1
through November 30.
      1.   Grass clippings and leaves shall be collected once a week, at the
curb provided they are in approved biodegradable paper bags.
      2.   Brush and tree limbs shall be collected once a week at the curb.
Tree limbs of more than one half inch (1/2") or less than four inches (4") in
diameter and brush will be collected, provided they are placed at the curb,
securely tied in bundles not more than four feet (4') in length or eighteen
inches (18") in diameter and weigh no more than fifty (50) pounds. Tree limbs
and brush shall not be combined with refuse or garbage for collection. All
bundles must be secured with twine or light string, not wire. Brush and tree
limbs that are one half inch (1/2") or less and no longer than twelve inches
(12") in length may be placed in approved biodegradable paper bags.
      3.   Christmas trees, wreaths and roping will be collected once. All
materials must be free of wire and hardware. Flocked trees that contain toxic
substances or wire will not be picked up. Individuals will be responsible for
hauling them to a designated site.
   C.   Recyclables: Recyclables shall be collected once weekly. The Sanitation
Division shall provide a current list of recyclable materials, which will be
published on the City website and other means of public notice.
   D.   Time Limit: Containers, bags, packages or other solid waste placed at
the curb or alley line shall not be placed more than one (1) day in advance of
the scheduled collection day. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-11,
7-16-2024)
4-2C-3: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Garbage and domestic refuse containers shall not be more than thirty-
three (33) gallons nor less than ten (10) gallons in normal capacity except,
however, where only one (1) container is used, in which case such container may
be less than ten (10) gallons in capacity. Containers shall be waterproof,
rodent-proof and fitted with a tight lid. Containers shall have handles, bails
or other suitable lifting devices or features. Containers shall be of a type
originally manufactured for garbage or other solid wastes, with tapered sides
for easy emptying. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy construction. The
weight of any individual container along with contents shall not exceed fifty
(50) pounds. Galvanized iron and similar metal containers, rubber or fiberglass
containers and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather
may be used. Disposal bags manufactured for garbage and solid waste disposal
shall be acceptable. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged
containers shall not be acceptable.
   B.   Yard waste containers shall be approved biodegradable paper bags and
shall not exceed thirty-three (33) gallons or fifty (50) pounds.
   C.   All garbage and other domestic refuse shall be placed in suitable
containers. Large bulky items that cannot be reduced to fit in approved
containers will not be collected unless the owner has notified the Sanitation
Department of the items, pickup of the items has been approved by the
Sanitation Department, and the owner has applied the required authorized
stickers.
   D.   Recyclable items shall be placed in a container provided by the City,
which shall be made available to residents for a fee to be set by resolution of
the City Council. (Ord. 13-20, 6-4-2013; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-4: TREATMENT PENDING COLLECTION:
All garbage which may attract flies or rodents shall be drained of all excess
liquid, securely wrapped in paper and placed in paper bags or otherwise
packaged before it is placed in containers. All garbage shall be packaged in a
manner which facilitates the safe and efficient transfer from private
containers and property to collection vehicles with minimum spillage and
nuisance. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-5: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS:
The City reserves the right to designate collection from streets or alleys
where the same exist. Where alley collections are designated, containers shall
be placed in plain view on the premises adjacent to the alley. Where street
collections are designated, containers shall be placed at the curb line. During
the winter season, access to the containers as well as the containers
themselves shall be cleared from snow by the owner within a reasonable time
after a snowfall. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-6: ACCUMULATIONS HAZARDOUS TO HEALTH OR PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate, on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste,
refuse, yard waste or recyclables, in containers or not, which constitute a
health or sanitation hazard. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit
to accumulate quantities of solid waste within or close to any building unless
the same are stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a health or
fire hazard. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-7: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The accumulation of solid waste, refuse, yard waste or recyclables contrary to
the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance as
set out in section
4-2C-6 of this article. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-8: PROHIBITED PRACTICE:
Combining yard waste or recyclables with garbage or refuse for removal is
prohibited. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-9: PREMISES FROM WHICH REFUSE, GARBAGE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE
COLLECTIONS NOT MADE BY CITY:
No other types of premises, except "residential premises" as defined herein,
shall be eligible to have their garbage or refuse collected by the City;
except, however: a) that owners of apartment dwellings having more than two (2)
separate family units may request that the City collect the garbage, domestic
refuse, recyclables and yard waste from such premises; and b) owners of mobile
home parks may request that the City collect the garbage, domestic refuse and
yard waste from such premises. In the event such apartment dwellings or mobile
home parks are furnished with such collection, then each separate family unit
within such apartment dwellings or mobile home parks shall be considered to be
a separate residential premises for the purpose of this chapter and shall be
charged a collection charge as hereinafter provided.
The owners of all of the above referred to premises from which collections of
refuse, garbage, recyclables or yard waste are not made by the City shall
provide suitable containers for the storage of refuse, garbage, recyclables or
yard waste on the premises and shall make private provisions for the removal of
the same. Garbage must be taken from dwellings and other private places not
collected by the City at least once each week. Garbage must be taken from
hotels, restaurants, nursing homes and all other places where there are unusual
quantities of the same as often as needed. The City Council may, by rule, make
different or additional requirements for the removal of garbage as the general
welfare of the City may require, and the Public Works Director may make such
rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article which he may deem
expedient or necessary for the carrying out of the provisions of this article
and for the administration thereof. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-
16-2024)
4-2C-10: HAULING SOLID WASTE, DOMESTIC REFUSE, RECYCLABLES OR YARD WASTE:
Nothing in this article is intended to prevent the owner from hauling solid
waste, garbage, domestic refuse, yard waste or recyclables accumulating on
premises of the owner, provided such materials are disposed of at the Landfill
of North Iowa or other means in accordance with County, State and Federal law.
(Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-11: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the Sanitation Division Supervisor to enforce the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-12: CHARGES:
Beginning with the July 1, 2022 billing date, the following monthly rates shall
be charged by the City and collected from each single-family dwelling and each
separate dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling, or owner of a
"residential premises" as defined in section
4-2C-1 of this article serviced by garbage, domestic refuse, recyclables or
yard waste collection service as provided for in this chapter.
 
July 1, 2022- July 1, 2023- July 1, 2024- June July 1, 2025- June July 1, 2026-
June 30, 2023 June 30, 2024 30, 2025           30, 2026           Until Amended
$12.77        $13.16        $13.55             $13.96             $14.24
 
This charge shall be in payment for collection of one bag per week and one
collection of recyclables or yard waste per week as herein set out in section
4-2C-2 of this article. Such monthly charge shall be billed to the owner as
herein directed.
For each additional bag of garbage or refuse, or for large items approved for
collection by the Sanitation Division, an authorized sticker or stickers shall
be attached. The charge for each sticker shall be set via resolution of the
City Council. The Sanitation Division shall determine the number of stickers to
be attached to large items that have been approved for collection.
The collection of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste, as provided for
in this chapter, and maintenance of the availability of such service, whether
or not the owner or occupant of such residential premises, is hereby declared a
benefit to the said premises at least equal to the monthly charges specified in
this article. (Ord. 19-07, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-6, 7-21-2020; Ord. 21-8, 6-
15-2021; Ord. 22-06, 4-19-2022; Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
This charge shall be in payment for collection of one bag per week and one
collection of recyclables or yard waste per week as herein set out in section
4-2C-2 of this article. Such monthly charge shall be billed to the owner as
herein directed.
For each additional bag of garbage or refuse, an authorized sticker shall be
attached. The charge for each sticker shall be one dollar and fifty cents
($1.50).
The collection of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste, as provided for
in this chapter, and maintenance of the availability of such service, whether
or not the owner or occupant of such residential premises, is hereby declared a
benefit to the said premises at least equal to the monthly charges specified in
this article. (Ord. 19-07, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-6, 7-21-2020; Ord. 21-8, 6-
15-2021; Ord. 22-06, 4-19-2022)
4-2C-13: PAYMENTS:
Bills for collection service charges shall be rendered to public utility
consumers by adding to the water service bill a statement showing the amount of
the charge or rate for garbage service as herein provided. All collection
charges which are paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or
mailing thereof shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount and ten
percent (10%) of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom.
If any waste collection service bill shall not be paid by the twenty fifth day
after the date of delivery or mailing, the property served shall be subject to
the immediate discontinuance of service. (Ord. 02-12, 4-16-2002; amd. Ord. 24-
11, 7-16-2024)
4-2C-14: DEPOSITS:
Deposits shall be required for collection service at the discretion of the
Finance Director as provided for in subsection
6-1A-1D of this Code. (Ord. 96-7, 3-5-1996; amd. Ord. 24-11, 7-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
DISCHARGE OF WATER INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definition And Method
4-3-3: Requirements To Disconnect Improper Connections
4-3-4: Access And Entry For Inspections
4-3-5: Future Inspections
4-3-6: Penalty
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this chapter, the City Council finds that the discharge of water
from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool or
other natural precipitation into the City sanitary sewer collection system will
and has on numerous occasions in the past flooded and overloaded the sanitary
sewer collection system to such an extent as to cause damage to residential
property and overloaded the water reclamation facility (WRF). Such damage is
caused by the backup of sewage into the living quarters of residential homes
creating a potential health hazard and exceeding the capacity of the WRF. The
City Council, therefore, finds it essential to the maintenance of health,
minimization of damage to property and to maintain the life and capacity of the
WRF that the provisions of this chapter be strictly enforced to avoid and
minimize these problems in the future. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-2: DEFINITION AND METHOD:
No water from any roof, surface, ground, sump pump, footing tile, swimming pool
or other natural precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer
collection system. Dwellings, including new housing construction or houses
under construction, and other buildings and structures which require, because
of the infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces and the like, a sump
pump system to discharge water shall have a permanently installed discharge
line which shall not at any time discharge water into the sanitary sewer
collection system. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for a
year round discharge connection to the City subdrain/storm sewer system. If
there is no subdrain available, the surface discharge point location shall be
approved by the City Engineer. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line,
without valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and, if
connected to the City subdrain/storm sewer line, include a check valve. (Ord.
06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-3: REQUIREMENTS TO DISCONNECT IMPROPER CONNECTIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, surface, ground, sump pump,
footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or discharging into the
sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove the same. Any disconnects
or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in a manner as
approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-4: ACCESS AND ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS:
Every person owning real estate or contractor/builder who are building a house
within the City of Mason City that discharges into the City's sanitary sewer
system or on the ground shall allow an employee of the City or their designated
representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump
or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. Any owner of
property or contractor/house builder found to violate this chapter shall make
the necessary changes to comply with this chapter and furnish proof of the
changes to the City within sixty (60) days from the date the violation was
identified. Inspections shall be made at a reasonable time and only after
reasonable effort has been made to notify the property owner of the need for
such inspection. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-5: FUTURE INSPECTIONS:
At any future time, if the City has reason to suspect that an illegal
connection may exist in a premises, the owner, after written notice, shall
allow City representatives to inspect the building. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
4-3-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided may be punished as set forth below.
   B.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, shall
be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing at least sixty (60) days for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease and correct all violations.
   C.   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine
in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day in which any
such violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
   D.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation. The City will also retain any and all civil remedies
including, but not limited to, injunction or abatement actions to remedy a
violation. (Ord. 06-8, 4-4-2006)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE A. SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Plans And Specifications
5-1A-2: Sidewalks To Conform To Grade
5-1A-3: Maintenance Obligation Of Abutting Property Owner
5-1A-4: Sidewalk Construction
5-1A-5: Resolution And Notice For Installation Of Sidewalks
5-1A-6: Sidewalk Repairs; Inspection And Notice
5-1A-7: Assessment Of Cost Of Sidewalk Repairs
5-1A-1: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to submit plans and specifications
for permanent sidewalks to the City Council, and the same, upon approval by the
Council, shall be filed with the City Administrator/City Clerk and shall
constitute the plans and specifications for all permanent sidewalks thereafter
constructed. It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to recommend changes in
such plans and specifications whenever approved building practices require the
same. (1953 Code § 56-2; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
5-1A-2: SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM TO GRADE:
All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed, relaid or repaired shall be in
conformity with the plans and specifications therefor on file with the City
Administrator/City Clerk and shall conform to the established grade therefor,
and all such work shall be done under the supervision and control of the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall furnish all design specifications for such
walks. (1953 Code § 56-2; amd. Ord. 97-29, 11-18-1997; 2017 Code)
5-1A-3: MAINTENANCE OBLIGATION OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER:
The abutting property owner shall maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition, in
a state of good repair, and free from defects. The abutting property owner may
be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk. (2017 Code)
5-1A-4: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks must be constructed by licensed sidewalk contractors as set forth
in title 3, chapter 12 of this Code, of the type approved by and in accordance
with the specifications of the City Engineer. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1A-5: RESOLUTION AND NOTICE FOR INSTALLATION OF SIDEWALKS:
The City Council may, by resolution, order the construction or the installation
of permanent sidewalks in front of or along any piece of property abutting upon
any street or alley in the same manner as set out for any public improvement
pursuant to sections 364.12 and 384.38, Code of Iowa. (1953 Code § 56-4; amd.
1985 Code)
5-1A-6: SIDEWALK REPAIRS; INSPECTION AND NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to inspect or cause to be inspected
all public sidewalks within the City and whenever the same shall become out of
repair, the City Engineer shall cause notice to be given to the owner, as shown
by the records of the County Auditor, of the property abutting said public
sidewalk, such notice requiring said property owner to repair, replace or
reconstruct said sidewalk, such notice to be given by certified mail in such
form as prescribed in section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1045, 5-6-1968; amd.
1985 Code; 2017 Code)
5-1A-7: ASSESSMENT OF COST OF SIDEWALK REPAIRS:
In the event the sidewalk repairs, as specified in the notice provided for in
section
5-1A-6 of this article, are not completed within thirty (30) days of the date
of the deposit in the mail, by certified mail, of said notice to the property
owner, the City Council may cause, in that event, such repair, replacement or
reconstruction to be done and assess the expense thereof against the property
in front of which such repair, replacement or reconstruction is made, and the
same shall be certified to the County Auditor and collected with other taxes as
set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 1045, 5-6-1968; amd. 1985 Code)
ARTICLE B. DRIVEWAYS; CUTTING CURBS
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Permit Required
5-1B-2: Filing Of Plan Required
5-1B-3: Number And Size Of Driveway Approaches
5-1B-4: Paving Of Driveway Approach
5-1B-5: Sidewalk As Part Of Driveway Approach
5-1B-6: Curbs
5-1B-7: Equipment Set Back From Street
5-1B-8: Drainage
5-1B-9: Utilities In Streets
5-1B-10: Approval By City Engineer
5-1B-11: Approach For Driveways
5-1B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No curb shall be cut or changed and no parking or public property shall
be used for a driveway without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City
Engineer, provided the application therefor conforms to this article and to all
other provisions of this Code, as set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa.
   B.   The permit fee for new installation, repair or replacement of a
driveway approach and the permit fee for curb sawing or curb grinding shall be
set by resolution of the Council and shall be payable at the time said permit
is issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given
to the applicant and one (1) filed in the Engineering Office. The permit shall
show the name of the applicant, the exact location of the construction, and
such other information as the City Engineer may require. (1953 Code § 59-1;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
5-1B-2: FILING OF PLAN REQUIRED:
Before any such permit shall be granted, the applicant therefor shall file with
the City Engineer a plat and plan of the area to be improved, which said plan
shall be accurately drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth inch to one foot
(1/8" = 1') and with all principal dimensions shown. Such plan shall show the
location of all existing walks, curbs and the relative elevation of the
gutters, the top of the curb and the sidewalk, all existing trees, their size
and kind, fire hydrants, water shutoff boxes, storm sewer inlets, street light
poles and conduits and any other structures existing on or in the street
adjacent to the property, and shall also show the proposed location of tanks,
buildings, air hose, wash racks, oil pits, pump islands and all other equipment
which applicant proposes to install on said property, together with the
distance from such equipment to the street line and all proposed improvements
to be installed; provided, however, that no plat or plan shall be required for
a private driveway twenty six feet (26') or less in width. (1953 Code § 59-2;
amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
5-1B-3: NUMBER AND SIZE OF DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
There shall not be more than two (2) driveway approaches on any one (1) street
frontage of one hundred eighty five feet (185') or less, nor more than three
(3) driveway approaches for any one (1) street frontage of over one hundred
eighty five feet (185').
No driveway approach for any commercial or industrial property shall be less
than twenty feet (20') nor more than forty five feet (45') in width measured at
the property line, nor more than fifty five feet (55') in width measured at the
curb line.
No driveway approach for any residential property shall be more than twenty six
feet (26') in width measured at the property line, nor more than thirty six
feet (36') in width measured at the curb line.
A safety zone between driveway approaches shall not be less than ten feet (10')
measured at the curb line.
A safety zone between a driveway approach and an alley approach shall not be
less than ten feet (10') measured at the curb line.
No driveway approach shall be closer than twenty feet (20') to the extended
curb lines of any intersecting streets.
In no event shall the curb cut for a driveway approach extend more than five
feet (5') beyond the extended property line of the property being served by
this driveway. No driveway approach shall be within five feet (5') of an
intersecting sidewalk or crosswalk at the property line. (Ord. 98-13, 10-20-
1998; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-4: PAVING OF DRIVEWAY APPROACH:
All driveway approaches shall be paved with either portland cement concrete or
asphaltic cement concrete according to the Mason City standard specifications.
All driveway approaches shall be complete from the street gutter or curbing to
the property line and include a portland cement concrete sidewalk section as
specified by the City Engineer. (Ord. 98-13, 10-20-1998; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-5: SIDEWALK AS PART OF DRIVEWAY APPROACH:
No driveway which is also a part of the public walk shall have a longitudinal
slope greater than one-half inch (1/2") per foot, and no grade of walk shall be
changed so as to make the walk less than six inches (6") above the adjacent
gutter. The surface of such walk shall be of a rough finish so as to prevent
slipping. (1953 Code § 59-5)
5-1B-6: CURBS:
   A.   When a distance from the inside curb line to the outside private
property line is ten feet (10') or more, the driveway shall end at the curb
line with a flare having a radius of not less than five feet (5') and which
flare shall be tangent to both the driveway and the street curb at the point of
intersection. When the distance from the inside curb line to the outside
private property line is less than ten feet (10'), the driveway shall end at
the curb line with a flare having a radius equal to the distance from the
inside curb line to the outside private property line minus five feet (5'). In
lieu of the radius as above described, the driveway may be flared on a straight
line; provided, that the flared distance does not exceed the limits herein
fixed for radii.
   B.   Sidewalk grades shall not be changed except as provided herein.
   C.   The tangent curb of any driveway shall at no time make an angle of less
than forty five degrees (45°) measured from the street curb. (1953 Code § 59-6;
amd. Ord. 742-1, 3-4-1957; 2017 Code)
5-1B-7: EQUIPMENT SET BACK FROM STREET:
All pumps, oil pits, wash racks and islands, if set parallel with the street
line, shall be at least twelve feet (12') from the edge of the property line,
and if set at other than right angles or parallel with the street line, same
shall be fifteen feet (15') or more from the property line. All such equipment
shall be so placed that vehicles will not be stopped upon sidewalk or street
while being serviced. Where visible type pumps are used, they must be installed
upon an island at least six inches (6") high and thirty inches (30") wide.
(1953 Code § 59-7)
5-1B-8: DRAINAGE:
The drainage from all buildings and paved areas, wherever practicable, shall be
so arranged as not to flow across a public sidewalk or onto adjoining private
or public properties. Where storm sewer connections are available, connections
thereto shall be made; or whenever storm sewer connections become available,
then the same shall be made within sixty (60) days after becoming available.
(1953 Code § 59-8; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-9: UTILITIES IN STREETS:
Wherever there may be encountered in the street or parking, Municipally owned
cables, services, poles, water mains or other Municipally owned utilities, the
applicant shall obtain the written permission of the interested Municipal
department for any changes necessary therein, and the reasonable expenses and
cost of all such changes shall be paid by the applicant. (1953 Code § 59-9)
5-1B-10: APPROVAL BY CITY ENGINEER:
Driveways and curbs lying on City property shall be of a type approved by and
in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer. (1953 Code § 59-10;
amd. 2017 Code)
5-1B-11: APPROACH FOR DRIVEWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property in connection
with a driveway thereon to use a wooden or metal approach extending from the
street to the top of the curb, regardless of whether the same clamps over the
top of the curb or not, and it shall also be unlawful for any person to place
dirt, ashes or other material in the gutter next to the curb for the purpose of
building up an approach for a driveway. Temporary driveway approaches within
the right-of-way shall be approved by the City Engineer. (1953 Code § 59-11;
amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE C. OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
SECTION:
5-1C-1: Definitions
5-1C-2: Permit Required
5-1C-3: Nuisances
5-1C-4: Duties Of Permit Holder
5-1C-5: Inspections
5-1C-6: Right Of Entry
5-1C-7: Exemptions
5-1C-8: Permit Requirements
5-1C-9: Permit Fees
5-1C-10: Temporary Encroachments; Dumpsters In Public Rights- Of-Way
5-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to their usual meanings, the following definitions shall apply to
the terms used in this article:
AREAWAY: Any opening for stairs or any ramp or other means of ingress or egress
from the street, alley or sidewalk level to any cellar or basement or any part
of a building below the level of the street, alley or sidewalk.
ENCROACHMENT: Any areaway, excavation, obstruction, opening or structure.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street, highway, boulevard, avenue, alley, sidewalk,
parkway, public place, plaza, mall or other real property owned or controlled
by the City, as set out in section 384.37, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code)
5-1C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, use or maintain under, in, upon or over the surface
of any public property in the City any encroachment such as a chimney, areaway,
stairway, walkway, platform, step, area, railing, grate, vault, opening, room,
sign, canopy, marquee, sidewalk cafe or any other encroachment unless and until
a permit, as applicable, is obtained from the City to construct, use or
maintain such encroachment, except that no person shall construct, use or
maintain nor shall a permit be issued for any sign, marquee or awning which
extends over the surface of any public property unless the City has issued a
permit for said encroachment in the manner specified in title 10, chapter 2,
article G of this Code. No such permit shall be required, however, for the
erection and maintenance of a privately owned and maintained mailbox, where
required and approved by the United States Postal Service, or for any newspaper
delivery receptacles when installed by any person who publishes a newspaper of
general circulation as defined by Iowa law, for and at the request of or by
subscribers to the newspaper so long as the receptacles do not encroach in,
upon or over the traveled portion of the public way. Trees, when placed on
public property in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 3 of
this title, shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article. (1985
Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-3: NUISANCES:
This article shall not be construed as authorizing the creation or maintenance
of a nuisance. (1985 Code)
5-1C-4: DUTIES OF PERMIT HOLDER:
   A.   Damages: Any damage occurring in consequence of the creation, use or
maintenance of any of the encroachments described in this article or, by reason
of any defect therein, shall be paid by the person using or maintaining such
encroachment. (1985 Code)
   B.   Barricades: No person placing or causing any obstruction of any kind in
any street, alley or public ground shall fail or neglect to secure the same by
an enclosure or barricades to cause the opening, excavation or obstruction to
be protected and distinctly visible. Compliance with all Federal and State of
Iowa accessibility guidelines shall be followed. Any obstructions such as, but
not limited to, barricades and signage placed in the right-of-way shall be in
compliance with the latest version of the MUTCD (Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices). (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-5: INSPECTIONS:
Any City employee having jurisdiction is authorized to inspect at any time the
different encroachments mentioned in this article. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Any City employee having jurisdiction is hereby authorized to enter such areas
for any purpose in connection with the legitimate use of such public property.
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be held in any way to regulate the maintenance of
manholes, pits or covers in connection with the construction and operation of
any water, telephone, gas or electric connections, pipes or conduits nor shall
anything in this article be held to apply to the use of any public property of
the City by fire escapes or public service corporations wherein such right has
been granted by the City. (1953 Code § 60A-3; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1C-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
All encroachment permit applications shall be subject to the following
requirements:
   A.   Prerequisites:
      1.   No permit required under this article shall be granted for any
encroachment until the required fee(s) have been paid, and until an application
with complete plans shall have been filed with the City and approved by the
City Council, following review by the Planning and Zoning Administrator and the
City Engineer.
      2.   No permit shall be granted for any encroachment when it would
unreasonably conflict with the rights of travel which the general public has on
any public property or would create a hazard to the movement of people or
vehicles unless specifically permitted by the City Council.
      3.   Permit Granted On Condition City Held Harmless: In granting a permit
under this article, the party receiving the same shall be deemed to have agreed
to hold and shall hold the City harmless from and indemnified against all
damages arising from or growing out of the construction, use or maintenance of
the encroachment. Any person who publishes a newspaper of general circulation
as defined by Iowa law and who installs delivery receptacles for such newspaper
in accordance with the terms of section
5-1C-2 of this chapter, shall be deemed to have agreed to hold and shall hold
the City harmless from and indemnified against all damages arising from or
growing out of the installation, placement, use or maintenance of such
receptacles.
      4.   Insurance: Before granting a permit under this section, the
applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the City and sufficient to hold the City harmless from and indemnified
against all damages arising from or growing out of the construction, use or
maintenance of such encroachment, when, in the judgment of the City Council,
the public interest may require it.
   B.   Interim Encroachment Permit for Commercial Use: Upon request by an
adjacent or abutting business, the City Administrator may issue an interim
encroachment permit to allow intermittent or continuous commercial use of
public property by an adjacent or abutting business, provided that the
requirements of subsection A, above, are met. Alcoholic beverages may not be
sold or consumed within the area subject to the interim encroachment permit
unless and until a validly issued alcohol service area permit is approved.
During the period the interim encroachment permit is in effect, the owner or
proprietor shall submit a formal encroachment permit application for review and
approval or disapproval by the City Council. The interim encroachment permit
shall expire on the date that the City Council approves a formal encroachment
permit, or after ninety (90) days have passed, whichever is sooner.
   C.   Grant; Contents: All permits required by this article shall first be
granted by the City Council and shall contain the name of the person securing
the permit, the date granted, the number, size and location of the encroachment
and when deemed necessary, a lease, the duration and cost of which to be
determined by the City Council following review and recommendation by the City
Engineer.
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits; Removal Of Encroachments: Upon
determination by the building official, City Engineer or other duly authorized
agent, that an encroachment is unsafe for persons or property, is in such a
state of repair as to render it useless, or when the encroachment becomes
loathsome to the senses, the City Council may, in its discretion:
      1.   Order suspension of the permits until such time that improvements
are completed to the satisfaction of the City Council. If said improvements are
not completed within sixty (60) days, said permit shall be revocable.
      2.   Order revocation of the permit for said encroachment. The City
Council may order removal within thirty (30) days after the issuance of written
notice of the revocation to the person maintaining the encroachment. If the
encroachment is not removed within thirty (30) days, the City Council shall
order the same abated as a nuisance and shall cause the cost thereof to be
assessed against the property of the permit grantee.
   The City Council has the right to revoke any encroachment permit at any
time. Reasons to revoke a permit may include: If the encroachment creates
conflicts with an aboveground or belowground existing or planned public utility
extension, future street widening or extension or any City construction
activity.
   E.   Notice Of Revocation: A copy of the resolution revoking the permit
required by this chapter shall be mailed to the person using or maintaining
such encroachment. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution revoking
such permit to such person at the address shown in the permit.
   F.   Removal Of Encroachment; Penalty: Any encroachment, constructed or
maintained without securing the permit required by section
5-1C-2 of this article, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be ordered
abated by the City Council. The cost shall be assessed against the property of
the person constructing, using or maintaining, or causing to be constructed,
used or maintained, any encroachment in connection with the real property
owned, leased or occupied by the person in violation of this chapter, who shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   G.   Expiration Of Permits: Permits granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire and become null and void if the construction or placement
of the obstruction or encroachment is not commenced within six (6) months of
the date of such permit, or if said construction or placement is suspended or
abandoned for a period of six (6) months or more after work has commenced.
(1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-02A, 5-19-2020)
5-1C-9: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Any person constructing, maintaining or using any area, vault, room or
any other encroachment, except as listed in section 5-1C-2 of this article
under, upon or in any part of any public property, shall obtain a permit
therefor from the City and shall pay to the City a fee set by resolution of the
Council for said permit and when required, additional lease fees. Said fee(s)
shall be collected by the City at the time of issuance of the permit.
   B.   Encroachments existing at the time of adoption of this section shall be
exempt from permit fee payments.
   C.   Religious organizations shall be exempt from the payment of fees
required by this article for property directly used by them for church or
hospital purposes. Charitable and benevolent organizations shall likewise be
exempt from the payment of such fees for the temporary use of streets and
alleys for construction purposes, upon application and approval by the City
Council. Any person who publishes a newspaper of general circulation, as
defined by Iowa law, and which installs delivery receptacles for such newspaper
in accordance with the terms of section 5-1C-2 of this article pertaining
thereto, shall likewise be exempt from the payment of the fees required by this
article. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
5-1C-10: TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS; DUMPSTERS IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Dumpsters In Public Right-Of-Way:
      1.   Definitions:
   ALLEY: A thoroughfare laid out, established and platted as such, by
constituted authority.
   DUMPSTER: Any solid waste container not eligible for disposal by the City
Sanitation Department.
   DUMPSTER PERMIT: Any thirty (30) day permit issued by the Engineering
Department for placement of a dumpster on a roadway.
   OWNER: The owner of the dumpster.
   ROADWAY: The entire width between property lines of a way designated as a
public street when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. (An alley is not considered
a roadway.)
   SUBSEQUENT DUMPSTER PERMIT: A permit issued within ninety (90) days of a
previously issued permit for use at the same address.
   B.   Temporary Encroachment: A dumpster placed in a roadway shall be
considered a temporary encroachment.
   C.   Liability Insurance: A dumpster shall not be placed in public right-of-
way unless the owner of the dumpster has filed with the City Clerk a
certificate of insurance showing coverage in amounts set by resolution of the
Council and per occurrence for damages to property or injuries to persons that
may be caused by the presence of the dumpster in the public right-of-way. The
City shall be an additional insured on the policy. The owner of a dumpster that
has damaged public property during placement or removal, shall reimburse the
City for said damages.
   D.   Approval Of Dumpster Placed In Right-Of-Way: The owner of the dumpster
shall contact the City Engineer, or designee, and request that a dumpster be
placed in the City right-of-way. The owner shall provide the proposed dumpster
location, intended use, size, time frame needed and any other information
necessary. If approved, the City Engineer, or designee, will grant permission
for the owner to place the dumpster in the City right-of-way.
   E.   Dumpster Permits: Except as hereinafter provided, a dumpster shall not
be placed or remain in a roadway unless the owner has a valid dumpster permit
from the Engineering Department.
      1.   Permit Application: The completed application for a permit to place
a dumpster on the public right-of-way shall be made by the owner of the
dumpster or the owner's designee to the Engineering Department on a form
available from the department. The application must be accompanied by a sketch
showing the approximate location of the dumpster.
      2.   Fees: The fee for a thirty (30) day dumpster permit shall be set by
resolution of the Council. Subsequent fees for each permit will be an
additional fee in the same dollar amount per thirty (30) days.
      3.   Issuance Of Permit: Dumpster permits shall be for a period of thirty
(30) days. No more than two (2) subsequent thirty (30) day dumpster permits
shall be issued for the same address within any given calendar year. The City
Engineer or designee reserves the right to waive the maximum of two (2)
subsequent permits. The City Engineer or designee may deny the permit
application or revoke a permit after issuance if there is noncompliance with
any of the requirements of this section or if a health or safety concern
arises.
   F.   Dumpster Safety Provisions: Dumpsters placed in the roadway shall not
need a permit if they meet the following criteria:
      1.   Both ends of the dumpster facing oncoming traffic have Department of
Transportation certified reflective tape of a minimum width of two inches (2");
said tape running in a continuous line or in a breaking pattern covering at
least fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter of the ends and located as close to
the extreme edges of the ends as possible.
      2.   Dumpster is placed not more than twelve inches (12") from the curb,
or, in the absence of a curb, from the edge of the traveled way and does not
extend more than nine feet (9') out from the curb or, in the absence of a curb,
from the edge of the traveled way.
      3.   Dumpster is not placed closer than thirty feet (30') from any
intersection or alley or provide a visibility barrier for the traveling public.
      4.   Dumpster complies with relevant traffic restrictions applicable to
motor traffic.
      5.   The dumpster does not remain in the roadway longer than fourteen
(14) days.
      6.   There is at least sixteen feet (16') of traveled way available along
the traveled side of a dumpster placed in a roadway.
      7.   The dumpster does not block a sidewalk.
   G.   Removal Of Dumpster:
      1.   The City Engineer or designee may determine that the location or
condition of a dumpster is a health or safety risk and require its removal from
any public right-of-way within twenty-four (24) hours.
      2.   The City Engineer or designee may determine that the owner of a
dumpster has not complied with the requirements under Paragraph F of this
section, and require removal or relocation of the dumpster.
   H.   Fines: Any owner of a dumpster in violation of the provisions of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of
two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 05-32, 11-15-2005; amd. 2017 Code; Ord.
24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE D. CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
5-1D-1: Definition
5-1D-2: Authority For Control Of Access
5-1D-3: Establishment
5-1D-4: Regulation Of Access
5-1D-5: Points Of Access Defined
5-1D-6: Unlawful Use Of Controlled Access Facilities
5-1D-1: DEFINITION:
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY: A highway or street specially designed for through
traffic and over, from or to which owners or occupants of abutting land, or
other persons, have no right of easement or only a controlled right of easement
for access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their property abuts
upon such controlled access facility or for any other reason. Such highways or
streets may be freeways open to use by all customary forms of street and
highway traffic or they may be parkways from which trucks, buses or other
commercial vehicles shall be excluded. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-2: AUTHORITY FOR CONTROL OF ACCESS:
The provisions of this article relating to control of access shall be deemed an
exercise of the police power of the City of Mason City pursuant to chapter 306,
Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety and
for the promotion of the general welfare. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-3: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk a list of controlled
access facilities as established by the Iowa Department of Transportation and
the City of Mason City. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-4: REGULATION OF ACCESS:
No person shall have any right of ingress or egress to, from or across the
controlled access facilities hereby established except at existing points of
access, or at points hereinafter designated or at such points as may be
hereafter jointly designated by the Iowa Department of Transportation. (Ord.
765, 1-20-1958)
5-1D-5: POINTS OF ACCESS DEFINED:
The points of access shall consist of accessways from abutting property to the
adjacent traffic lane or roadway and their locations and widths shall be in
compliance with the Iowa Department of Transportation's access agency for urban
areas. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958; amd. 1985 Code)
5-1D-6: UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central dividing section
or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access facilities.
   B.   Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening
provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
   C.   Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose
and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb,
separation section or line.
   D.   Drive any vehicle onto any controlled access facility from a local
service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the
dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the
controlled access facility property. (Ord. 765, 1-20-1958)
ARTICLE E. STREETLIGHT INSTALLATION
SECTION:
5-1E-1: Definitions
5-1E-2: Criteria For Installation
5-1E-3: Types Of Lighting
5-1E-4: Approval Process
5-1E-5: Installation
5-1E-1: DEFINITIONS:
LONG BLOCK: Any block longer than five hundred feet (500'), measured from
center of street to center of street.
LONG CUL-DE-SAC: Any cul-de-sac longer than three hundred fifty feet (350'),
measured from center of street to center line of cul-de-sac radius.
STREETLIGHT: A light placed within the street right-of-way for the purpose of
providing lighting for the safety of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
5-1E-2: CRITERIA FOR INSTALLATION:
Streetlights may be installed at all street intersections or as near to the
midblock as practical of a long block or at the end of a long cul-de-sac. (Ord.
97-9, 3-18-1997)
5-1E-3: TYPES OF LIGHTING:
All streetlights shall conform to City standards. The following list identifies
the possible types of luminaires and the approved mounting height and pole type
that may be used in the City. All other combinations need written approval from
the City Engineer. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
 
Wattage Luminaire Type    Mounting Height Pole Type
80      Roadway light LED 25 feet         Wood
108     Roadway light LED 25 feet         Wood
135     Roadway light LED 25 feet         Wood
270     Roadway light LED 25 feet         Wood
44      Pole topper LED   20 feet         Fiberglass
45      Pole topper LED   20 feet         Fiberglass
 
Note: LED means light emitting diode.
(Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
5-1E-4: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   If a streetlight request meets the criteria requirements in section
5-1E-2 of this article, the approval process concludes with a petition. The
affected area would be determined by the City Engineer and would include all
properties with frontage abutting the affected street(s). Petitions shall be
considered according to the following criteria:
      1.   Each adjoining property shall be allowed one (1) vote;
      2.   The vote for each property shall be awarded according to the
majority of owners of record on that property;
      3.   A simple majority shall dictate installation of a light;
      4.   A tie vote shall nullify the request for installation.
   B.   Once a legal petition is received and acted upon, a six (6) month
period would need to elapse before an additional petition to reverse the action
would be accepted. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
5-1E-5: INSTALLATION:
The streetlight shall be placed within the street right-of-way at street
intersections, midblocks of long blocks, or at the end of a long cul-de-sac.
Lights are to be placed at the lot lines nearest the midblock of long blocks as
practical or the end of long cul-de-sacs. All lights shall be staggered from
one (1) side of the street to the other where possible. (Ord. 97-9, 3-18-1997)
ARTICLE F. COMMERCIAL USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION:
5-1F-1: Definitions
5-1F-2: Use Of Public Right-Of-Way Restricted
5-1F-3: Use For Sidewalk Service Area
5-1F-4: Use For Sidewalk Sales
5-1F-5: Penalty
5-1F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
FOOD-PRIMARY ESTABLISHMENT: A business where the service of food, as opposed to
liquor, is the primary focus of the business and which meets the following
criteria:
   A.   Serves meals prepared on the premises for consumption on the premises;
   B.   Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
   C.   Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food and an
employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
   D.   Has a kitchen separate from the bar equipped with all of the following:
a stove, a griddle, a grill or broiler, and a food refrigeration unit with a
capacity in excess of twenty (20) cubic feet;
   E.   Operates the restaurant service during at least sixty percent (60%) of
the hours that the business is open to the public; and
   F.   Holds itself out to be a restaurant and advertises itself as a
restaurant if it advertises;
   G.   Includes a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, ice cream shop,
lunchroom or tearoom;
   H.   May also offer alcohol for sale on premises so long as the primary
function of the business is to serve food.
LIQUOR-PRIMARY ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment where the service of alcoholic
beverages directly to the public, as opposed to food, is the primary focus of
the business.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person traveling on foot or wheelchair.
PUBLIC PLAZA: A publicly owned open area, unobstructed from the ground to the
sky, that is bounded on not more than three (3) sides by the exterior walls of
one (1) or more buildings.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, walkway,
right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian travel
and dedicated to public use.
SIDEWALK: The improved portion of public right-of-way dedicated to pedestrian
circulation.
SIDEWALK SALES: The use of the public sidewalk or a public plaza for the
display and sale of merchandise.
SIDEWALK SERVICE AREA: An outdoor area located temporarily on a public sidewalk
or public plaza contiguous with and having direct access to any building
wherein a food-primary establishment or a liquor-primary establishment is
located, and where food or beverages are taken for consumption by persons
sitting or standing at tables in that area. (2017 Code)
5-1F-2: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTRICTED:
Use of public right-of-way or of a public plaza for any commercial purpose
shall be unlawful except as specifically authorized by this Code. (2017 Code)
5-1F-3: USE FOR SIDEWALK SERVICE AREA:
A permit for a sidewalk service area may be issued subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   Usable Area:
      1.   A sidewalk service area may not extend onto the sidewalk in a manner
that will not allow a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed sidewalk
adjacent to the street for pedestrian use, nor extend into a public plaza in a
manner that will not allow an unobstructed twenty foot (20') fire lane.
      2.   No tables and chairs shall be placed in street corner areas defined
by building lines extended to the street, and no closer than ten feet (10')
from an alley.
      3.   The area for a sidewalk service area shall be delineated during the
hours of operation by ropes or some other suitable method which shall be
clearly visible to pedestrians. If required by the City Council, tables, chairs
and other items are not required to be removed at the end of each day's
operation unless required as a condition of approval by the City Council,
provided that all items are secure from unauthorized removal or impact from
wind or weather. No materials shall be stored on the public right-of-way.
      4.   A sidewalk service area may not utilize any public amenities such as
benches, seats, tables or trash receptacles.
      5.   No person shall sell or display merchandise, or permit the sale or
display of merchandise, under this subsection until he or she has first
obtained liability insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability
insurance policy insuring the said person and the City and its officers and
employees, against liability which might arise out of the display or sale of
merchandise by such person upon the public right-of-way or public plaza, in an
amount at least equal to the maximum statutory liability of the City, its
officers and employees. The City, together with its officers and employees,
shall be named as additional insured in the said liability insurance policy,
and shall meet all other requirements established by the City.
   B.   Days And Hours Of Operation:
      1.   The sidewalk service area may be operated and used any time of the
year. Outdoor heating units, if used, must meet all applicable Building and
Fire Codes.
      2.   Sidewalk service areas shall be set up and operated each day only
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
The City Council may, as part of the initial permit approval, impose more
restrictive hours.
   C.   Sidewalk Service Area Permit Required:
      1.   Establishments must apply for and obtain a sidewalk service area
permit from the City prior to operation. Each applicant shall file an initial
application with the Development Services Director, on forms provided by the
city and containing all pertinent information as the city may require, and
shall agree to abide by state and local laws governing use of public right-of-
way. Establishments dispensing any alcoholic beverage must do so under state
and local law.
      2.   The City Administrator may grant an interim sidewalk service area
permit, provided that the applicant provides sufficient information to show
that the requirements of this article will be met, fees are paid, and proof of
insurance as required in subparagraph 10, below, is submitted. Alcoholic
beverages may not be sold or consumed within the interim sidewalk service area
unless and until a validly issued alcohol outdoor service area permit is
approved by the City Council. During the period the interim sidewalk service
area permit is in effect, the owner or proprietor of the adjacent or abutting
business shall submit a formal sidewalk service area permit application for
review and approval or disapproval by the City Council, and meet all
requirements of this article. The interim encroachment permit shall expire on
the date that the City Council approves a formal sidewalk service area permit,
or after ninety (90) days have passed, whichever is sooner.
      3.   An initial sidewalk service area permit shall be reviewed by the
City Council. The Council may impose conditions upon the use of public property
to ensure protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
      4.   A sidewalk service area permit shall be issued in conjunction with
yearly renewals of alcoholic beverage licenses/permits, or one (1) year from
the date of issuance for establishments not dispensing alcohol. The initial
application may be less than the one (1) year period to coincide with existing
alcoholic beverage licenses/permits, and will require full payment.
      5.   Annual renewals shall be reviewed by the Development Services
Director. If the sidewalk service area continues to operate in accordance with
the initial permit, the renewal shall be granted. The Development Services
Director may impose any conditions he/she deems necessary to minimize the
impact of the sidewalk service area on neighboring properties and to ensure
that the sidewalk service area does not pose a threat to public health and
safety. If the Development Services Director determines that the operation,
scope or area of the sidewalk service area have changed significantly from that
approved in the initial permit, he/she may require the owner or operator to
submit a new permit for review by the City Council.
      6.   An annual fee for a sidewalk service area permit shall be
established by Council resolution.
      7.   An applicant for a sidewalk service area who intends to serve
alcoholic beverages must file an application for and obtain an outdoor service
area permit from the State of Iowa.
      8.   The city shall retain the right to terminate the sidewalk service
area permit but only after written notice of violation has been given and the
time to cure the violation has expired. Grounds for termination of the sidewalk
service area permit shall include, but not be limited to, violations of the
state and local liquor control laws, violations of the sidewalk service area
permit, and creating a safety hazard, health hazard and/or public nuisance
under state or local law. Additionally, the city retains the right to terminate
the sidewalk service area permit and direct removal of sidewalk service area
operations if, after deliberation, the City Administrator determines there is a
substantial and reasonable need for use of the public right-of-way for a valid
public purpose.
      9.   The use of public right-of-way permitted shall in no way interfere
with access to public or city utilities located and/or operated within the
city's public right-of-way. In addition, each applicant shall be required to
provide a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the city, and shall agree to
hold the city harmless against any and all liability arising from
interruptions, accidents or other actions arising from the sidewalk cafe
operation or location in the public right-of-way.
      10.   No person shall establish, operate, or be issued a permit for a
sidewalk service area under this subsection until he or she has first obtained
liability insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability insurance
policy insuring the said person and the city and its officers and employees,
against liability which might arise out of the display or sale of merchandise
by such person upon the public right-of-way in an amount of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) cumulative. Failure to obtain such insurance shall be a
misdemeanor violation of this code. The city, together with its officers and
employees, shall be named as additional insured in the said liability insurance
policy, and shall meet all other requirements established by the city.
   D.   Operation Of Sidewalk Service Area:
      1.   The City retains the right to limit the number of sidewalk service
areas in subsection A of this section.
      2.   Other than signs permitted in title 12 of this Code, signs shall not
be permitted in the sidewalk cafe area except on chairs, tables, umbrellas or
other amenities, as approved by the City. The amenities used in the sidewalk
cafe area shall be maintained in good condition.
      3.   The sidewalk serving area must be arranged to allow for access to
building entrances. No blockage of building entrances or exits shall be
permitted in a sidewalk cafe area.
      4.   Additional restroom capacity may be required to comply with local
Building and Housing Codes.
      5.   Occupancy limits shall be determined as set forth in title 10,
"Building Regulations", of this Code.
      6.   Sidewalk service areas shall be subject to inspection at least
annually or at any other time at the direction of the City.
      7.   A sidewalk service area operated by a liquor-primary establishment
must have an employee monitoring the area at all times during the hours liquor
is consumed.
      8.   "Bring your own bottle of liquor" (BYOB) is not allowed in any
sidewalk service area. Any alcoholic beverage possessed or consumed in the
sidewalk service area must have been sold by the sidewalk service area permit
holder.
      9.   The sidewalk service area permit holder shall be responsible for
trash removal and must maintain the area and surrounding five feet (5') in a
clean and litter free manner during all hours of operation, and shall restore
the area and surrounding five feet (5') to its normal condition as a
pedestrianway and litter free after operation each day.
      10.   The operation of any sidewalk service area shall be in conformity
with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations. (2017 Code;
amd. Ord. 2020-02, 5-19-2020)
5-1F-4: USE FOR SIDEWALK SALES:
      Mason City may, with advance written notice to the Director of the
Development Services Department (Director), use a limited part of a sidewalk or
plaza that immediately adjoins the premises of such retail business for the
display and sale of its merchandise. The Director may impose additional
reasonable restrictions upon, or withdraw approval of, the use of any sidewalk
or public plaza for retail sales where necessary in his or her judgment to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare or to prevent a nuisance
from developing or continuing.
   A.   The display and/or sale of merchandise shall not be permitted in any
portion of the sidewalk or public plaza where normal pedestrian traffic flow is
obstructed.
   B.   No display racks, tables or other equipment of any kind shall be
placed, or permitted to remain, on the sidewalk or public plaza during any
period when merchandise is not displayed and available for purchase. While such
merchandise is displayed or available for purchase, all racks, tables and other
equipment shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   C.   The use of a portion of the sidewalk or public plaza for retail display
or sale shall not be an exclusive use. All public improvements including, but
not limited to, trees, light poles, traffic signals, pull boxes or manholes, or
any public initiated maintenance procedures or work, shall take precedence over
the use of the public sidewalk at all times. The merchandise and display racks,
tables and equipment shall be removed from the sidewalk or public plaza
immediately to permit such public initiated maintenance procedures or work.
   D.   No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the sidewalk or public plaza
at any time in connection with the sidewalk sale.
   E.   This section applies to and permits only the sale and display of
merchandise and goods, and does not permit the sale, display or provision of
services on the sidewalk or public plaza. This section does not apply to or
allow the display and sale of merchandise and goods on sidewalks or public
plazas by transient vendors or other persons who do not operate retail business
in a building on the property adjoining the public sidewalk or public plaza
where the display and sales take place.
   F.   No person shall sell or display merchandise, or permit the sale or
display of merchandise, under this section until he or she has first obtained
liability insurance or an amendment or rider to an existing liability insurance
policy insuring the said person and the City and its officers and employees,
against liability which might arise out of the display or sale of merchandise
by such person upon the public sidewalk in amounts set by resolution of the
Council per occurrence and cumulative. Failure to obtain such insurance shall
be a misdemeanor violation of this Code. The City, together with its officers
and employees, shall be named as additional insured in the said liability
insurance policy, and shall meet all other requirements established by the
City. (2017 Code; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
5-1F-5: PENALTY:
Any violation of this article shall be considered a Municipal infraction as
provided for in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this Code. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. SIDEWALKS KEPT CLEAN, FREE FROM SNOW AND ICE
SECTION:
5-1G-1: Definitions
5-1G-2: Owner/Occupant Responsibilities
5-1G-3: City May Remove Snow And Ice; Notice
5-1G-4: Unlawful Deposit Of Snow And/Or Ice
5-1G-5: Administration Of Costs
5-1G-6: Right To Assess
5-1G-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCUMULATIONS: Snow and/or ice deposits.
PERSON: An individual or group or association of individuals; a firm or any
member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer, manager, person in
charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying one (1) gender
shall include both genders.
SNOWFALL: Any snow, ice or wind event that cause accumulations on sidewalks.
(Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-2: OWNER/OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
As set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa, the abutting property owner is
responsible for the removal of the accumulations of snow and/or ice within
forty eight (48) hours of snowfall from the entire width of the sidewalk and
may be liable for damages caused by the failure of the abutting property owners
to use reasonable care in the removal of accumulations. It shall be prohibited
for any property owner to allow accumulations to remain on sidewalks abutting
the owner's property for more than forty eight (48) hours after snowfall.
Whenever it shall not be practicable to remove the snow and/or ice from such
sidewalk by reason of the accumulation of snow and ice being frozen to the
sidewalk, then the owner or occupant shall keep and maintain such accumulations
spread with fine cinders and/or sand in such a manner as to provide traction
and prevent the sidewalk from being dangerous to pedestrians. Nothing in this
article shall be construed to be a substitute for the removal of accumulations
of snow and/or ice. This article shall only apply when accumulations cannot be
reasonably removed, however, all accumulations shall be removed as soon as
practical. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-3: CITY MAY REMOVE SNOW AND ICE; NOTICE:
   A.   Whenever the occupant or owner of any such lot or parcel of ground
abutting a sidewalk shall fail or refuse to remove the accumulation or to
sprinkle material upon frozen ice, as required by section
5-1G-2 of this article, the Development Services Department may serve a notice
upon the property owner as determined from the records of the County Auditor by
one (1) or more of the following, as necessary:
      1.   Posting a notice on the front door or main entry to the building;
      2.   Personal service, if the owner can be served within the City limits;
      3.   United States first class mail, if the owner lives within any zip
code that is within or contiguous to the boundaries of Cerro Gordo County.
      4.   United States certified mail with return receipt, if the owner
cannot be served according to any of the above methods.
   B.   The notice shall direct that snow and ice shall be removed to create
safe passage within twenty four (24) hours after the completed service of
notice. Said notice shall set forth those actions which are required of the
property owner.
   C.   If the owner/occupant fails to perform the action required in the
notice of abatement within the time prescribed therein, the City may proceed to
clear said sidewalks of snow and ice and may assess the actual cost and expense
thereof against each such lot or parcel of ground. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008; amd.
2017 Code; Ord. 20-12, 12-15-2020)
5-1G-4: UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF SNOW AND/OR ICE:
No person shall remove, or cause to be removed, accumulations from private
premises and deposit the same or cause the same to be deposited upon any public
street, avenue, alley, public square or traveled area within the City. (Ord.
08-14, 10-7-2008)
5-1G-5: ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS:
In addition to the actual cost of removing accumulations or treatment of
accumulations from sidewalks abutting private property, an administrative fee,
as adopted by resolution of the City Council shall be paid by the owner of said
property.
The property owner shall be sent a bill for said costs to permit voluntary
payment thereof by the property owner. Failure to pay said bill within the
stated time period on the bill will cause the action to appear on a schedule of
assessments to be forwarded to the City Clerk for consideration by the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008; amd. Ord. 21-3, 3-2-2021)
5-1G-6: RIGHT TO ASSESS:
When the City causes to be removed accumulations and/or treats accumulations,
the City may assess the actual cost plus any administrative costs for removing
such accumulations from the abutting property owners' sidewalks and/or
treatment of irremovable accumulations. (Ord. 08-14, 10-7-2008)
ARTICLE H. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS
SECTION:
5-1H-1: Owner Responsibility
5-1H-2: Violation; Enforcement
5-1H-1: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
As provided for in Iowa Code Section 364.12, an abutting property owner shall
maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines upon public streets and shall keep such area in a safe condition, free
from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards. In the absence of a curb, such
property shall extend from the property line to that portion of the public
street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner
shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly
owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but is not limited to,
timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter and debris. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain
the publicly owned property or right-of-way. (Ord. 22-10, 8-2-2022)
5-1H-2: VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this Article shall constitute a public
nuisance pursuant to applicable provisions of Title 4, Chapter 1 of this Code
and shall be enforced accordingly. (Ord. 22-10, 8-2-2022)
CHAPTER 2
PUBLIC PARKS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Control, Supervision
5-2-2: Park Rules
5-2-1: CONTROL, SUPERVISION:
As set forth in section 364.12, Iowa Code, the City Council has established
that all public parks, including dedicated pedestrian and bicycle paths owned
or maintained by the City, shall be under the direct supervision and control of
the Park and Recreation Board 1  which is empowered to make and prescribe rules
and regulations additional to those prescribed by this chapter for the control
and custody of the parks, pedestrian and bicycle paths within the park system
of the City.
   A.   No person shall ride or drive any motorized vehicle in the parks, or on
any pedestrian or bicycle paths included in the park system, except on
established roads, and then only at a moderate rate of speed and in no event at
a rate of speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
Exception: Emergency vehicles. (Ord. 93-17, 7-20-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 5 of this Code.
5-2-2: PARK RULES:
The following rules are hereby prescribed and shall be observed by all persons
in or upon the public parks of the City:
   A.   No person shall ride or drive in the parks except on established roads
and ways, and then only at a moderate rate of speed, and in no event at a rate
of speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour.
   B.   Motor vehicles may be parked only in places provided therefor and must
be parked in such a manner so as not to obstruct the roadway.
   C.   No person shall hitch a horse or other animal except where there are
hitching posts provided for such purpose.
   D.   No person shall deface or injure any building, tree, shrub or plant, or
other improvements made in or about the parks, or disturb or interfere with
birds, animals, fish, flowers or plants kept or found therein.
   E.   No fire shall be laid or made except in fireplaces or stoves provided
therefor.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to use arms, explosives or weapons of any kind
within a City park. (1953 Code § 17-2)
   G.   No person shall scatter or litter the grounds or riverbanks with any
form of garbage or waste material, including fish of any kind. All litter,
garbage, papers and refuse must be deposited in the receptacles provided
therefor.
Exception: Fish shall not be placed in the receptacles. (Ord. 97-21, 9-2-1997)
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any violent, obscene or
profane language while in any park, or to conduct himself in a disorderly or
obscene manner, or to commit any nuisance in or about the park.
   I.   No person shall throw any foreign or waste substance into the water
within or adjoining the parks; nor shall any person swim or bathe in the water
therein, except at such places as may be directed by the Park and Recreation
Board and marked by signs erected in the park.
   J.   No person shall enter upon any portion of the ground in disregard of
signs or posted notices forbidding the same.
   K.   It shall be unlawful for any person to transact business of any kind or
give entertainment or hold public meetings or assemblies or to establish or
occupy a camp within any park except upon the written permission of the Park
and Recreation Board.
   L.   All picnic parties, assemblies, entertainments and other uses made of
the park shall occupy only the grounds designated for use for such purposes.
(1953 Code § 17-2)
   M.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess or consume any
alcoholic beverage in the following City parks: Lester Milligan Park/Big Blue
Pond, Pierce Pond, Ray Rorick Park, West Park and Parker's Woods. Under special
circumstances, a variance of this subsection can be obtained by appearing
before the Mason City Park and Recreation Board. (Ord. 03-8, 4-15-2003)
   N.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be within any of the
parks between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. the following morning, except that the pedestrians may use the sidewalks
of Central Park for the purpose of crossing same. (1953 Code § 17-2)
   O.   It shall be unlawful for any person who walks or takes an animal upon
any public park property or playground to do so without said animal being
attached to a leash or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal and
not more than six feet (6') in length when said leash or chain is held by a
person competent to restrain and control the animal off the premises. Said
person or handler shall clean up, remove and dispose of solid waste excreted or
deposited upon such public or private property. This subsection shall not apply
to animals under the direct control of a handicapped person which are specially
trained for the purpose of assisting handicapped persons.
Exception: When animal(s) are included in activities such as a kennel club
show, field trial or other special event. (Ord. 94-26, 11-15-1994)
   P.   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any use of a parkway within
a public park in the City in disregard of or contrary to signs or posted
notices which may be installed by direction of the Park and Recreation Board.
(Ord. 1156, 6-7-1971)
   Q.   It shall be unlawful for any watercraft or boat that is gasoline
powered or has a gasoline mounted motor to enter Big Blue Pond in Lester
Milligan Park.
Exception: Emergency personnel and vehicles.
   R.   It shall be unlawful to power a boat on Pierce Pond in Lester Milligan
Park with a gasoline powered motor; however, a boat may have a gasoline powered
motor mounted on it but it must be out of the water.
Exception: Emergency personnel and vehicles. (Ord. 04-21, 7-20-2004)
CHAPTER 3
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title And Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: City Forester
5-3-4: Street Parkings In Excess Of Certain Distances
5-3-5: Permit To Plant Or Remove Trees
5-3-6: Applications For Permits
5-3-7: Applications For Commercial Areas
5-3-8: Issuance Of Permit
5-3-9: Rules Of Construction
5-3-10: Regulations For Planting Trees And Shrubs
5-3-11: Prohibited Species Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-12: Permitted Species Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-13: Maintenance Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-14: Protection Of Trees And Shrubs
5-3-15: Tree Diseases And Pests
5-3-16: Nuisance; Notice Of Abatement, Removal
5-3-17: Charges For Abating Nuisance
5-3-18: Statement Of Costs
5-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
As set out in section 364.12, Code of Iowa, setting forth the authority to
adopt regulations by the City Council, this chapter shall be known as and may
be cited as the STREET TREE ORDINANCE of the City of Mason City. (Ord. 15-07,
7-28-2015)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BOULEVARD: Any unpaved portion of a public street located between opposing
travel lanes.
CUL-DE-SAC ISLAND: The unpaved portion of a public street located between the
opposing travel lanes.
INSIDE EDGE OF CURB: That side of the curb nearest the outside edge of the
public sidewalk.
OUTSIDE EDGE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALK: That edge of the public sidewalk nearest the
public roadway.
STREET PARKING: That portion of the public street located between the outside
edge of the public sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-
2015)
5-3-3: CITY FORESTER:
The Operations and Maintenance Manager/Street Supervisor, as agent, shall
perform the duties of City Forester for the City and shall have charge, custody
and control of all trees and shrubs growing now or hereafter in any street
parking, public parks, boulevards and public places in the City and shall have
the power to plant, care for and otherwise maintain such trees and shrubs.
(Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-4: STREET PARKINGS IN EXCESS OF CERTAIN DISTANCES:
   A.   Trees may be planted in street parking where the unpaved distance
between the outside edge of the sidewalk and the inside edge of the curb is
more than four and one-half feet (41/2'), and less than six feet (6') may have
plantings that will not exceed thirty feet (30') in height and spread of not
more than ten feet (10') when fully grown. Such planting shall be made after
first making application for and obtaining a written permit from the City
Forester.
   B.   Trees to be planted in street parking in excess of six feet (6') shall
be for a species conforming with the approved species set forth by the City
Forester.
   C.   All planting shall be done after a permit has been obtained from the
City Forester, after first having submitted an application containing
information as set forth in sections
5-3-7,
5-3-8 and
5-3-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-5: PERMIT TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES:
No person shall plant, move, trim or remove any tree in any street parking,
boulevard, park or public place in the City nor cause such action to be done by
others without first obtaining a written permit from the City Forester.
Contractors hired to trim or remove a tree on the public right-of-way or
property shall be required to obtain a written permit from the City Forester
and have sufficient liability insurance, and obtain a license issued by the
City Clerk's Office before performing tree service within the community.
Exception: Annual plants and flowers whose maximum mature height is less than
thirty six inches (36") may be planted in any street parking and boulevard
without obtaining a permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-6: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Said application shall be accompanied by a plan or drawing which shall
accurately show:
   A.   The property of the applicant adjacent to the street parking upon which
a permit to plant is sought, along with the existing public sidewalk, street,
parking area and curb located between the applicant's property line and the
outside edge of the curb, all of which shall be to a definite indicated scale.
   B.   The species and location of each tree proposed to be planted and of
those trees already existing in the street parking, also in definite scale.
   C.   The location of any fire hydrant, utility poles, street light pole and/
or mailbox or other obstructions located upon the street parking, all of which
shall be in scaled relation to the other information required. (Ord. 15-07, 7-
28-2015)
5-3-7: APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AREAS:
Trees may be planted in an area where the outside edge of the sidewalk runs
continuously to the inside edge of the curb, provided the plantings be a
minimum of three feet (3') from the inside edge of the curb, and that before
any tree may be planted in such areas, the owner of the property adjacent to
said street parking must first make application to and secure a permit from the
City Forester as hereinafter provided.
   A.   Application Data:
      1.   Local address of the applicant's property which is adjacent to the
street parking upon which a permit to plant is sought;
      2.   The species, number, height and trunk diameter of each tree proposed
to be planted; and
      3.   Any additional information which the City Forester shall deem is
reasonably necessary to enable the making of a fair determination of whether or
not a permit should be issued hereunder; and
      4.   The recommendations, along with comments, if any, by the City
Planner, electrical inspector, current communications company, current power
company and the Iowa Department of Transportation when the street parking abuts
the extension of a primary highway within the City.
   B.   Application Plan Or Drawing: Application plan or drawing shall be as
set forth in section
5-3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-8: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The City Forester may, after review and consideration of any application as
above required, issue a permit to an applicant. Any such permit issued shall be
to plant trees in strict compliance with terms and provisions of this chapter
and the application and plan or drawing as finally approved by the City
Forester, a copy of which said finally approved application and plan and
drawing shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Forester. All such
permits shall be issued upon the express condition that they may be revoked at
any time by the City Forester and that all trees planted pursuant to said
permit may be removed by the City without liability to any person for such
removal.
Further, no such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have executed
and filed with the City Forester an indemnification agreement whereby said
applicant agrees to save and hold harmless the City from any and all liability
for damage or injury to person or property proximately caused by trees planted
pursuant to said permit. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-9: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purpose of determining the distance under sections
5-3-6 and
5-3-7 of this chapter, where there is no existing public sidewalk or curb, then
it shall be assumed that such improvements have been installed and the location
and dimensions of such improvement shall be as determined by the City Engineer
based upon projected improvements. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-10: REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING TREES AND SHRUBS:
   A.   All trees planted in any street parking area under this chapter shall
be planted in strict accordance with the following regulations:
      1.   All trees planted under section
5-3-7 of this chapter in an area where the outside edge of the public sidewalk
runs continuously to the inside edge of the curb so that there is no unpaved
distance between the outside edge of the public sidewalk and the inside edge of
the curb shall be planted in the center of an area which is at least thirty six
inches (36") square and the outside line of said square area shall be the
inside edge of the curb. Said planting area may be adjusted to accommodate
underground utilities; however, the size of the tree trunk at maturity shall be
considered to alleviate damage to sidewalks and curbs. Offset of tree planting
shall meet all conditions.
      2.   All trees planted under section
5-3-6 of this chapter shall be planted at a point in the street parking at a
distance of forty percent (40%) of the parking width from the outside edge of
the public sidewalk and a distance of sixty percent (60%) of the parking width
from the inside edge of the curb. The City Forester shall determine the species
and the planting site whenever overhead utility wires are present.
      3.   All trees hereafter planted in any street parking, except section
5-3-7 of this chapter, shall be at least twenty feet (20') from any
intersection street right-of-way line; at least ten feet (10') from any fire
hydrant, alley and driveway; at least one-half (1/2) the diameter of the tree
canopy at maturity of the tree, from a light standard or transmission poles.
Spacing between trees shall be dependent upon species and variety of tree being
planted. Standard or large growing trees shall be at least three-fourths inch
(3/4") to one inch (1") in diameter, six inches (6") above the ground and at
least five feet (5') to six feet (6') tall. Small growing trees such as
flowering and ornamental trees shall be at least four feet (4') to five feet
(5') tall and have five (5) or more branches.
      4.   Hereafter, the total number of any tree species planted on the
parking within a specified block shall equal no more than ten percent (10%) of
the combined total number of tree species that are or may be planted on the
parking within that block, except the percentage may be increased by special
permission of the City Forester.
   B.   Shrubs may be planted in cul-de-sac islands only after a planting plan
for said shrubs shall be approved by the City Forester after a statement shall
be submitted in writing assuming responsibility for maintenance of said shrubs;
said responsibility assumption shall be made by adjacent property owners or an
area homeowners' association. Said responsibility shall transfer with property
ownership. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-11: PROHIBITED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Hereafter, it shall be unlawful to plant any of the following described species
of trees and shrubbery upon any street parking in the City along with any new
species and varieties that are known to be or which may become a public
nuisance:
American elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be
planted.
Ash.
Birch - river birch, white or paper birch, etc.
Black locust.
Box elder.
Catalpa.
Chinese or Siberian elm - elm species that are certified to be disease
resistant may be planted.
Common fruit trees.
Conifers (evergreens).
Cottonwood.
Ginkgo (female only).
Hawthorn - except thornless variety.
Mulberry, common.
Poplars.
Russian olive.
Silver maple.
Sumac.
Trees bearing large nuts, i.e., walnut, hickory, butternut.
Willow.
All species of shrubbery, except as provided in subsection
5-3-10B of this chapter. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-12: PERMITTED SPECIES OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
Elm - elm species that are certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
Ginkgo (male).
Hackberry.
Hard maple - allowed but not recommended due to over population of maples at
this time and susceptibility to the Asian longhorn beetle.
Hawthorn - (only thornless varieties allowed) to be used when overhead utility
wires are present and the parking is more than ten feet (10').
Japanese lilac - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the
parking is more than ten feet (10').
Kentucky coffeetree.
Linden.
Locust - excluding black locust.
Oak.
Tatarian maple - to be used when overhead utility wires are present and the
parking is more than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
5-3-13: MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
It shall be the duty of all property owners having trees and shrubbery abutting
or overhanging any public property, street parking, public alleys, public
sidewalks and other public property:
   A.   To keep all trees pruned so that the lower branches are not less than
eight feet (8') in height above public sidewalks, sixteen feet (16') above the
traveled portion of all public streets, public alleys and primary highways.
   B.   To remove all dead, damaged and broken limbs and trees; all limbs and
trees which are or may become dangerous to travel upon the public way and all
limbs and trees that obstruct the natural flow of any meandering public streams
within the City limits.
   C.   To maintain all trees, shrubbery, hedges, bushes, vines or plants in
such a manner so as not to interfere with the vision of drivers of vehicles
approaching any intersection, street or alley.
   D.   To keep all trees trimmed so as not to unduly obstruct street lights or
traffic signs and traffic signals.
   E.   While performing any of the preceding maintenance to trees controlled
by the City, the Arborist Department may clear any privately owned tree not
conforming to this chapter and retain the option to assess the charge to the
property owner(s).
   F.   In the event a tree is located upon the property lot line and City
property, the cost of maintaining or removal shall be equally shared by both
parties. The property owner shall reserve the option to obtain cost estimates
by a private contractor and said costs shall be approved by the City Forester
before said work is done. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-14: PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS:
No person shall break, deface, injure, kill or destroy any tree or shrub in any
street parking, park or public place in the City. Also, no person shall place
or permit any toxic, liquid, gaseous or solid substances to seep, drain or be
placed on or about any public tree or shrub. During all public building and
construction operations, the contractor or builder shall erect protective
barriers around all trees during the period of construction. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-
2015)
5-3-15: TREE DISEASES AND PESTS:
All trees infected with any declared pest such as Dutch elm disease, emerald
ash borer or any diseases or pests declared at a later date are hereby declared
to be nuisances, and the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property
whereon such tree or trees are located is hereby ordered to remove such tree or
trees or use a proven method of treatment to eliminate or stop the declared
disease or pest. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-16: NUISANCE; NOTICE OF ABATEMENT, REMOVAL:
The property owner, as shown by the records of the County Auditor, shall remove
said tree or any portion thereof at the owner's expense within thirty (30) days
after receiving a notice to abate said nuisance from the City Forester. In the
event the owner does not perform the acts necessary to remove and abate said
nuisance(s) within the time set forth in said notice, the City may perform or
contract the required action and assess the costs thereof against the property
upon which the nuisance is located. (Ord. 15-07, 7-28-2015)
5-3-17: CHARGES FOR ABATING NUISANCE:
If the City abates the said nuisance, charges for equipment use and labor shall
be assessed against the property. Charges under this section shall be set by
resolution of the Council. (Ord. 23-11, 8-1-2023)
5-3-18: STATEMENT OF COSTS:
At such time as the City Forester has removed or abated any nuisance
hereinbefore authorized, he shall prepare a certified statement of all costs
and expenses connected therewith and shall submit such statement or statements
to the Finance Director to be billed to the property owner. If the statement is
left unpaid, it shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with the legal
description prepared by the City Engineer of the property involved, and the
City Clerk shall thereupon certify such cost to the County Auditor and it shall
then be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes. (Ord.
15-07, 7-28-2015)
CHAPTER 4
STREAMS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Obstructing Streams
5-4-1: OBSTRUCTING STREAMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without prior approval from the City, to:
(Ord. 87-2, 2-2-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
   A.   Shovel, rake, throw or deposit in any manner any garbage, refuse, yard
waste, dirt or any other material into any stream or creek, or upon the bank of
any river, stream or creek, and the above specific enumerations shall not in
any way limit the general enumerations. (Ord. 93-17, 7-20-1993)
   B.   Change or attempt to change the course of any stream or creek.
   C.   Dig or dredge the banks of any stream or creek in the City or alter in
any manner whatsoever the banks of any such streams or creeks. (Ord. 909, 3-18-
1963)
TITLE 6
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Extension Of Water Mains
6-1-2: Excavation Affecting Water System
6-1-3: Connections Prior To Street Improvements
6-1-4: Permit Required And Fees; Water Service Connections
6-1-5: Service Connections
6-1-6: Extension Of Existing Service
6-1-7: Abandonment Of Service
6-1-8: Service Lines Shall Run To Street
6-1-9: Repairs Of Service Lines
6-1-10: City Not Liable
6-1-11: Right To Shut Off Water
6-1-12: Meters Furnished; Protection
6-1-13: Location Of Meters
6-1-14: Testing Of Meters
6-1-15: Payment Of Charges
6-1-16: Discontinuance Of Service
6-1-17: Fire Hydrants
6-1-18: Private Fire Hydrants
6-1-19: Sprinkler Systems
6-1-20: Closing Of Valves
6-1-21: Backflow Prevention Device
6-1-1: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS:
Water mains may be extended at the discretion of the City Engineer and said
City Engineer may require that the cost of such extension be paid by owners of
property that would be served by such extension. All water mains or extensions
thereof shall be installed by and under the direction of the City Engineer. No
water main or extension thereof shall be installed in any street or property
until the same shall have been brought to grade; and, provided further, that
the property to be connected to said water main is accessible to sewer
connections and sewer connections have been arranged for, subject to the City
Council's direction. (Ord. 1579, 10-6-1980; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 90-27, 12-18-
1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-2: EXCAVATION AFFECTING WATER SYSTEM:
No excavation which may involve the uncovering of any part of any main, water
pipe, fixture or appliance of the waterworks system of the City shall be begun
or made in any street, alley or public ground until the excavator shall have
secured the permit from the Engineering Department, which permit shall
designate the place and limits of the proposed excavation. The City Engineer
shall require that proper protection be made for all such mains, pipes,
fixtures and appliances. No excavation involving such mains, pipes, fixtures or
appliances shall be refilled until inspection of the work shall have been made
by the City Engineer and his written permission obtained therefor. (1953 Code §
81-4; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-3: CONNECTIONS PRIOR TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Whenever the Council has ordered any street permanently improved by paving, the
Council shall thereupon notify the City Engineer of the passage of the
resolution of necessity and it shall thereupon be the duty of the City Engineer
to report to the Council the lots and names of the owners thereof, and the
number and location of the required connections from any water mains or pipes
to the curb line of the abutting and adjacent property. The City Engineer shall
notify, a minimum of six (6) weeks prior to commencement of work, the above
mentioned property owners of the upcoming street improvements. The property
owner shall have the ability to install the services before the street
improvements commence. (Ord. 97-6, 3-4-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1-4: PERMIT REQUIRED AND FEES; WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   A.   A permit for water service connections shall be obtained from the
Engineering Department by a City licensed excavating contractor for the
property to be served, and such permit shall state the streets and house number
where service is desired, the size of tap required and the approximate location
where such service will enter the premises. This permit shall be and constitute
an acceptance by the applicant of all the provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances now existing or hereafter passed having reference to the
waterworks system, and all the rules and regulations of the City and the
Engineering Department relating to the waterworks system, and all such
ordinances, rules and regulations shall be a part of the contract between the
City and such applicant. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990;
2017 Code)
   B.   The permit and inspection fee for each water service, new installation
or repair and for each water service disconnection shall be set by resolution
of the Council, payable at said time permit is issued; and the same shall be
issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the applicant and one (1)
filed with the Engineering Department. The fee schedule for time and materials
charges for water service connections shall be set by resolution of the
Council. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code; Ord. 24-
3,2-20-2024)
6-1-5: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
All service connections with the City water main between the main and the meter
shall be installed by a City licensed excavating contractor. All repairs
ordered by the Water Supply Department shall be charged to the property owner.
All service lines from the corporation in the main to the meter are the
property of the owner and shall meet City specifications. All service lines
must be installed and maintained at the expense of the property to be served.
(Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-6: EXTENSION OF EXISTING SERVICE:
No service line shall be extended nor shall additional connections thereto be
made without special written permission of the City Engineer after full
investigation of the proposed changes or extension. (1953 Code § 15-9; amd.
Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-7: ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE:
Whenever a service line is abandoned due to demolition of structure(s) and no
use is made of the property within two (2) years, the corporation cock must be
closed at the main. The expense thereof shall be charged against the property.
(1953 Code § 15-10; amd. 1985 Code)
6-1-8: SERVICE LINES SHALL RUN TO STREET:
Service lines shall not be installed across lots or buildings to adjoining
premises, but all service lines must run to the property to be serviced
directly from the mains from an adjacent street or alley. (1953 Code § 15-11)
6-1-9: REPAIRS OF SERVICE LINES:
Whenever a service line becomes out of repair or develops a leak, it shall be
the duty of the property owners to immediately authorize its repair or the
installation of a new service. Failure of the property owner to authorize any
such work shall subject the property to the immediate discontinuance of
service. (1953 Code § 15-12)
6-1-10: CITY NOT LIABLE:
The City shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of or leakage
from any service pipe or apparatus, main or water coil or meter, or on account
of the failure in the supply of water or the pressure thereof. In turning on
water, the City shall not be responsible for any damage that may occur by
reason of improper fixtures, open or imperfect connections, or from any other
cause. (1953 Code § 15-13)
6-1-11: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The City reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water
in its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions or for other
purposes; and no claim shall be made against the City by reason of breakage of
any service pipe or service cock or from any other damage that may result from
shutting off water as herein provided. The Water Department shall give notice
of shutting off of water whenever conditions are such that it is practicable
for them to so do. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017
Code)
6-1-12: METERS FURNISHED; PROTECTION:
Water meters of a type and size approved by the Water Department will be
furnished to property owners and installed by the Water Department at the cost
thereof in addition to a reasonable charge for the installation thereof. Title
to water meters shall remain in the Water Department and maintenance, repair
and replacement of water meters so installed shall be at the cost of the Water
Department except those instances in which the repair, maintenance or
replacement is occasioned by the negligence of the user or property owner, in
which event such repair, maintenance or replacement shall be at the expense of
the user or property owner.
No person shall use water from City mains without a meter approved by and
installed and recorded with the Water Department, except as otherwise herein
provided for fire protection purposes. No person shall in any way interfere
with the proper and usual installation of a water meter. No person except an
authorized employee of the Water Department shall break a seal on a meter. In
case of any injury resulting to a water meter or in the event it becomes
stopped or works improperly, it shall be the duty of the owner and/or occupant
of the premises served to give immediate notice thereof to the Water
Department. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-13: LOCATION OF METERS:
All water meters shall be placed in a horizontal position and in such approved
location as will make them readily accessible to authorized representatives of
the Water Department during all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading,
testing, inspecting and adjustment. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-
18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-14: TESTING OF METERS:
The accuracy of any meter in service shall be tested by the Water Department
upon the request of the owner and may be tested by the Water Department at any
time. In the event the owner shall request a testing of the water meter more
often than once every twelve (12) months, the owner shall pay the cost thereof.
(Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-15: PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
   A.   Assessment Of Unpaid Charges: As all lines, improvements, meters and
repairs are at the request of the property owner, any charges for same that
become delinquent when billed, as heretofore provided, shall be assessed
against the property benefitted in the manner provided by and for special
assessments. (Ord. 1443, 6-19-1978; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
   B.   Collection Process: At least annually, the Finance Director shall
prepare a delinquent list of persons failing to pay the charges for the
installation of service lines, improvements on said line, meters and repairs on
same required by this chapter, listing the premises against which such charge
was made and the amount due therefrom. Resolutions shall thereupon be prepared
assessing the delinquent charges to the property so benefitted. Such
resolutions, properly adopted by the City Council, shall be certified as
provided by law in cases of special assessments for collection in the manner of
general taxes. (Ord. 1443, 6-19-1978; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; 2017 Code)
6-1-16: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
When requested by the owner or consumer, the Water Department will cause the
water to be turned off, provided the curb cock is maintained in working order
and is accessible. Except in cases of emergency, the Water Department shall not
cut off or cut on a water meter to any premises except at the curb cock. The
Water Department shall not be called upon to cut off service to property while
occupied by a consumer whose account is not delinquent, except in case of
emergency. Should it become necessary to cut off the water at the corporation
in the main, the expense thereof shall be charged against the property. Water
rents and charges for services will be made until notice of discontinuance of
service is given to the Utility Billing Department and shall be immediately due
and payable. (1953 Code § 15-22; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-
1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-17: FIRE HYDRANTS:
No persons, except officers or employees of the City acting in the regular
performance of their duties, shall open or in any manner tamper with any
hydrant belonging to the City. (1953 Code § 15-22)
6-1-18: PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS:
Private fire hydrants or standpipes may be installed under the direction and
supervision of the City Engineer. All valves thereto shall be sealed closed.
Water therefrom may be used for fire purposes only, and when the seal has been
broken for that purpose, notice of such breaking must be given immediately to
the Water Department. If any person shall break such a seal or use water from
said hydrant for other than fire purposes, a charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for use of water, as per signed agreement, shall be made. No charge
will be made for water used for fire purposes. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord.
90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-19: SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
Sprinkler systems may be permitted to be attached to the water mains by direct
connection without meters under the direction and supervision of the City
Engineer. No open connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance of the building which
must be sealed open. The owner of the property shall promptly report to the
Water Department whenever said seal has been broken for the closing of the
system. A diagram of such sprinkler system must be filed with the City Engineer
and free access to all parts of said system must be granted to the Water
Department. No charge shall be made for water used for fire purposes through a
sprinkler system. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3,
2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-20: CLOSING OF VALVES:
No plumber or any other person shall have the right to open or close any valve
or corporation or curb cock attached to any water main or service on the street
side of the meter without the written permission of the City Engineer except in
case of emergency, and in such case, an immediate report of such action shall
be made to the Engineering Department. (Ord. 88-8, 5-2-1988; amd. Ord. 90-27,
12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1-21: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE:
Backflow prevention devices will be required for all underground lawn
sprinkling systems. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
ARTICLE A. WATER RATES
SECTION:
6-1A-1: Rates And Charges Established
6-1A-2: Adjustments To Bill
6-1A-3: Periods Of Meter Readings
6-1A-4: Meter Replacement Fee
6-1A-1: RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   General Rates: Beginning with the July 1, 2022 billing date, the
following rates shall be effective:
 
                                   July 1,  July 1,  July 1,  July 1,  July 1,
                                  2022 -   2023 -   2024 -   2025 -   2026 -
                                   June 30, June 30, June 30, June 30, Until
                                   2023     2024     2025     2026     Amended
1.    Administrative Charge Per 6.66     6.83     7.00     7.17     7.35
Meter
 
      2.   Usage Per 100 Cubic Feet:
 
             July 1, 2022 July 1, 2023 July 1, 2024 July 1, 2025 July 1, 2026 -
             - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   Until Amended
             2023         2024         2025         2026
First 1,000- 4.759        4.878        5.000        5.125        5.253
Gross
First 1,000- 4.283        4.390        4.500        4.613        4.728
Net
Next 2,000-  4.045        4.146        4.249        4.356        4.465
Gross
Next 2,000-  3.640        3.731        3.824        3.920        4.018
Net
All Over     2.736        2.804        2.874        2.946        3.020
3,000- Gross
All Over     2.462        2.524        2.587        2.651        2.718
3,000- Net
 
   B.   Minimum Rates:
      1.   Normal Minimum Rates: Regardless of the quantity of water used,
there shall be a minimum charge per month, dependent upon the meter size, of
the following amounts, with the following rates being effective beginning with
the July 1, 2022 billing date:
Meter Size  July 1, 2022 July 1, 2023 July 1, 2024 July 1, 2025 July 1, 2026 -
(Inches)    - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   Until Amended
            2023         2024         2025         2026
Meter Size  July 1, 2022 July 1, 2023 July 1, 2024 July 1, 2025 July 1, 2026 -
(Inches)    - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   - June 30,   Until Amended
            2023         2024         2025         2026
5/8         17.33        17.77        18.21        18.67        19.13
3/4         28.07        28.78        29.50        30.23        30.99
1           49.50        50.73        52.00        53.30        54.64
11/2        104.10       106.70       109.37       112.10       114.91
2           233.12       238.94       244.92       251.04       257.32
3           479.40       491.39       503.67       516.26       529.17
4           1,489.17     1,526.40     1,564.56     1,603.67     1,643.77
6           3,003.84     3,078.94     3,155.91     3,234.81     3,315.68
8           3,545.67     3,634.31     3,725.17     3,818.30     3,913.76
10          4,629.33     4,745.06     4,863.69     4,985.28     5,109.91
12          5,959.27     6,108.25     6,260.96     6,417.48     6,577.92
The minimum monthly charge includes the administrative charge.
 
   C.   Payment: All water bills which are paid in full on or before the
fifteenth day after delivery or mailing thereof shall be eligible for a ten
percent (10%) discount and ten percent (10%) of the gross amount of said bill
shall be subtracted therefrom. Any payment transmitted through the United
States mail postmarked on or before the fifteenth day shall be deemed paid
within fifteen (15) days. If any water bill shall not be paid, or if
transmitted through the United States mail postmarked on or before the twenty
fifth day following the date of delivery or mailing, the property served shall
be subject to immediate discontinuance of service. A hearing on disconnection
must be requested in writing by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the payment due
date as identified on the Disconnection Notice. At this hearing the customer
must be prepared to provide or present any evidence or information in their
possession that would dispute the amounts owed as described in this notice or
otherwise disputing the disconnection notice. The hearing will be with the
Finance Director, Assistant Finance Director or designee and between twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. of the payment due
date on Disconnection Notice. When water service shall have been discontinued
for nonpayment, service shall not be reestablished until all indebtedness owed
by the owner has been paid, together with an additional charge set by
resolution of the Council for cutting service off and on. For purposes of this
paragraph, service is considered “discontinued” at close of business on the
final day designated in the Disconnection Notice, whether or not the water to
the address has been physically shut off.
   D.   Deposits Required: Deposits shall be required, at the discretion of the
Finance Director, of applicants for water service connections who have
exhibited a history of delinquency with the City Engineer. At the discretion of
the Finance Director, customers who become delinquent shall be required, as a
condition of continued water service, to provide the City Engineer with a
deposit. The amount of the deposit shall approximate two (2) months' total
utility bill. In the event of delinquency by the customer, the deposit shall be
applied on the water bill with any remaining deposit applied on the amount of
sewer rental due, with any remaining deposit applied on the garbage collection
charges due, with any remaining deposit applied on the landfill charges due.
(Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; amd. Ord. 92-24, 11-17-1992; Ord. 18-5, 6-19-2018;
Ord. 19-3, 4-2-2019; Ord. 19-5, 6-18-2019; Ord. 20-4, 7-21-2020; Ord. 21-6, 6-
15-2021; Ord. 22-04, 4-18-2022; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
6-1A-2: ADJUSTMENTS TO BILL:
The bill will be adjusted by deducting the previous year's average monthly
consumption and dividing the difference in water consumption equally between
the Public Services Department and the customer. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; amd.
Ord. 92-24, 11-17-1992)
6-1A-3: PERIODS OF METER READINGS:
Customers' meters will be read each month. In the event meters are found
stopped or inaccurately recorded, charges for such month shall be based on the
averages of the preceding quarters or months for which correct readings were
obtained. All billings shall be made to the nearest one hundred (100) cubic
feet of water used. Water bills will be mailed or delivered on approximately
the same day of the month for each billing period. Separate bills shall be
rendered for each meter in service. (Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990)
6-1A-4: METER REPLACEMENT FEE:
Water meters must be replaced occasionally which normally requires access to
the water meter on private property. If a final notice is provided both via
posting of the notice on the property where the meter is located and certified
letter to the address of the record title owner(s) of the property on record
for the property with the County Assessor's Office (regardless of signature
for, or physical receipt of, such notice and/or certified letter), the
unresponsive property owner shall be charged a monthly service fee set by
resolution of the Council in addition to the otherwise applicable monthly
charges and fees for water service. This service fee shall commence thirty (30)
days following the date of posting or postmark of such notice, whichever is
later, until the water meter is replaced at the property in question.
Additionally, the City may elect to have the water service disconnected until
the water meter is allowed to be replaced. Nothing in this section shall limit
the City’s ability to exercise any and all remedies allowed by law. (Ord. 18-
14, 12-4-2018; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE B. POTABLE WATER
SECTION:
6-1B-1: Definitions
6-1B-2: Required Connections
6-1B-3: Exceptions
6-1B-4: Testing
6-1B-5: Request For Exemption
6-1B-6: Restricting Potential Sources Of Contamination Near Public Water Supply
Wells
6-1B-7: Backflow Prevention Assemblies For Containment
6-1B-8: Administrative Authority
6-1B-9: Customer Requirements
6-1B-10: Backflow Prevention Assembly Testing
6-1B-11: Termination For Noncompliance
6-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT: A backflow prevention
assembly which is approved by the University of Southern California Foundation
for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. The approval listing shall
include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow
prevention assembly shall also be listed by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) as having met the requirements of
ANSI/AWWA C510-97 double check valve backflow prevention assembly, or ANSI/AWWA
C511-97 reduced pressure principle (RPZ) backflow prevention assembly.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT IN FIRE PROTECTION
SYSTEM: A backflow prevention assembly to be used in a fire protection system
which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and
Underwriters Laboratory (UL), in addition to the requirements of an approved
backflow prevention assembly for containment.
CONTAINMENT: A method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow
prevention assembly on water services. Backflow prevention assemblies for
containment shall be installed as close to the public water supply main as is
practical, typical installation shall be immediately following the water meter
or as close to that location as deemed practical by the City.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between
a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixtures or tank, receptacle,
equipment, or device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used,
unclean, polluted, or contaminated water, or other substance, to enter into any
part of such potable water system under any condition, including, but not
limited to, lawn or other landscaping irrigation systems, water powered or
water assisted sump pumps, yard hydrants, or other potentially hazardous water
connections.
CUSTOMER: The owner of a building or property which has a water service from
the public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water system
which has water service from the public water system.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The rating of a cross connection or a water service which
indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination (high hazard) or
pollution (low hazard).
REGISTERED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER: A technician registered with
the State of Iowa Department of Public Health as set forth in Iowa Code chapter
135K, Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers and Iowa Administrative Code chapter
26, Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers Registration. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-2: REQUIRED CONNECTIONS:
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public water supply system, is required, at the owner's
expense, to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water
supply system within ninety (90) days after the date of official notice to do
so; provided, that said public water supply system is within two hundred feet
(200') of the property line. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of the foregoing section shall not be required where such
property, used for human occupancy, is serviced by a suitable water supply
system which is not contaminated, as defined above. (Ord. 1650, 8-16-1982)
6-1B-4: TESTING:
All tests to determine whether or not a water supply system is contaminated
shall be performed by a laboratory approved by the Water Superintendent. (Ord.
1650, 8-16-1982; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-5: REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION:
Within sixty (60) days after the installation of a public water supply system
within two hundred feet (200') of the owner's property line, said owner must
apply for an exemption pursuant to the above provisions and have an approved
laboratory test the owner's existing water supply for contamination. All
applications for exemption shall grant to the City the right of ingress and
egress to said system for the purpose of inspection and testing. Additional
tests at the owner's expense may be required at the discretion of the Water
Superintendent. Said application may be obtained from the City Engineer. (Ord.
1650, 8-16-1982; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
6-1B-6: RESTRICTING POTENTIAL SOURCES OF CONTAMINATION NEAR PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY
WELLS:
No structure or facility of the following types shall be located within the
distances set forth, from a public well located within the City of Mason City,
Iowa:
   Feet
                                                                    Feet
   Well house floor drains to ground surface, and:                  5
A. 1. Drain constructed of water main material encased in concrete  5 - 10
   2. Drain constructed of water main material                      10 - 25
   3. Drain constructed of sewer pipe material                      25 - 75
   Well house floor drains to sewers; water plant waste drains;
B. sanitary sewers; storm sewers; all drains; when:
   1. Drain constructed of water main material                      25 - 75
   2. Drain constructed of sewer pipe material                      75 - 200
C. Sewer force mains constructed of water main material             75 - 400
D. Sanitary and industrial discharges to ground surface             400
E. Land application of solid waste or wastewater                    100
F. Concrete vaults or septic tanks                                  100
G. Mechanical wastewater treatment plants, cesspools, earth pit     200
   privies, soil absorption fields
H. Lagoons                                                          400
I. Chemical application to ground surface and aboveground chemical  100
   storage
J. On or under ground chemical storage                              200
K. Animal pasturage                                                 50
L. Animal enclosure; land application of animal wastes storage tank 100
M. Animal wastes solids stockpile                                   200
N. Animal wastes liquid storage                                     400
O. Earthen silage storage                                           100
P. Basements, pits and sumps                                        10
Q. Flowing streams or other surface water and cisterns              50
R. Cemeteries                                                       200
S. Private wells                                                    200
T. Solid waste disposal sites                                       1,000
 
(Ord. 88-25, 11-7-1988)
6-1B-7: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR CONTAINMENT:
   A.   Under Public Law 99-339, the Safe Drinking Water Act amendments of 1986
and regulations of the State, the elimination of cross connections or the
installation and maintenance of a proper type of approved backflow prevention
assembly, at the water service connection, is hereby required whenever a
potential hazard is determined to exist in the customer's system. Backflow
prevention assemblies shall be required for all new construction or change of
use of an existing structure.
   B.   A water service determined to present a high hazard shall be protected
by an air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly.
   C.   A water service determined to present a low hazard shall be protected
by an approved double check valve assembly, an air gap or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
   D.   Dual water connections with a direct connection to the public water
supply and other auxiliary supplies such as wells, ponds, rivers, industrial
waters are strictly prohibited. (Ord. 93-16, 8-13-1993; amd. 2017 Code)
6-1B-8: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
   A.   The Administrative Authority for this article is the City Engineer or
such persons the City Engineer shall designate.
   B.   The City Engineer shall require the submission of plans, specifications
and other information deemed necessary for a building, property or private
water system to which a water service is proposed. The information submitted
shall be reviewed to determine if cross connections will exist and the degree
of hazard. Each customer or their representative shall survey the activities
and processes which receive water from the water service and shall report to
the City if cross connections exist and the degree of hazard.
   C.   The owner of a building, property or private water system shall
install, or cause to be installed, an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment as directed by the City before water service is initiated. All
backflow assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the latest version of
the Uniform Plumbing Code.
   D.   The City shall have the right to access any property to inspect the
plumbing of any building, property and private water system which has a water
service to determine if cross connections exist and the degree of hazard.
Failure to grant access for inspection shall be cause for termination of water
service.
   E.   If the City determines that nonpotable water may potentially enter the
public water supply, the customer shall be required to install the appropriate
backflow prevention assembly for containment. If a customer refuses to install
a backflow prevention assembly for containment when it is required, water
service to the customer may be discontinued until an appropriate backflow
prevention assembly is installed.
   F.   The City Engineer shall institute a Backflow Prevention Assembly for
Containment Program and maintain all pertinent records of cross connection
surveys, installations, testing records, or other required records. (2017 Code)
6-1B-9: CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross
connections exist without an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   B.   The customer, at their own expense, shall cause installation,
operation, maintenance and testing of the backflow prevention assemblies
required by this section. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by
a State of Iowa licensed plumbing contractor. A registered backflow prevention
assembly tester shall test the backflow prevention assembly at initial
installation and annually thereafter. Backflow prevention assemblies installed
on irrigation systems shall be tested annually by May 1.
   C.   Following any repair, overhaul, repiping or relocation of an assembly,
the customer shall have the backflow prevention assembly tested to ensure that
it is in good operating condition. Maintenance and repairs of backflow
prevention assemblies shall be made by licensed plumbers and tests shall be
conducted by a registered backflow prevention assembly tester.
   D.   The customer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made
to backflow prevention assemblies and provide copies of such records to the
City Engineering Department. The records shall be on forms approved by the City
Engineer and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
   E.   The customer shall immediately notify the City Engineer and Water
Superintendent when the customer becomes aware that backflow has occurred in
the building, property or private water system receiving water service, and
take measures to confine the contamination or pollution by turning off valves
to isolate the area of the incident. The City may order a water service be
temporarily shut off when a backflow occurs in a customer's building, property
or private water system.
   F.   Backflow prevention assemblies for fire protection systems must be
tested annually on a routine scheduled basis by a registered backflow
prevention assembly tester. The City Engineering Department shall be copied
with test results. (2017 Code)
6-1B-10: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTING:
   A.   Backflow prevention assemblies which are in place, but have not been
used for more than three (3) months, shall be tested prior to being placed back
into service.
   B.   Any backflow prevention assembly that fails a test and is repaired or
replaced must successfully pass the test prior to being placed into operation.
   C.   The City may require more frequent testing of backflow prevention
assemblies.
   D.   The City may conduct, at its own cost, additional testing of a backflow
prevention assembly to verify test procedures and results.
   E.   To suspend the testing requirements for an irrigation system or other
system taken out of service, the customer shall have a State of Iowa licensed
plumbing contractor disconnect all piping and remove the backflow prevention
assembly. When the system is to be placed back into service, the backflow
prevention assembly must be reinstalled by a State of Iowa licensed plumbing
contractor and tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly tester. The
customer must contact the Chief Building Official for an appointment to have
the disconnection and reconnection inspected. (2017 Code)
6-1B-11: TERMINATION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Water service may be terminated in the case of noncompliance with, but not
limited to, the following:
   A.   Refusal to allow City access to the property to inspect for cross
connection at reasonably scheduled times.
   B.   Unauthorized removal or bypassing of a backflow prevention device
required by the City.
   C.   Providing inadequate backflow prevention when a cross connection
exists.
   D.   Failure to install an approved backflow prevention assembly when
required by the City.
   E.   Failure to test a backflow prevention assembly as required by the City
and/or submit the required test report within fifteen (15) days of the test.
   F.   Failure to comply with any other provisions of this article or
reasonable requests. (2017 Code)
ARTICLE C. PRIVATE WELLS
SECTION:
6-1C-1: Scope
6-1C-2: Permit Required
6-1C-3: Permit Process
6-1C-1: SCOPE:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all private water wells,
including, but not limited to, new construction and modification of existing
wells located or to be constructed within the City limits of Mason City, Iowa,
as defined in section
1-5-1 of this Code. (Ord. 09-06, 6-2-2009)
6-1C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall construct a private well within the area described in
section
6-1C-1 of this article in the City of Mason City after the effective date of
this provision, unless a permit has been issued for the well by the Mason City
Engineering Department. This permit shall be in addition to any permits
required by the State or County. This requirement shall not apply to monitoring
wells used for soil and groundwater investigation.
   B.   The applicant shall be required to have an environmental assessment
completed to determine if there are known sources of contamination within five
hundred feet (500') of the proposed site.
   C.   The permit applicant shall also provide to the Engineering Department
any further study/testing required to further address any problems identified
in the assessment described in subsection B of this section concerning the soil
and groundwater contamination in the particularly described application site.
(Ord. 03-6, 4-1-2003)
6-1C-3: PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Any person desiring a well permit shall make application to the Mason
City Engineering Department on the form prescribed. The Mason City Engineering
Department shall determine the necessary information, data and testing required
for the issuance of the permit.
   B.   In determining whether to issue a permit or not, the Mason City
Engineering Department shall consider the availability of public water to serve
the real property, building or facility, the estimated amount of water to be
consumed, possible contamination of the water, and the purpose for which the
water will be used.
   C.   If the property, building or facility to be served is located within
two hundred feet (200') of public water, the Mason City Engineering Department
shall automatically deny the permit and the applicant shall be required to use
the public water system.
   D.   If the Mason City Engineering Department determines that the water is
in an area of contamination or is otherwise unfit, the permit may be denied or
limitations may be made as to the use of the water from said private well as
necessary to protect life and property. In determining what the actual area of
contamination is, the Mason City Engineering Department shall consider current
levels and areas of contamination, as well as where the contamination might
reasonably be expected to expand to in the foreseeable future.
   E.   The application shall not be deemed complete until all information,
data and testing results required by the Mason City Engineering Department have
been submitted for consideration along with the application fee set by
resolution of the Council. (Ord. 03-6, 4-1-2003; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE D. SOUTH WATER LINE DISTRICT
SECTION:
6-1D-1: Scope
6-1D-2: Definitions
6-1D-3: Payment And Connection
6-1D-1: SCOPE:
The purpose of this article is to establish the south water line connection fee
district in the City of Mason City, Iowa, and the imposition of a fee for
connection to the City of Mason City water district upon property owners in
said area who desire to connect to the City of Mason City water district. (Ord.
05-28, 10-18-2005)
6-1D-2: DEFINITIONS:
BENEFITTED SERVICE AREA AND CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT: The area within the City
limits of Mason City, Iowa, described as the south water line connection fee
district consists of property located within and described as follows:
That part of Sections 16, 17, 20, 21, 28, and 29, all in Township 96 North,
Range 20 West of the 5th P.M., Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, described as follows:
Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 21;
thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Southeast Quarter to the
Southeast Corner of said Southeast Quarter, said point also being the Northeast
Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 28; thence Southerly along the
Easterly line of said Northeast Quarter to a point perpendicular with said
Easterly line and a point on the Northerly right of way line of U.S. Highway
No. 18, said point also designated as Side Road Station 2259+40.000, 64.000
meters left of centerline Side Road U.S. Highway 65 as shown on Exhibit A
attached to Warranty Deed filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page 1413 in the
Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Southwesterly, 589.52 feet
along said Northerly right of way line; thence Southwesterly, 598.43 feet along
said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Southerly line of said
Northeast Quarter; thence Westerly along said Northerly right of way line and
along said Southerly line to the Southwest Corner of said Northeast Quarter,
said point also being the Southeast Corner of the Northwest Quarter of said
Section 28; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said Northwest Quarter
and along said Northerly right of way line to the Southwest Corner of said
Northwest Quarter, said point also being the Southeast Corner of the Northeast
Quarter of said Section 29; thence Westerly along the Southerly line of said
Northeast Quarter and along said Northerly right of way line to the most
Easterly point of that tract of land described in Warranty Deed and shown in
Acquisition Plat 2 of 2, both filed February 29, 1996 in Book 96 Page 1412 in
the Office of the Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Northwesterly, 999.32
feet along said Northerly right of way line; thence Northwesterly, 1020.66 feet
along said Northerly right of way line; thence Northwesterly, 525.68 feet along
said Northerly right of way line to a point on the Easterly right of way line
of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence Northerly along said Easterly right of
way line to the Southwest Corner of Lot 1, Golden Grain Energy First
Subdivision, Cerro Gordo County, Iowa; thence Easterly along the Southerly line
of said Lot 1 to the Southeast Corner of said Lot 1, said point also being the
Southwest Corner of Lot 2, said Golden Grain Energy First Subdivision; thence
Northerly along the Westerly line of said Lot 2 to the Northwest Corner of said
Lot 2; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Lot 2 to the Northeast
Corner of said Lot 2; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Lot 1 to
the Northeast Corner of said Lot 1; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of
said Lot 1 to a point on said Easterly right of way line of the Union Pacific
Railroad; thence Northerly and Northeasterly along said Easterly right of way
line to the most Northerly Corner of that tract of land described in Warranty
Deed filed December 29, 2003 in Document No. 2003-16329 in the Office of the
Cerro Gordo County Recorder; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said
tract of land; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said tract of land
to a point on the Easterly line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 17;
thence Northerly along said Easterly line to the Southeasterly right of way
line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence Northeasterly along said
Southeasterly right of way line to a point on the Northerly line of South 510
feet of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 16;
thence Easterly along said Northerly line to a point on the Easterly line of
said Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter; thence Southerly along said
Easterly line and along the Easterly line of the Southwest Quarter of said
Southwest Quarter to the Northwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter of said Section 21; thence Easterly along the Northerly line
of said Northwest Quarter to a point 100 feet Westerly, measured at a right
angle, from the Easterly line of said Northwest Quarter; thence Southerly along
a line parallel with said Easterly line to a point 100 feet Southerly, measured
at a right angle, from the Southerly line of Midland Heights First Addition,
Mason City, Iowa; thence Easterly along a line parallel with said Southerly
line to a point on the Easterly line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section
21; thence Southerly along said Easterly line to the Point of Beginning;
containing 1320 acres more or less.
CONNECTION: Any act that results, directly or indirectly, in receiving water
service from the City water utility.
CONNECTION FEE: The sums specified below per acre of property within the
connection fee district served by the connection.
   A.   Connection fee is two hundred thirty seven dollars ($237.00) per acre
from August 2, 2005 and thereafter.
   B.   The connection fee shall be paid prior to connection to the Mason City
water utility and upon application for connection to the Mason City water
utility. (Ord. 05-28, 10-18-2005)
6-1D-3: PAYMENT AND CONNECTION:
   A.   Connection to the Mason City water utility shall not be permitted until
the connection fee specified above is paid in full.
   B.   Prior to connection, a property owner shall file an application, on a
form provided by the City, with the City Engineer. Upon approval of the
application, the City Engineer shall advise the applicant of the connection fee
to be paid. Upon payment of the connection fee and accrued interest, if any, to
the City Treasurer, or upon entry into an agreement to pay said fee in
installments if so allowed by separate action of the City Council of the City
of Mason City, Iowa, the City shall issue a connection permit. Upon completion
of the connection, the property owner shall notify the City Engineer, and the
City Engineer or the City Engineer's designee shall, at his or her discretion,
inspect the connection. Connections found to be faulty shall be corrected by
the property owner immediately.
   C.   Connection fees collected by the City Treasurer shall be used only for
the purposes of operating the Mason City water utility, or to pay debt service
on obligations issued to finance improvements or extensions of the utility.
   D.   The water connection fees established by this article are in addition
to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the
Plumbing Code, other provisions of this Code, or City policy. The property
owner paying a connection fee will be responsible for the full cost of
providing any necessary water line extensions or service lines from the private
property improvements or buildings to the water main being constructed as part
of the project.
   E.   In the event a connection is made to the City of Mason City water
utility serving Mason City south water line connection fee district without the
permit required by this article, or without payment of the connection fee set
forth in this article, or if any installment payment of such fee as provided by
subsequent ordinance of the City Council is not made, the City may, pursuant to
the provisions of section 384.84, Code of Iowa:
      1.   Give ten (10) days' notice of the intention to disconnect such
service from the City of Mason City water utility until such time as the
property owner has received a permit for the connection and paid the required
connection fee; upon failure to show cause why disconnection should not be
accomplished by the City, the City may proceed with disconnection in the manner
provided by law. Any environmental pollution or damage caused by unpermitted
connection, disconnection, and permitted reconnection, shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the property owner.
      2.   Pursuant to the provisions of said section 384.84, the City may
declare the connection fee specified above, plus interest, due and payable, and
in default, and may certify said amount to the County Treasurer as immediately
due and payable, whereupon the County Treasurer shall certify said amount as a
lien upon the property in accordance with section 384.84. Upon satisfaction of
the lien, the property owner shall be entitled to connection, all costs of
which shall again be borne entirely by the property owner.
      3.   In addition, the City may pursue any other remedy allowed by law.
(Ord. 05-28, 10-18-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SANITARY SEWERS
SECTION:
6-2-1: General Provisions
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Abbreviations
6-2-4: Sanitary District
6-2-5: Use Of Public Sewers Required
6-2-6: Private Wastewater Disposal
6-2-7: Building Sewers And Connections
6-2-8: Use Of Public Sewers
6-2-9: General Sewer Use Requirements
6-2-10: Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
6-2-11: Iowa Department Of Natural Resources Requirements
6-2-12: City's Right Of Revision
6-2-13: Special Agreement
6-2-14: Prohibition Of Dilution
6-2-15: Pretreatment Of Wastewater
6-2-16: Vandalism
6-2-17: Wastewater Surveys
6-2-18: Wastewater Discharge Permits
6-2-19: Wastewater Discharge Permit Application; Baseline Monitoring Report
6-2-20: Application Signatories And Certification
6-2-21: Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
6-2-22: Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
6-2-23: Continuation Of Expired Permits
6-2-24: Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
6-2-25: Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
6-2-26: Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
6-2-27: Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
6-2-28: Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
6-2-29: Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
6-2-30: Categorical Industrial User Reporting Requirements
6-2-31: Significant Industrial User Reporting Requirements
6-2-32: Categorical And Significant Industrial User Reporting Requirements
6-2-33: Compliance Monitoring
6-2-34: Notification Of Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
6-2-35: Search Warrants
6-2-36: Confidential Information
6-2-37: Public Notification Of Significant Noncompliance
6-2-38: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
6-2-39: Administrative Fines
6-2-40: Emergency Suspensions
6-2-41: Termination Of Discharge
6-2-42: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
6-2-43: Severability Clause
6-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Intent: This chapter is to implement provisions of the Act, the General
Pretreatment Regulations and the Iowa Administrative Code, chapter 567,
sections 62.4 and 62.8. This chapter is to be construed and applied in
accordance with the Clean Water Act amendments, the General Pretreatment
Regulations, the Iowa Administrative Code and the purpose and policy provisions
set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Purpose And Policy: This chapter regulates the use of sewers, private
disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge
of water and waste into the sewers and drains of the City sewage system, and
the City's publicly owned treatment works (POTW). This chapter sets forth
uniform requirements for dischargers into the collection and treatment systems
for Mason City and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and
Federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403). The objectives of this
chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may
interfere with the operation of the system or interfere with sludge management
and disposal;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that may
pass through the system inadequately treated and ultimately into receiving
water, the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      3.   To ensure that the quality of the treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
      4.   To protect workers' safety and health and to protect against damage
to the POTW;
      5.   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim sludge from the
POTW;
      6.   To provide for equitable distribution of treatment and industrial
pretreatment costs resulting from pollutants introduced into the POTW;
      7.   To enable the City to comply with its NPDES permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements and any other Federal or State laws to
which the POTW is subject.
   C.   Administration: Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by
the Superintendent to other City personnel.
   D.   Interpretation: This chapter shall be construed and interpreted to
conform with 40 CFR chapter I and it is the intent of this chapter that it
comply with said Federal regulations. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The Iowa Department of Natural Resources/EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: An authorized representative of
an industrial user may be:
   A.   A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President,
if the industrial user is a corporation;
   B.   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership
or proprietorship, respectively;
   C.   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if
such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities
from which the indirect discharge originates.
BASELINE MONITORING REPORT: The report required by 40 CFR part 403.12(b)(1-7)
and by POTW.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
CATEGORICAL USER: A. The industrial activity performed at the facility is
regulated by one (1) or more of the Federal regulations found in title 40 CFR.
   B.   The facility discharges process wastewater to a POTW.
   C.   In the EPA Pretreatment Categories and Standards, the categorical
activity is assigned pretreatment limitations, reporting requirements or both.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or
surface water.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula as found in 40 CFR part 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample resulting from the combination of individual samples
taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT: BOD, COD, O&G, suspended solids, pH, ammonia nitrogen,
total.
DISCHARGE OR INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of treated or untreated
wastewater into the POTW.
DOMESTIC USER: All users discharging only domestic sewage from premises
consisting of any building or parts of buildings designed for or occupied by
one (1) or more persons as a single housekeeping unit, including such units
within multi- family dwellings, flats and apartment buildings.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease, in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated, and the water system does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one time basis
without regard to flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
HEADWORKS: The main wet well at the POTW treatment plant prior to any treatment
process.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A discharge into the POTW from any source other than a
domestic user. See definition of categorical user or significant industrial
user.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any liquid, gaseous, radioactive, or solid waste substance
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business or
from the development of any natural resource.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with the discharge or
discharges from other sources:
   A.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations,
or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
   B.   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any Federal, State or local
regulations or permits.
LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge of a given pollutant as in the following
definitions:
Daily Maximum Limit: The maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a
calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass,
the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day.
Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
Monthly Average Limit: The maximum allowable value for the average of all
measurements of a pollutant obtained during one (1) calendar month.
MAY: Permissive or discretionary.
MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood by-
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiological agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by EPA under section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean
Water Act applicable to industrial users and includes prohibitive discharge
limits (40 CFR chapter 1, subpart N, parts 401-471) established pursuant to 40
CFR 401.5.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES PERMIT: A permit
issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body or surface or
ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants to navigable water, the construction of
which commenced after the promulgation of standards of performance under
section 306 of the Act which are applicable to such source, provided that:
   A.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; the building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or the production or
generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification, rather than a new source, if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of subsection A of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of a "new source", as defined herein, has commenced if the
owner or operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program, any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation
or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in the operation of the
new source within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this definition.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
NONCONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS: All pollutants which are not included in the
definition of "conventional pollutants".
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of the City of Mason City's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all Federal, State or local governmental entities.
pH: The hydrogen ion activity of a solution expressed as a logarithm of the
reciprocal of the hydrogen ion activity in moles per liter at twenty five
degrees centigrade (25°C). pH is a measure of the relative acidity or
alkalinity of the solution. The range extends from 0 - 14; 0 - 7 being acidic,
7 - 14 being alkaline.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor).
POLLUTION: The alteration of chemical, physical, biological or radiological
integrity of water as a result of human activity or enterprise.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes or by
other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to the industrial users.
"Pretreatment Standard" includes prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to 40 CFR.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
section
6-2-9 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded such that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section
212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the City of
Mason City. This definition includes any sewers that convey to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter,
"POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the City who are, by permit with the City, users of the City's
POTW.
SANITARY SEWER: A drain or sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water
that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE: The water carried waste products from residences, public buildings,
institutions or other buildings, including the bodily discharges from human
beings or animals together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water
as may be present.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A. An industrial user of the City's wastewater
disposal system that meets any of the following conditions:
      1.   Has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater;
      2.   Contributes a process wastestream five percent (5%) or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW;
      3.   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6
and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or
      4.   Is designated by the City of Mason City as a significant industrial
user on the basis that the contributing industry, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the operation of or effluent quality from the POTW or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirements.
   B.   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
subsection A1 or A2 of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the operation of the POTW or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the City POTW may, at any time on its own initiative
or in response to a request received from an industrial user or POTW, determine
that an industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
SLUDGE: The solids separated from the liquids during the wastewater treatment
process.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which, when measured by either a
grab or a composite, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour
concentration or flow limit found in a user's most recent wastewater discharge
permit.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the
"Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A drain or sewer for conveying
water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the City of Mason City to manage and
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
T: When used as a portion of a chemical name, shall designate "total" such as
in "Cyanide-T" where "T" means total cyanide.
TKN: The total Kjeldahl nitrogen concentration expressed in mg/l as determined
using EPA approved methods.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The portion of total solids retained by a filter
using EPA approved methods.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01
milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable
regulation.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in 40 CFR
part 403 appendix B.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USER: See definition of industrial user.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent.
WATER RECLAMATION FACILITY: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used synonymously
with "sewage treatment plant", "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment
plant" or "water pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. (Ord. 94-14,
7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD   - Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   - Code of Federal Regulations
COD   - Chemical oxygen demand
EPA   - United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd   - Gallons per day
IDNR  - Iowa Department of Natural Resources
l     - Liter
mg    - Milligrams
mg/L  - Milligrams per liter
NCPS  - National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
NPDES - National pollution discharge elimination system
O&M   - Operation and maintenance
POTW  - Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC   - Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA  - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.)
TSS   - Total suspended solids
USC   - United States Code
 
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-4: SANITARY DISTRICT:
The City shall comprise one sanitary district for the collection and disposal
of garbage, sewage and other waste matter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Unlawful Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City,
any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
   B.   Unlawful Discharge: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City and/
or to the POTW, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Privies, Vaults, Etc., Prohibited; Connection Required:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
      2.   The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the City are hereby required, at their own expense, to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public
sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-6: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is available under the
provisions of section
6-2-5 of this chapter, the building sewer shall not be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a permit from the Engineering
Department. Said applicant shall supplement any plans, specifications and other
information as is deemed necessary by the City Engineer. A permit and
inspection fee set by resolution of the Council shall be paid to the City at
the time the application is filed.
   C.   A permit for use of a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer. The Engineering Department shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of the construction and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Engineering Department when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the
Engineering Department exclusive of weekends and holidays.
   D.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater
disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than one square acre. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   E.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section
6-2-5 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
within ninety (90) days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned
of sludge and filled with a suitable material.
   F.   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
   G.   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 18-2, 4-17-2018; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
6-2-7: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the City Engineer.
   B.   There shall be the following classes of building sewer permits:
      1.   For residential and commercial service; and
      2.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, a City licensed excavating contractor shall obtain a permit furnished by
the Engineering Department. The permit request shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the City Engineer. A permit and inspection fee in amounts set by resolution
of the Council for residential, for commercial, for industrial property, and
for each sanitary sewer disconnection shall be payable at time said permit is
issued; and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one copy being given to the
applicant and one filed in the Engineering Department.
   C.   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection or
repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly, or indirectly, be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. Work shall be done only
by a contractor licensed under the provisions of title 3, chapter 13 of this
Code.
   D.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer, but the City does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by, or resulting from, any such single
connection aforementioned.
   E.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the City Engineer, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   F.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the Mason City
Standard Specifications or other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
In the absence of Code provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
"Manual of Practice No. 9" shall apply.
   G.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   H.   No person(s) shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly, or
indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the City Engineer for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
   I.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF "Manual of Practice No. 9".
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must
be approved by the City Engineer before installation.
   J.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Engineering Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The
connection shall be approved by the City Engineer or a duly authorized
representative, prior to backfilling.
   K.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. (Ord. 18-2,
4-17-2018; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
6-2-8: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
noncontact or unpolluted water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from
limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to
the sanitary sewer by permission of the City Engineer. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
However, this section shall not apply to any single- family residence located
more than four hundred fifty feet (450') from the nearest sanitary sewer line
and which otherwise meets all requirements of this chapter and State law for
installation, maintenance, repair and replacement of private wastewater
disposal systems. (Ord. 95-21, 10-17-1995)
   B.   Stormwater, other than that exempted under subsection
 6-2-7H of this chapter, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the City Engineer and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted
industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of
the City Engineer, and other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-9: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
No industrial user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced into the POTW,
any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass- through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether or not
they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no
industrial user may contribute the following substances to the POTW:
   A.   Fire Or Explosion Hazard: Pollutants which create a fire or explosion
hazard in the Municipal wastewater collection system and POTW, including, but
not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
   B.   Corrosive Properties: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5,
or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater
works.
   C.   Solid Or Viscous Substances: Solids or viscous substances in
quantities, or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the
sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and flesh, entrails, asphalt residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders, or other
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty
two degrees Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)
(65°C).
   D.   Pollutants: Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants,
released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will
cause interference or pass- through at the Mason City POTW or which constitutes
a "slug" load as defined in this chapter.
   E.   Temperature: Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) upon entering the collection system,
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case shall wastewater which causes temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104°F).
   F.   Petroleum Products: Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or
products of mineral oil in origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
   G.   Toxic Substances: Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
   H.   Imported Material: Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the City. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
   I.   Discharge Limits: Discharge of wastewater from underground storage tank
site cleanups or any wastewater containing petroleum products shall not exceed
the following limits prior to discharge to the POTW:
 
Benzene 0.050 mg/L
BETX    0.750 mg/L
 
(Ord. 97-3, 1-21-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
   J.   Ground Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see
definition of "properly shredded garbage" in section
6-2-2 of this chapter). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers
from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation
of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when
served by caterers.
   K.   Heavy Metals: Any waters or wastes containing iron, arsenic, cadmium,
chromium, copper, lead, nickel, mercury, and zinc, and similar objectionable or
toxic substances in concentration or at flow rates that would cause
interference. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
   L.   Odoriferous Substances: Any waters or wastes containing odor producing
substances exceeding limits or causing public nuisance which may be addressed
by the Wastewater Superintendent and other regulatory agencies. (Ord. 94-14, 7-
5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   M.   Deleterious Substances: Any water or wastes which, by interaction with
other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues), or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate), which
exceed or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
   N.   Dyes: Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent thereby violating the City's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of
the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent
(10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
   O.   Radioactive Wastes: Any radioactive wastes unless they comply with the
Atomic Energy Commission Act of 1954 (68 stat. 919 as amended and part 20,
subpart D - Waste Disposal, section 20.303 of the regulations issued by the
Atomic Energy Commission, or amendments thereto).
   P.   Runoff: Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
   Q.   Residues: Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
   R.   Toxicity Test: Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to
fail a toxicity test.
   S.   Foaming Substances: Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
   T.   Animal Fats: Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or
vegetable origin is limited to two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l), or
categorical standards if more stringent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   U.   Pretreatment Requirements: Any waters which do not meet the applicable
requirements or National Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(ii)).
   V.   Discharge: Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or
stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor
drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the
industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. (Ord.
94-14, 7-5-1994)
   W.   Local Limits:
      1.   Headworks Limits; Average Mass: The average composite loading of all
industrial users contributing the following specific pollutants to the POTW
shall not exceed the allowable total pounds. The Superintendent will distribute
the allowable industrial load through permits to significant industrial users.
      TABLE A
 
          Total Of All Sources Industrial
Pollutant (30 Day Average      (30 Day Average
          Allowable In         Allowable In
          Pounds/Day)          Pounds/Day)
BOD       28,235               20,638
TSS       33,814               24,817
NH3       3,348                2,457
 
      TABLE B
          Maximum Allowable Maximum Allowable
Pollutant Headworks Loading Industrial Loading
          Pounds/Day        Pounds/Day
          Total             Industrial
             Maximum Allowable Maximum Allowable
Pollutant    Headworks Loading Industrial Loading
             Pounds/Day        Pounds/Day
             Total             Industrial
Arsenic-T    0.365             0.337
Cadmium-T    0.278             0.271
Chromium-T   6.020             5.913
Chromium VI  6.020             4.392
Copper-T     10.958            8.895
Cyanide-T    2.066             2.027
Lead-T       0.918             0.764
Mercury-T    0.208             0.201
Molybdenum-T 0.329             0.216
Nickel-T     2.192             2.007
Selenium-T   0.438             0.383
Silver-T     0.054             0.040
Zinc-T       20.805            18.175
 
      2.   Discharge Concentration Or Mass Limits And Review Criteria:
         a.   Concentration Or Limits: Discharge concentration or mass limits
and review criteria shall be as follows:
            (1)   The discharge into the POTW of any materials, water or
wastewater having a pollutant level greater than the limits in tables A, B, C
or D of this subsection W or containing pollutants not listed in this
subsection W shall be subject to the review and approval of the POTW
Superintendent.
            (2)   After review of the proposed discharges, the Superintendent
may:
               (A)   Reject the water or wastewater.
               (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable pollutant level for
discharge to the POTW.
               (C)   Require control of the quantities and rates of discharge
of the water or wastewater.
               (D)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treatment of water or wastewater or any combination thereof.
               (E)   Reduce the maximum or average mass loading of present and
prospective industrial users on any reasonable prorated basis to meet headworks
loading limits at the WRF.
               (F)   Require the user to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
and be subject to any of the rules and regulations contained therein.
               (G)   Require the user to meet local limits when local limits
are more restrictive than National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
               (H)   Initiate enforcement action in response to any
noncompliance with this article using the enforcement procedures outlined in
sections
6-2-40 through
6-2-42 of this chapter.
         b.   Wastewater With Pollutant Concentrations: Users discharging
wastewater with pollutant concentrations that are greater than the following
shall be considered industrial users for purposes of sewer charges and may be
regulated or permitted by the POTW Superintendent as appropriate:
      TABLE C
 
Pollutant        Daily Maximum
                 (mg/l)
BOD              300
TSS              250
Oil and grease-T 200
TKN              30
NH3-N            15
Having an unusual concentration of flow constituting a slug load
 
         c.   Pollutant Limits: New industrial users shall contact the POTW if
any of the following limits are exceeded to assess if a permit is required:
      TABLE D
Pollutant Monthly Limit
          (mg/l)
Pollutant    Monthly Limit
             (mg/l)
Arsenic-T    0.04
Cadmium-T    0.26
Chromium-T   1.71
Chromium VI  1.28
Copper-T     2.07
Cyanide-T    0.65
Lead-T       0.43
Mercury-T    0.003
Molybdenum-T 0.025
Nickel-T     2.38
Selenium-T   0.045
Silver-T     0.24
Zinc-T       1.48
 
(Ord. 97-3, 1-21-1997; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-10: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1,
subchapter N, parts 401-471 are hereby incorporated. If categorical industry
imposes limits, the most stringent limit will apply. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-11: IOWA DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES REQUIREMENTS:
IDNR requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where
they are more stringent than USEPA or City requirements and limitations unless
allowed by the IDNR. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-12: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The City reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW than those contained in this chapter if
deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy objectives presented in
subsection
 6-2-1B of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-13: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
   A.   The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with
industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to
the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request
a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user
can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different
from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment
standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor
variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provision in 40 CFR
403.13. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
   B.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section
6-2-9 of this chapter, and which may have deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, refer to
subsection
 6-2-9W2 of this chapter for guidance.
   C.   If the Wastewater Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Wastewater
Superintendent.
   D.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Wastewater Superintendent and other regulatory agencies, they
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section
6-2-9 of this chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory agencies, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent. Any removal and
hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s), personnel must be
performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
   E.   Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.
   F.   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property,
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall install a
suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-14: PROHIBITION OF DILUTION:
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
Superintendent may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994)
6-2-15: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
   A.   Industrial Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide necessary
wastewater treatment, as required, to comply with this chapter and shall
achieve compliance with all Federal categorical pretreatment standards within
the time limitations as specified by the Federal pretreatment regulations. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the City for review, and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation procedures
will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the City under the
provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the
City prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
   B.   Tenant Responsibility: If an owner of property leases premises to any
other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, and either the
owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-
5-1994)
6-2-16: VANDALISM:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or diligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance
or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this
requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in sections
6-2-39 to
6-2-43 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-17: WASTEWATER SURVEYS:
   A.   Industrial Wastewater Survey: The Federal regulations (40 CFR 403.8(f)
(2)(i)) require control authorities to identify and locate all IUs that might
be subject to the pretreatment program. Control authorities must ensure that
the entire service area is reviewed. The IWS questionnaire requests information
regarding IU activities and the nature of wastes discharged. Key to the IWS is
to identify facilities that are subject to categorical standards (i.e., CIUs)
or otherwise have the potential to impact the POTW (i.e., SIUs). If requested
by control authority, industrial or businesses using City sewers must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of wastewater by completing a
survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for
terminating service and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-18: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
   A.   Wastewater Discharge Permit Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to
discharge wastewater into the City's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the Superintendent. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in sections
6-2-39 through
6-2-43 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State and local law.
      2.   The Superintendent may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   B.   Wastewater Discharge Permitting New Connections: Any significant
industrial user proposing to begin, or recommence, discharging industrial waste
into the POTW must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning,
or recommencing, of such discharge. An application for this wastewater
discharge permit must be filed at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
the date upon which any discharge will begin. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-19: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION; BASELINE MONITORING REPORT:
Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit or submitting a baseline
monitoring report shall submit the following information as required by 40 CFR
403.12 or by the POTW Superintendent:
   A.   Users applying for a wastewater discharge permit must submit an
application on a form prescribed by the City and accompanied by the application
fee. All new significant users must submit such application one hundred eighty
(180) days prior to the date of any wastewater discharge. Existing users
subject to new National Categorical Pretreatment Standards must, within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the standard, submit such
an application. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to
submit to the City a report which contains the information listed below in this
subsection. A new source shall also be required to report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new
source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants discharged. The following information is required:
      1.   Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address
of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. The name of the
person or agent authorized to accept legal service of process.
      2.   Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description Of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description
of the nature, average rate of production and Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) of the operations carried out by such industrial user or
applicable North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Codes. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
      4.   Flow And Pollutant Measurement: Wastewater constituents and
characteristics, including any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
any Federal, State or local standards with sampling and analysis performed in
accordance with Environmental Protection Agency approved methods, and meeting
the following requirements:
         a.   The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
         b.   All samples shall be representative of daily operations. See
subsections
6-2-32H and I of this chapter for sample collection and analytical
requirements.
         c.   A minimum of four (4) grab samples, if required, must be used for
pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. For
all other pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained
through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The
Superintendent may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user that
demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is not feasible. In such cases,
samples may be obtained through time proportional techniques or through a
minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that such sampling
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
         d.   Samples must be taken immediately downstream from the
pretreatment facilities, if such exists, or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists and prior to mixing with other
waste. If nonregulated wastewater is mixed with regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentration necessary to
allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to
evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards. When an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6
(e), this adjusted limit, along with the supporting data shall be submitted to
the Superintendent. Users not subject to categorical standards shall submit
analysis of wastewater representative of the effluent discharged to the POTW.
         e.   The Superintendent may allow the submission of an application
which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for pretreatment.
         f.   A statement indicating the time, date and place of sampling,
methods of analysis and certifying that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW shall accompany each application/baseline monitoring report unless such
sampling analysis was performed by the City.
      5.   Time And Duration: Time and duration of all discharges.
      6.   Flow Rates: Daily maximum, daily average and monthly average
wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any.
      7.   Activities At The Site: Description of activities, facilities and
plant processes at the site, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally
be discharged to the POTW.
      8.   Plans: The site plans, floor plans and mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation. The plans shall include a schematic process diagram
which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW.
      9.   Product Produced: Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production.
      10.   Raw Materials: Type and amount of raw materials processed (average
and maximum per day).
      11.   Employees; Hours Of Operation: Number and type of employees, and
hours of operation and proposed or actual hours of operation of the
pretreatment facility.
      12.   Statement: A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of
the "industrial user" (as defined in section
6-2-2 of this chapter) and certified by a professional engineer, registered in
the State, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&M) or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet pretreatment
standards and requirements.
      13.   Schedule: If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance
will be required to meet pretreatment standards or requirements, then the user
shall supply a compliance schedule indicating the shortest time schedule
necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of such additional
pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
The following conditions apply to this schedule:
         a.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such schedule shall include, where
applicable, but not be limited to, dates for the hiring of an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction, beginning operation and conducting routine
operations).
         b.   No time increment in the schedule may exceed nine (9) months.
         c.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Supervisor,
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return, no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in
the schedule and the final date for compliance, to the established schedule. In
no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports
to the Superintendent.
      14.   Additional Information: Any additional information required by the
Superintendent to evaluate a permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the industrial user for revision.
   B.   All applications and reports must contain the certification statement
and be signed in accordance with section
6-2-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-20: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(L) and POTW requirements, BMRs, ninety (90) day
compliance reports and periodic compliance reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the facility and must contain a certification
statement attesting to the integrity of the information reported. The
categorical and significant reports must be signed by one (1) of the following:
   A.   A responsible corporate officer if the IU is a corporation; a
responsible corporate officer is defined as either of the following:
      1.   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function.
      2.   The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      3.   A general partner or proprietor if the IU is a partnership or sole
proprietorship.
      4.   A duly authorized representative of the above specified persons if
such authorization is in writing, is submitted to the POTW, and specifies a
person or position having overall responsibility for the facility where the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the facility.
   B.   As required in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and by the POTW, the
certification statement must read as follows:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
All applications and reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the "industrial user" as defined in section
6-2-2 of this chapter. Users shall maintain a current and accurate
authorization on file with the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017
Code)
6-2-21: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days
of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
Superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application
will be deemed denied. The Superintendent may deny any application for
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-22: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a
period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Superintendent. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-23: CONTINUATION OF EXPIRED PERMITS:
Expired permits shall remain effective and enforceable until the permit is
reissued, unless the user is notified of permit termination by the City. (Ord.
94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-24: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass-through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
      1.   A statement that indicates the duration of the wastewater discharge
permit; which, in no event shall exceed five (5) years.
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to and approval from the City, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
      3.   Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards
in Federal, State and local law.
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on Federal, State and local laws.
      5.   Statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable Federal, State or local law.
   B.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
      2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
      3.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants to the POTW.
      4.   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges.
      5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
      6.   Compliance schedules.
      7.   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
      8.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment for each separate discharge to the POTW.
      9.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, types and standard tests and reporting
schedules.
      10.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
      11.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules and
regulations.
      12.   Interim limits effective during the installation or updating of
pretreatment equipment.
      13.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the Superintendent and affording the
Superintendent, or the Superintendent's representatives, access thereto.
      14.   Requirements for the notification of any change in the
manufacturing processes, pretreatment processes, quantity or quality of waste
discharged to the POTW ninety (90) days prior to such change. The
Superintendent shall approve, deny or condition a changed discharge prior to a
change occurring.
      15.   Requirements for the notification of excessive, accidental or slug
discharges. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-25: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the City to reconsider
the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of its
issuance.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), and
an alternate condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the City fails to act within sixty (60) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Iowa District Court for Cerro Gordo County within the required statute of
limitations. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-26: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. After becoming aware of more stringent standards or
requirements, the Superintendent will update the permits within ninety (90)
days.
   B.   To make substantial alterations or additions to the industrial user's
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
   C.   To make a change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
   D.   Upon notification of information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, wastewater treatment personnel or
the receiving stream.
   E.   Upon occurrences of a violation of any terms or conditions of the
wastewater discharge permit.
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
   G.   Revision of, or a grant of, variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator.
   J.   Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a
violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and
regulations.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation
and reissuance, termination, or a notification of planned changes or
anticipated noncompliance shall not have the effect of staying or delaying the
implementation or effective date of any permit condition. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-27: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner
and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance
notice to the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must include a
written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
   A.   States the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change
the facility's operations and process;
   B.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
   C.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-28: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
If the Superintendent believes that the change at a permitted facility will
result in a substantial change in process, operation, or management practices
at the POTW, the Superintendent shall modify, revoke or reissue the permit.
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: (Ord.
94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   A.   Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the discharge change;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the City of change condition
pursuant to subsection
 6-2-32B of this chapter;
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self-monitoring results;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   F.   Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and
records;
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
   L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
   M.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of
the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon nonuse, cessation of operations
or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are voided
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-29: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application, in
accordance with section
6-2-19 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 94-14, 7-
5-1994)
6-2-30: CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Baseline Monitoring Reports (40 CFR 403.12(b)) Located In Section
6-2-19: BMRs must be signed and certified by an authorized representative of
the CIU as detailed in 40 CFR 403.12(L) and as described in section
6-2-20 of this chapter. If a CIU has already submitted the specific information
required in a permit application or data disclosure form and the information is
still current, it need not be reproduced and resubmitted in the BMR. The BMR is
a one time report, unless changes in the Federal Categorical Standards require
submission of a new or updated BMR.
   B.   Compliance Schedule Progress Report (40 CFR 403.12(c)(3)): A CIU that
is not in compliance with applicable categorical standards by the time the
standards are effective might have to modify process operations or install
treatment facilities to comply. Federal regulations require that the POTW
develop and impose a compliance schedule for the CIU to install technology to
meet applicable standards. As part of the BMR, a CIU that is unable to comply
with the categorical standards must include a schedule for attaining compliance
with the discharge standards. The final compliance or completion date in the
schedule may not be later than the final compliance date specified in the
categorical standards. The POTW may require compliance earlier than the final
compliance date specified in the Federal regulations. The conditions that apply
to the schedule are located in subsection
6-2-19A13 of this chapter.
In addition, the CIU must submit progress reports to the POTW no later than
fourteen (14) days following each date in the compliance schedule (and final
date for compliance) that include the following:
      1.   A statement of the CIU's status with respect to the compliance
schedule.
      2.   A statement of when the CIU expects to be back on schedule if it is
falling behind and the reason for the delay and steps the CIU is taking to
return to the established schedule.
      3.   The control authority can consider initiating appropriate
enforcement action to correct the problem(s).
   C.   Ninety Day Compliance Report (40 CFR 403.12(d)): Section 403.12(d) of
the general pretreatment regulations requires a CIU to submit the results of
the self-monitoring of its wastewater discharge(s) to the POTW in a final
compliance report.
All new sources subject to existing categorical pretreatment standards shall
submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days from the date of first
discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and continuing compliance with those
standards.
All existing sources required to comply with newly promulgated categorical
pretreatment standards shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90)
days of the date on which compliance is required with those standards
demonstrating that actual and continuing compliance with such standards has
been achieved.
Such ninety (90) day compliance report shall contain at a minimum the
information required in subsections
6-2-19A4, A5, A6, A12, A13 and A14 of this chapter.
Ninety (90) day compliance reports must be signed and certified by an
authorized representative of the CIU as detailed in 40 CFR 403.12(L) and as
described in section
6-2-20 of this chapter.
For CIUs subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the
POTW (40 CFR 403.6(c)), the report must contain a reasonable measure of the
IU's long term production rate. For CIU subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or another measure of operation), the report must include the IU's
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-31: SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Baseline Monitoring Reports: Refer to section
6-2-19 of this chapter.
Significant industrial users will use the same format as the categorical for
baseline reporting in section
6-2-19 of this chapter but not be subject to categorical requirements by the
EPA Federal regulations.
   B.   Compliance Schedule Progress Report: The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by subsection
6-2-19A13 of this chapter. The schedule shall contain progress increments in
the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring
an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and
conducting routine operation).
Progress reports should contain information below:
      1.   A statement of the status with respect to the compliance schedule.
      2.   A statement of when IU expects to be back on schedule if it is
falling behind and the reason for the delay and steps the IU is taking to
return to the established schedule.
      3.   The control authority can consider initiating appropriate
enforcement action to correct the problem(s).
   C.   Ninety Day Compliance Schedule:
All new sources shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days from
the date of first discharge to the POTW demonstrating actual and continuing
compliance with those standards.
All existing sources required to comply with newly promulgated pretreatment
standards shall submit a report to the City within ninety (90) days of the date
on which compliance is required with those standards demonstrating that actual
and continuing compliance with such standards has been achieved.
Such ninety (90) day compliance report shall contain at a minimum the
information required in subsections
6-2-19A4, A5, A6, A12, A13 and A14 of this chapter.
All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section
6-2-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-32: CATEGORICAL AND SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Periodic Compliance Reporting (40 CFR 403.12(e) And (h)):
40 CFR 403.12(e) categorical: After the final compliance date or, in the case
of a new source, after beginning the discharge into the POTW, CIUs (except
NSCIUs) are required to submit, in June and December, the self- monitoring
results of their wastewater discharge(s). The POTW may modify the months in
which the reports are to be submitted and may require more frequently. All
results for self-monitoring performed must be reported to the POTW, even if the
CIU is monitoring more frequently than required.
40 CFR 403.12(h) significant: After the final compliance date or, SIUs not
subject to categorical pretreatment standards must submit to the POTW at a
minimum of once every six (6) months (on dates specified by the POTW) a
description of the nature, concentration and flow of the pollutants required to
be reported by the POTW. The POTW may modify and increase the frequency of
collection and reporting. All results for self-monitoring performed must be
reported to the POTW, even if the IU is monitoring more frequently than
required.
Periodic compliance reports must include the following:
      1.   The nature and concentration of pollutants as required by the POTW.
      2.   Flow data (average and maximum daily) as required by the POTW.
      3.   Mass of pollutants discharged (applicable to CIUs where mass limits
have been imposed).
      4.   Production rates (applicable to CIUs where equivalent limits have
been imposed or where limits imposed are expressed in allowable pollutant
discharged per unit of production).
      5.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial
user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
      6.   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW,
using the procedures prescribed in subsection I of this section, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
As a result of the streamlining rule, the Superintendent has the authority to
allow an IU subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling
of a pollutant regulated by that categorical pretreatment standard if the CIU
has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the
pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is
present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in
the pollutant resulting from activities of the CIU. To be authorized to forego
this sampling, the IU must provide the sampling data and meet the requirements
in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Nondeductible sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was
used in the analysis. This monitoring waiver does not supersede certification
processes and requirements established in the categorical pretreatment
standards.
For a CIU authorized by the POTW to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by
a categorical pretreatment standard, the CIU must certify on each report, using
the statement in 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(v), that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its wastestream from activities of the IU. The monitoring waiver
is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the IU's control
mechanism, but it may not be longer than five (5) years. The CIU must submit a
new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
control mechanism. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Report Of Changed Conditions: Each industrial user is required to
notify the Wastewater Superintendent of any planned significant changes to the
industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before change.
      1.   The Wastewater Superintendent may require the industrial user to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under section
6-2-19 of this chapter.
      2.   The Wastewater Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under section
6-2-21 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
section
6-2-26 of this chapter.
      3.   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the Wastewater Superintendent has responded to the industrial
user's notice.
      4.   For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent
(10%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants,
shall be deemed significant.
   C.   Spill Containment:
      1.   Accidental Discharge Protection: Users having the ability to cause
interference, or pass-through at the POTW, or to discharge a slug, shall
provide protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be at the user's cost and
expense.
      2.   Spill Containment Plan (SCP): Users meeting the criteria in
subsection A of this section shall develop an SCP. The plan shall require the
approval of the Superintendent and shall contain the following:
         a.   A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
         b.   A description of stored chemicals;
         c.   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges,
including any that would violate the discharge prohibitions in section
6-2-9 of this chapter. Notification procedures shall comply with subsections C3
and C4 of this section;
         d.   A description of procedures and structures necessary to prevent
adverse POTW impact from accidental spills including inspection and maintenance
of stored areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants
(including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response;
         e.   A schedule for the completion or implementation of necessary
procedures and structures. Complete implementation and installation of any
procedures or structures shall be according to the shortest possible schedule
but in no case longer than one (1) year. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to
modify and operate its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter.
      3.   Written Report: Users shall submit a written report to the
Superintendent within five (5) days following such an accidental or deliberate
discharge describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Users shall submit follow up
reports as may be required by the Superintendent. Such report, or reports,
shall not relieve the user of any expenses, loss, damage or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such report relieve the user of
any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this
chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate discharges
may, in addition to any other remedies available to the City, result in the
revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
      4.   Control Of Discharge Production: Users shall control production of
all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all
applicable regulations upon reduction, loss or failure of its pretreatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
pretreatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where,
among other things, the primary source of power to the user's pretreatment
facility is reduced, lost or fails.
      5.   Posting Of Notice: Users required to have a spill containment plan
must permanently post a notice in English and the language of common use on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
should a prohibited discharge occur. Users shall ensure that all employees who
are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge
are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
   D.   Treatment Upsets: Users shall inform the Superintendent within one (1)
hour of becoming aware of an upset in operations that places it in a temporary
state of noncompliance with the pollutant limits in this chapter. Users shall
provide a follow up written report to the Superintendent within five (5)
working days. The report must demonstrate that the pretreatment facility was
being operated in a prudent and appropriate manner and shall contain:
      1.   Description of the upset, its cause(s), and impact on the user's
compliance status;
      2.   The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and if noncompliance is continuing, the time by which compliance
is reasonably expected to be restored;
      3.   All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of such an upset.
   E.   Treatment Bypass:
      1.   Unavoidable Bypass: Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to
prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage or no feasible
alternatives exist such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention
of untreated waste or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
      2.   Essential Bypass: The Superintendent may allow a bypass to occur
which does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards, but only if it is
essential for maintenance to assure efficient operation.
      3.   Notification Of Bypass:
         a.   Anticipated Bypass: The user shall immediately notify the
Superintendent and submit a written notice to the POTW within five (5) days.
This report shall specify:
            (1)   A description of the bypass, its cause and the duration;
            (2)   Whether the bypass has been corrected;
            (3)   The steps being taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a
reoccurrence of the bypass.
      4.   Liability: Proper notification shall not relieve the user of
liability for treatment costs and fees or other remedies as provided for in
sections
6-2-39 to
6-2-43 of this chapter.
   F.   Reporting Requirements From Nonsignificant Industrial Users: All
industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the City as the Superintendent may require.
   G.   Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting: If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must
notify the City within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the City within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to
resample if the POTW performs sampling at least once a month, or if the POTW
performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the
industrial user receives the results of this sampling.
   H.   Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis
must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
   I.   Sample Collection:
      1.   Except as indicated in subsection I2 of this section, the industrial
user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques. In the event flow proportional composite sampling is
infeasible, the Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional
sampling or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent
being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous discharge limits.
      2.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
   J.   Determination Of Noncompliance: The Superintendent may use a grab
sample(s) to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards.
   K.   Timing: Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
   L.   Record Keeping: Industrial users shall retain, and make available for
inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained
under this chapter. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this chapter, or where
the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
   M.   Self-Monitoring Requirements: All SIUs, including CIUs, must conduct
self-monitoring as part of several different reporting requirements. That may
include BMR, ninety (90) day compliance report and periodic compliance reports.
Those reports must be based on data that were obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report and are
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. In cases
where a violation is identified, the IU must repeat the sampling and analysis
for the pollutant in violation and submit the results within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. Noted in 40 CFR 403.123(g)(5), sample
collection and analysis for all required pretreatment program reports must be
conducted using 40 CFR part 136 procedures or with any other test procedures
approved by the EPA Administrator. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2-33: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   A.   Inspection And Sampling: The City shall have the right to enter the
facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this
chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the
industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users
shall allow the Superintendent, or authorized representatives, ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
      1.   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City,
State and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
      2.   The City, State and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
      3.   The City may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow
and quality shall be calibrated once yearly to ensure their accuracy.
      4.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent and shall not be replaced.
      5.   Unreasonable delays in allowing City personnel access to the
industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-14,
7-5-1994)
6-2-34: NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Notification: Any industrial user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the
name of hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the
industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms (10 kg) of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the industrial user:
      1.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes; (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
      2.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in
the IU's discharge; and
      3.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of rule 40
CFR 403.12 shall provide the notification no later than one hundred eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences of the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under subsection
6-2-32B of this chapter. The notification required in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of:
baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule progress reports or periodic
compliance reports. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Exemption; Additional Notification:
      1.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR part 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time notification.
      2.   Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   C.   New Regulations: In the case of any new regulations under section 3001
of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substances as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   Reduction Program: In the case of any notification made under this
section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it
has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-35: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or
property or any part thereof, and if the Superintendent has demonstrated
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that
there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then upon application by the Superintendent to a judicial magistrate
for Cerro Gordo County, a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the
specific location subject to the warrant shall be issued. The warrant shall
specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property
described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the
Superintendent, in the company of a uniformed police officer of the City. In
the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall
be made without the issuance of a warrant. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-36: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
   A.   Except as herein provided, information and data obtained from user
reports, questionnaires, permit applications and inspections, shall be made
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction. If
the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate that the release of
such information would divulge information concerning processes or methods of
production entitled to protection under law as trade secrets of the user or
would give advantage to competitors and serve no public purpose, the
Superintendent shall not make such information available to the public but such
information shall be available to the USEPA or IDNR.
   B.   Decisions by the Superintendent to deny confidential status for
information may be appealed using the procedures in section
6-2-25 of this chapter. In determining whether information is confidential, the
provision of chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa shall prevail.
   C.   Effluent data and City enforcement actions will not be considered
confidential records or information. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-37: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The City shall annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the Mason City community, a list of users which, at any time during the
previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance. Instances of
SNC are user violations which meet one (1) or more of the following criteria:
   A.   Violations Of Wastewater Discharge Limits:
      1.   Chronic Violations: Sixty six percent (66%) or more of the
measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a
six (6) month period (any magnitude of exceedance).
      2.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) Violations: Thirty three percent
(33%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the
same average limit by more than the TRC in a six (6) month period.
There are two (2) groups of TRCs:
 
Group I for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, TRC = 1.4
etc.)
Group II for all other pollutants                                     TRC = 1.2
 
      3.   Endangering Health: Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit
(average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads)
or pass-through; or endangered the health of the sewage treatment personnel or
the public.
      4.   Exercise Of Emergency Authority: Any discharge of a pollutant that
has caused imminent endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment
and has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge.
      5.   Failure To Meet Compliance: Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days
after the schedule data, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local
control mechanism or enforcement or for starting construction, completing
construction or attaining final compliance.
      6.   Failure To Provide Reports: Failure to provide, within thirty (30)
days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports,
ninety (90) day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and
reports on compliance with compliance schedule.
      7.   Noncompliance Report: Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
      8.   Other Violations: Any other violation or group of violations which
the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the pretreatment program.
   B.   Significant Noncompliance: When a user is in SNC, the Superintendent is
directed to:
      1.   Report the information to IDNR as part of the annual pretreatment
performance summary of permitted user noncompliance;
      2.   Include the user in the annual public notification as described
above;
      3.   Address SNC through appropriate enforcement actions or document in a
timely manner the reasons for withholding enforcement. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-38: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   Notification Of Violation: Whenever the Superintendent finds that any
user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the
Superintendent or a duly authorized representative may serve upon said user a
written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the City to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   B.   Consent Orders: The Superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to subsections D and E of this section and shall be judicially
enforceable.
   C.   Show Cause Hearing: The Superintendent may order any user which causes
or contributes to violation(s) of this chapter, wastewater discharge permits,
or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such action and a request that the user show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested
at least 7 days prior to the hearing). Such notice may be served on any
authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as
ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing
date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other
action against the user.
   D.   Compliance Orders: When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or
orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within ten (10) days. If the user
does not come into compliance within ten (10) days, sewer service shall be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimized the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a Federal pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user.
   E.   Cease And Desist Orders: When the Superintendent finds that a user is
violating this chapter, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements.
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any
other action against the user. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-39: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   Violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40
CFR of chapter 1, section 403.8 is a Municipal infraction and shall be
punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each day said violation exists or continues. All other Municipal
infractions shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each initial separate violation and two hundred dollars ($200.00)
for each repeated violation. In addition to the penalties established in this
section for Municipal infractions, corporation counsel shall seek all other
appropriate remedies allowed by law in regard to the abating correction or
discontinuance of activities which constitute Municipal infractions under this
subsection.
   B.   Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service
charge and the Superintendent shall have such other collection remedies as may
be available for other service charges and fees.
   C.   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent (5%) of the unpaid
balance. Interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half percent
(1.5%) per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought
for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
   D.   Issuance of a Municipal infraction citation shall not be a prerequisite
for taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-40: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal
notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice
and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW, or which presents an endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Superintendent
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent shall allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings set forth in section
6-2-41 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the Superintendent, prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under subsection
6-2-38C and section
6-2-41 of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-41: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to those provisions in section
6-2-28 of this chapter, any user that violates the following conditions of this
chapter, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject
to discharge termination:
   A.   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   C.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
   D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling;
   E.   Violation of the pretreatment standards set out in sections
6-2-9 to
6-2-14 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause, under section
6-2-25 of this chapter, why the proposed action should not be taken. (Ord. 94-
14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-42: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   A.   Injunctive Relief: Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard
or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the Superintendent may petition the Iowa District
Court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the City. A petition
for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other
action against a user.
   B.   Criminal Prosecution:
      1.   Any user that wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30)
days, or both.
      2.   Any user that wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and be subject to imprisonment for thirty (30)
days. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for
personal injury or property damage available under State law.
      3.   Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more
than thirty (30) days, or both.
   C.   Second Conviction: In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation
per day or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both.
   D.   Remedies Nonexclusive: The provisions in section
6-2-37 of this chapter and this section are not exclusive remedies. The City
reserves the right to take any, all or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the City
reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the City is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement
action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
6-2-43: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 94-14, 7-5-1994)
ARTICLE A. SEWER RATES
SECTION:
6-2A-1: Enforcement
6-2A-2: Rates Established
6-2A-3: Schedule Of Rates
6-2A-4: Payments
6-2A-5: Deposits Required
6-2A-6: Sewer Rental Fund
6-2A-7: Adjustments To Bill
6-2A-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent is hereby charged with the enforcement
of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 04-18, 7-6-2004)
6-2A-2: RATES ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established just and equitable rates and charges for the use
of the sewage system and facilities and wastewater treatment plant maintained
and operated by the City which shall be paid by the owner and occupant of each
lot, parcel of real estate or building which is now or may hereafter be
connected with said sewage system or that is in any way served by said
wastewater treatment plant, in accordance with the schedule in section
6-2A-3 of this article. (Ord. 04-18, 7-6-2004)
6-2A-3: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
   A.   General Rates: Beginning with all billings on or after July 1, 2024,
the following rates shall be effective:
 
Sewer                July 1, 2024- June July 1, 2025- June 30, July 1, 2026-
                     30, 2025           2026                   Until Amended
1.    Administrati                                         
   Charge Per Mete$5.87              $6.08                  $6.30
 
   2.   Usage Per 100 Cubic Feet:
 
     July 1, 2024- June 30, July 1, 2025- June 30, July 1, 2026- Until Amended
      2025                   2026
Gross 3.727                  4.547                  5.093
Net   3.355                  4.093                  4.584
 
   B.   Minimum Rates: Regardless of the quantity of water used, there shall be
a minimum charge, dependent upon the water meter size, of the following
amounts, with the following rates being effective beginning with all billings
on or after July 1, 2024:
Meter Size  Units          July 1, 2024- June 30, July 1,    July 1, 2026-
(Inches )   Included in 2025                         2025- June Until Amended
            Minimum *                                30, 2026
Meter Size  Units          July 1, 2024- June 30, July 1,    July 1, 2026-
(Inches )   Included in 2025                         2025- June Until Amended
            Minimum *                                30, 2026
5/8         2              12.58                  14.27      15.47
3/4         4              19.29                  22.45      24.64
1           7              29.36                  34.73      38.39
11/2        22             79.68                  96.13      107.15
2           56             193.75                 235.29     263.00
3           112            381.63                 464.50     519.71
4           167            566.16                 689.61     771.83
6           228            770.81                 939.28     1,051.45
8           308         1039.21                      1,266.72   1,418.17
10          388         1,307.61                     1,594.16   1,784.89
12          469         1,579.37                     1,925.70   2,156.20
* Units are measured in increments of 100 cubic feet of usage. The minimum
monthly charge includes the administrative charge.
 
   C.   Special Rates: Where, in the judgment of the City Engineer, special
conditions surround the use of the City water to the extent that the
application of the rental rate provided for in subsection A of this section
would be inadequate or unfair to either the City or the contributor, a special
rate shall be established by the City Engineer. Each such special rate shall be
contained in a written order or direction filed with the Clerk and open to
public inspection. The City Engineer is authorized to make such rates in
accordance with the following rules:
      1.   Rate Based On Amount Of Sewage: Where a substantial portion of the
City water consumed is not polluted or is not discharged into the sanitary
sewer system, the rate shall be based upon an estimate of the amount of sewage,
and in the event that the property owner or contributor does not agree to such
rate, then such property owner or contributor shall, at his own expense,
install a meter for the purpose of determining the amount of sewage being
discharged into the sanitary sewage system.
      2.   Additional Rate Based On BOD: Where the BOD (biochemical oxygen
demand) of the sewage exceeds three hundred (300) parts per million by weight,
the following additional rate shall be added to the regular rate above set
forth: (BOD-300) x (gallons of sewage ÷ 1,000)(0.0017). The contributor shall,
upon the request of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, provide a
satisfactory opening in the lateral before the sewage reaches the sewer main
where a representative sample of sewage can be taken by the Wastewater
Treatment Superintendent or a designated representative.
      The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent or a designated representative
shall, when he deems it necessary, take representative samples of sewage and
run the BOD test which shall be used to calculate the rate.
      3.   Discharging Of Waste Jeopardizing Wastewater Treatment Plant
Prohibited: No sewage or industrial waste having characteristics tending, in
the opinion of the Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, to jeopardize the
successful and continued operation of the wastewater treatment plant or any of
its units including sanitary sewers leading to the same, shall be discharged
into the sanitary sewage system. Such waste may be pretreated by the
contributor at his own expense and discharged into said system, but said
contributor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Wastewater Treatment
Superintendent that such pretreatment is adequate and dependable to the extent
that the sewage or waste discharged into the sanitary system does not
jeopardize the successful and continuous operation of the wastewater treatment
works.
      4.   Optional Payment Of One- And Two-Family Residences: The owner,
lessee or occupant of any one- or two-family dwelling connected with the City
sewage system shall have the option of paying his sewer rental charges for one
(1) year in advance; provided, that such payment shall be made not later than
March 31. Said charge shall be based on the net water bills for the twelve (12)
complete preceding months for said premises, and shall be figured on the amount
of the nine (9) lowest water bills multiplied by one and one-third (11/3) the
amount thus arrived at to be multiplied by the percentage set forth in
subsection A of this section. The application of these rates is limited to
residences used only for one- and two-family dwellings and shall not apply
where any commercial or industrial use is made of the premises.
      5.   Usage Established For Residential Structures: Effective January 1,
1991, for residential structures connected to the City sewage system without
the benefit of City water, the usage shall be established at three hundred
(300) cubic feet per month per each occupant with a maximum of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) cubic feet being charged per month.
   The sewer rental rates will be charged as set forth in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 09-04, 6-2-2009; amd. Ord. 19-06, 6-18-2019; Ord. 20-5, 7-21-
2020; Ord. 21-7, 6-15-2021; Ord. 22-05, 4-19-2022; Ord. 24-9, 6-4-2024; )
6-2A-4: PAYMENTS:
Bills for sewer rental shall be rendered to public utility consumers by adding
to the water and garbage service a statement showing the amount of the charge
or rate for sewer rental as herein provided. All sewer rental charges which are
paid in full on or before the fifteenth day after delivery or mailing thereof
shall be eligible for a ten percent (10%) discount and a ten percent (10%)
discount of the gross amount of said bill shall be subtracted therefrom. Any
payment transmitted through the United States mail postmarked on or before the
fifteenth day shall be deemed paid within fifteen (15) days. If any sewer
rental bill shall not be paid, or if transmitted through the United States mail
postmarked after the twenty fifth day following the date of delivery or
mailing, the property served shall be subject to immediate discontinuance of
service. (Ord. 02-12, 4-16-2002)
6-2A-5: DEPOSITS REQUIRED:
Deposits shall be required for sewer rental at the discretion of the Finance
Director as provided for in subsection
 6-1A-1D of this title. (Ord. 94-29, 12-20-1994)
6-2A-6: SEWER RENTAL FUND:
All funds collected under the provisions of this article and turned over to the
Finance Director shall be kept by the director in a separate and distinct fund
to be known as the Sewer Rental Fund. Said fund shall be used for the following
purposes:
   A.   Paying the expenses of collection of said rents and the enforcement of
the provisions of this article;
   B.   For the construction of new sanitary sewers paid for by the City, with
or without special assessment against benefited and abutting property;
   C.   For the payment of deficiencies in assessments for the construction of
new sanitary sewers;
   D.   For the remodeling, repair or enlargement of the sewage treatment plant
or for the construction of a new sewage treatment facility;
   E.   For the usual operating expenses of the sewage treatment facilities,
including the paying of salaries or wages of employees at said plant. (Ord.
1438, 5-8-1978; amd. Ord. 94-29, 12-20-1994)
6-2A-7: ADJUSTMENTS TO BILL:
Only one (1) adjustment will be made during any twelve (12) month period.
If an adjustment is needed for water that did not enter the sanitary sewer
system, the customer must provide verification that the water did not enter the
sanitary sewer. The bill will be adjusted by deducting the previous year's
average quarterly consumption and dividing the difference between the Public
Utilities Department and the consumer.
For total credit on the sewer rental bill, the consumer may purchase a separate
water meter to meter the flow not discharged to the sanitary sewer. The credit
meter shall be installed and maintained by the owner. The owner shall notify
the Public Utilities Department before removing the credit meter in order to
receive credit. A service fee set by resolution of the Council will be charged
for any part of a quarterly billing period the credit meter is used. (1985
Code; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE B. WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
6-2B-1: Definitions
6-2B-2: License
6-2B-3: Issuance Of License
6-2B-4: Denial, Suspension And Revocation Of License
6-2B-5: Denial, Suspension, Revocation Procedure
6-2B-6: Hours Of Operation
6-2B-7: Standards For Vehicles And Equipment
6-2B-8: Disposal
6-2B-9: Identification Of Source
6-2B-10: Mixing Wastes
6-2B-11: Standards For Disposal At POTW
6-2B-12: Rejection Of Waste Loads
6-2B-13: Enforcement Procedures
6-2B-14: Fee Payment For Domestic And Industrial Wastes
6-2B-15: Other Regulations
6-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as follows:
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The liquid waste from industrial users.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section
212 of the Clean Water Act, owned by the City of Mason City. This definition
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of wastewater or industrial waste of a liquid nature or that convey
wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant, regardless of ownership.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Administrator of the Mason City Water Reclamation Division,
wastewater treatment facility, POTW, or his/her designated deputy, agent, or
representative.
VEHICLE: A device equipped with a tank and used to remove or transport waste.
WASTE: Human excreta, water, scum, sludge, septage, and food waste grease
solids from public and private wastewater disposal systems or holding tanks;
impervious vaults, portable, or chemical toilets; and devices used to trap
grease resulting from food preparation.
WASTE HAULER: A person or firm engaged in the removal, transport, or disposal,
into the City of Mason City's water reclamation facility, the contents of any
privy vault, cesspool, septic tank, chemical toilet or acceptable industrial
waste, who shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall be
referred to herein as a waste hauler.
WASTEWATER: A combination of the liquid and water carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to
provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of wastewater and
industrial waste. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-2: LICENSE:
No waste hauler shall remove from within the City or shall dispose of waste,
whether from a source inside or outside the City, into the Mason City POTW
without first obtaining a waste hauler's license from the POTW, with the
following exceptions:
   A.   Waste haulers utilized by industrial with current wastewater discharge
permit by the POTW.
   B.   Waste haulers granted temporary authorization by the POTW
Superintendent in order to deal with an emergency. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The waste hauler's license shall be issued by the Wastewater Treatment Plant
Superintendent upon written application that shall consist of the following
minimum requirements: (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
   A.   Inspection: The Water Reclamation Division, upon application, shall
inspect the trucks, hoses, valves, and associated equipment of the applicant
for a waste hauler's license and determine if it meets the minimum
qualifications for complying with the conditions of this article. (Ord. 94-30,
12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   License Fee And Bond: An application shall be required for each vehicle
used by the applicant, along with a license fee and a bond with reasonable
surety in amounts set by resolution of the Council for the faithful compliance
with the provisions of this article including the prompt payment of fees, fines
and damages.
   C.   Renewal Of License: Renewal application must be made in the same manner
as initial application. License will expire, from the date of issuance, on
March 31 every other year. Failure to pay application fees, have a current bond
and permit, or completed inspection of tanker with POTW personnel will result
in relinquishing disposal privileges. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Transferability Of License: Waste hauler licenses are not transferable.
Waste haulers shall remove City license stickers and inform the water
reclamation facility when truck ownership is transferred. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
6-2B-4: DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The City may suspend, revoke or deny a waste hauler license for any of the
following reasons: (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
   A.   The making of any false or misleading statement concerning the nature,
origin or quantity of liquid waste delivered for disposal. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Failure to pay fees or costs as allowed by this Code.
   C.   Violation of the rules governing waste haulers as found in this
article.
   D.   An inspection shows deficiencies in equipment.
   E.   The waste hauler's license has been suspended by the City due to
noncompliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-5: DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
In the event of an occurrence warranting the suspension or revocation of any
permit issued under this article, the following procedure shall apply:
   A.   The Administrator or Superintendent of the POTW shall notify the permit
holder, in writing, that the permit is suspended or revoked. Such notice shall
be sent to the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, at
the address listed on the permit holder's application. The notice shall set
forth the nature of the violation and shall set forth the period of suspension,
or in the case of revocation, that the permit is revoked. The Administrator and
Superintendent shall have the authority to determine whether a violation
requires suspension (and for how long) or whether the permit should be revoked.
The permit holder receiving a notice of suspension or revocation may request a
hearing thereon before the Administrator and/or the Superintendent. The hearing
request must be in writing, must have a copy of the notice of suspension or
revocation attached to it and must be delivered to the POTW Superintendent no
later than ten (10) days after the date of such notice at 10 1st Street N.W. If
no request for a hearing is made within the time set forth above, the
suspension or revocation shall, upon the expiration of such time, become
immediately effective and the permit holder shall have no right to further
hearing or appeal. If timely request of hearing is made, the permit holder
shall be notified in writing of the time, date and place of hearing which shall
be not sooner than five (5), nor more than fifteen (15), working days following
the receipt of the request for hearing. In case a violation of this article is
of such nature that the violation is deemed to be an immediate hazard by the
Superintendent of the water reclamation facility, the Superintendent shall be
authorized to temporarily suspend the license until notice can be given and
hearing held.
   B.   If, after such a hearing, the City Administrator or Superintendent of
the POTW makes a finding based on substantial evidence that a violation of this
article did, in fact, occur as alleged, the City Administrator or
Superintendent may continue suspension of, suspend or revoke the license; the
determination of whether to revoke such license shall be in the discretion of
the City Administrator or Superintendent and shall be dependent upon the
circumstances surrounding the violation and its severity.
   C.   The decision of continued suspension or revocation made by the City
Administrator or POTW Superintendent may be appealed to the City Council. In
order to appeal such decision, written notice of appeal must be filed with the
City Clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the decision. Failure to file
such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the
decision of continued suspension or revocation.
   D.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the City Clerk. The hearing of
such appeal shall be scheduled at the next regular Council meeting, if such
notice is received by two o'clock (2:00) P.M. on the Thursday before the next
regular Council meeting. If notice is not received by the above designated
time, the hearing will be scheduled for the next following Council meeting. The
hearing may be continued for good cause. The hearing shall be confined to the
record made before the City Administrator and POTW Superintendent, and the
arguments of the parties or their representatives, but no additional evidence
shall be taken. After such hearing, the City Council may affirm or reverse the
order. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be
filed with the City Clerk within three (3) days after the hearing, or any
continued session thereof.
   E.   If the City Council affirms the action of the City Administrator and
the POTW Superintendent, continuing the suspension or revocation, the City
Council shall so state and order in its written decision.
   F.   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for
another waste hauler's license for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 94-30, 12-
20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Liquid wastes will be accepted at the disposal station between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday, except by special arrangement between the waste hauler and the
Superintendent to permit response to emergency conditions. Weekend and holiday
hauling will not be accepted, nor liquid waste before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
or after four o'clock (4:00) P.M., unless prior approval from the
Superintendent, by making written or verbal request to the POTW Superintendent
at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the date the work is to be
performed. The request shall state the location of the property, the name of
the owner, the date, and the hours of work. Waste haulers shall maintain the
designated location in a clean and orderly condition to avoid noxious odors and
unsanitary conditions. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-7: STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
For all vehicles and equipment used by waste haulers, the licensee shall:
   A.   Prevent waste and wastewater from leaking, spilling, or discharging
onto roads or rights-of-way.
   B.   Ensure proper construction and repair of the equipment to allow
cleaning.
   C.   Maintain vehicles and equipment in an essentially rust free and
sanitary condition and appearance.
   D.   Display the business name as it appears on the waste hauler's license
in three inch (3") or larger letters on the left and right sides of the
vehicle.
   E.   Display a City permit decal on the left side of the tanker bearing the
expiration date of the license. A City permit decal shall be provided by the
Superintendent or designee as the only proof of licensing after the applicant
has met all conditions and requirements of this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-
1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-8: DISPOSAL:
Waste haulers shall dispose of hauled wastes permitted in this article
according to rules for land application as found in chapters 65, 69, and 121,
Code of Iowa, or at a location designated by the Wastewater Treatment Plant
Superintendent. Waste disposal is only accepted during the set hours of
operation. Waste haulers may also dispose of hauled wastes at Municipal
wastewater plants outside the Mason City service area where such wastes are
accepted. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-9: IDENTIFICATION OF SOURCE:
Waste haulers must document the nature and origin of wastes collected and the
site and method of disposal for wastes that are delivered to the wastewater
treatment plant. Such information shall be provided on a manifest form provided
by the water reclamation facility. The manifest shall also include: a) the
name, address and phone number of the waste generator; b) the type of waste
collected; c) the approximate volume of the load; d) any other information
consistent with identification and tracking of wastes. The Superintendent or
his/her designee shall have the right to verify all information required by
this article including the right to measure, sample and analyze any waste
regulated by this article. The waste hauler shall obtain approval from the
Superintendent, or his/her designee, prior to loading wastes originating from
an industrial/commercial source unless previous approval is on record at the
water reclamation facility. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-10: MIXING WASTES:
Wastes from residential and nonresidential sources shall not be mixed. Wastes
from an industrial/commercial source shall not be mixed with wastes of any type
from another location. Portable toilets may be mixed with similar wastes from
different locations. Grease trap waste may only be mixed with other similar
grease trap loads as long as each source is identified on the waste manifest
form. Residential wastes from several sources may be mixed as long as each
source is identified.
Any tanks or equipment used for hauling waste to the POTW shall not be used for
hauling hazardous or toxic wastes, as defined in the Iowa Code and in 40 CFR
part 261, or other wastes detrimental to the POTW. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
6-2B-11: STANDARDS FOR DISPOSAL AT POTW:
Disposal of wastes to the POTW shall be carried out in accordance with
pretreatment standards and requirements established by Federal, State, and City
governments including categorical standards developed for the waste generator's
industrial category. The Superintendent may reject wastes from waste haulers
that do not comply with this section or with any other provision of this
article. Waste haulers shall not deliver wastes to the Mason City POTW that:
(Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
   A.   Exceed the limits found in sections
6-2-9,
6-2-10, and
6-2-11 of this chapter.
   B.   Are hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR part 261 or 567 IAC, and the
Iowa Code.
   C.   Originate from sand traps, such as those located in car, truck, and
trailer washes, which primarily remove sand and dirt.
   D.   Originate from mineral oil and grease traps, such as those located at
vehicle maintenance facilities.
   E.   Originate from an animal confinement facility.
   F.   Are not completely identified or are from industrial/commercial sources
that are not approved by the Superintendent as required in section
6-2B-9 of this article.
   G.   Are mixed in a manner prohibited in section
6-2B-10 of this article.
   H.   Are wastes other than residential from outside the City limits, except
through requests to the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994; amd. 2017
Code)
6-2B-12: REJECTION OF WASTE LOADS:
The Superintendent, or his/her designee, may reject any hauled waste load that
violates or is suspected to violate the requirements of this Code or that fails
to meet any other guidelines established by the Superintendent to protect
personnel, equipment, and processes at the POTW. Waste haulers must:
   A.   Remove rejected waste from the POTW.
   B.   Properly dispose of all rejected wastes in accordance with State and
Federal law.
   C.   Provide the Superintendent with a written statement, signed by the
waste hauler license holder, stating the location, date, and time the rejected
load was disposed of. The statement is due within five (5) calendar days after
the waste is rejected.
Vehicles used to haul rejected wastes shall not be allowed to enter the POTW
with additional wastes until the statement required by this section is
delivered to the Superintendent. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-13: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any person, corporation or other legal entity who violates or resists
the enforcement of any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
Municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the initial offense and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
repeat offense. Each violation constitutes a separate offense. Any person,
corporation or other legal entity that violates a provision of this article
after having previously been found guilty of violating the same provision of
this article at the same location or at a different location shall be guilty of
a repeat offense.
   B.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude
the City from seeking alternative relief, including any order for abatement or
injunctive relief, from the court in the same action or as a separate action.
The enforcement provisions in this section are in addition to those set out in
sections
6-2-38 through
6-2-42 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-14: FEE PAYMENT FOR DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
   A.   A treatment fee shall be set per gallon of hauled waste which shall be
equal to the cost of disposal and treatment of an equivalent mass of pollutants
otherwise delivered into the sewer system. Currently, the fee is thirty dollars
($30.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of sewage. This treatment fee will be
adjusted according to the costs associated with the administrative requirements
of this article. (Ord. 07-15, 6-5-2007)
   B.   Loads originating outside the area served by the wastewater treatment
plant shall pay a fee equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the in service
fee.
   C.   Fees shall be computed and recorded by the Data Processing Department
and shall be paid by the waste hauler on the basis of monthly billings by the
Finance Department. Limits of credit shall be reasonable limits to be
determined by the Finance Department. Abuse of such credit shall be grounds for
liability on the waste hauler's bond and for refusal of disposal services to
any waste hauler under this article. (Ord. 94-30, 12-20-1994)
6-2B-15: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this article are in addition to, and not in
substitution of, any other applicable Federal, State, or local statutes, rules
and regulations regarding the subject matter of wastewater collection,
transportation and disposal. Any person holding a permit issued under this
article shall, at all times, abide by and remain in strict compliance with all
such other statutes, rules and regulations. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
STORM SEWERS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Storm Sewer District
6-3-3: Drainage District
6-3-4: Discharge Requirements
6-3-5: Drainage Connections Required
6-3-6: Approval Of Connections
6-3-7: Applicability Of Provisions
6-3-8: Permits Required
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purposes of this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
AIR            Any equipment or apparatus using in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons of water in
CONDITIONING   any one (1) day for cooling or purifying purposes, the wastewater of which will not be
AND COOLING    of such a nature as will render it unfit to be wasted into storm sewers.
EQUIPMENT:
BONDS:         Revenue bonds, notes, loans, or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to
               finance the costs of construction.
               Any person owning, operating, or otherwise responsible for property within the city
               which directly or indirectly discharges stormwater or surface or subsurface waters to
CONTRIBUTOR OR any portion of the stormwater management system, including direct or indirect
USER:          discharges to the city’s stormwater drainage system, or which is directly or
               indirectly protected by the city’s stormwater drainage system. The term “contributor”
               or “user” means any person responsible for the direct or indirect discharge of
               stormwater or surface or subsurface waters to the city’s stormwater drainage system.
               Costs reasonably incurred in connection with providing capital improvements to the
               system or any portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
               following:
               A.   Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and all interests in connection
               therewith including all rights-of-way and easements therefor;
               B.   Physical construction installation and testing including the costs of labor,
               services, materials, supplies and utility services used in connection therewith;
COSTS OF       C.   Architectural, engineering, legal and other professional services;
CONSTRUCTION:  D.   Insurance premiums during construction, to the extent not paid for by a
               contractor for construction and installation;
               E.   Any taxes or other charges which become due during construction;
               F.   Expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf with its approval in seeking to
               enforce any remedy against any contractor or subcontractor in respect of any default
               under a contract relating to construction;
               G.   Principal and interest on any bonds; and
               H.   Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto.
DEBT SERVICE:  The amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on outstanding debt and pay
               the principal of maturing debt.
DEVELOPED      Real property upon which a structure or impervious surface has been placed or
PROPERTY:      constructed, thus increasing the amount of rainwater or surface water runoff.
DIRECTOR:      The city engineer as director of the stormwater management utility.
DOWNSPOUTS:    Any duct used for carrying roof water from the roof toward the ground.
               A district established for the drainage of surface waters from agricultural or other
DRAINAGE       lands for the protection of said lands from overflow when said protection is a public
DISTRICT:      benefit or is conducive to public health, convenience, and welfare, and in which the
               City is either trustee or responsible party.
EQUIVALENT     The average impervious area of a residential property located within the city as
RESIDENTIAL    periodically determined and established as provided in this chapter.
UNIT OR ERU:
               Equivalent Residential Unit; the dollar value periodically determined and assigned to
ERU RATE:      each ERU as a charge for stormwater management services, and expressed as $X.XX per
               ERU.
EXEMPT         Public rights-of-way including public streets, alleys, sidewalks, public drainage
PROPERTY:      facilities, and other City facilities.
               Costs of extensions, additions and capital improvements to or the renewal and
EXTENSION AND  replacement of capital assets of or purchasing and installing new equipment for the
REPLACEMENT:   system or land acquisition for the system and any related costs thereto or paying
               extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction, or any
               other expenses which are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt service.
FISCAL YEAR:   A twelve (12) month period commencing on July 1, and ending on June 30 of the
               succeeding year.
GREASE PIT:    A place where vehicles or machinery are greased, the waste from which greasing is
               conducted to a sewer.
               The number of square feet of hard surfaced areas which either prevent or retard the
               entry of water into soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions as undeveloped
IMPERVIOUS     property, and/or cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an
AREA:          increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions as undeveloped
               property, including, but not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches,
               driveways, sidewalks, concrete/asphalt pavement, gravel surfaces and athletic courts.
LOT:           A continuous tract of land under one (1) ownership.
MULTIFAMILY    A residential structure designed with three (3) or more dwelling units to accommodate
RESIDENTIAL    three (3) or more families or groups of individuals living separately and not sharing
PROPERTY:      the same living space.
NONOPERATING   Refers to revenues derived from activities other than the basic operations of the
REVENUES:      stormwater management system, but excluding interest income on bond proceeds and on
               contributed capital.
               Any property developed for commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional use,
NONRESIDENTIAL including churches, hospitals, and other eleemosynary institutions and including
PROPERTY:      multi-use properties incorporating residential uses, but excluding undeveloped
               property and property used exclusively for agricultural purposes.
OPERATING      The annual operating budget for the stormwater management utility adopted by the city
BUDGET:        council for the succeeding fiscal year.
               The current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of
               the system, as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice, and includes,
OPERATIONS AND without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative
MAINTENANCE    expenses including record keeping, the cost of materials and supplies used for current
EXPENSE:       operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current
               expenses not annually incurred, but which are such as may reasonably be expected to be
               incurred in accordance with sound accounting practice.
               The owner of real estate, a duly authorized agent or attorney of an owner, a tenant,
OWNER:         purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and any person having a vested or contingent interest in
               the property.
PERSON:        An individual, copartnership, corporation, fiduciary and trustee.
               All rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the
               utility, in connection with the management and operation of the system, including
REVENUES:      amounts received from the investment or deposit of monies in any fund or account and
               any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound
               accounting practice.
               A residential structure designed as a single or two-family dwelling unit to
RESIDENTIAL    accommodate one to two families or groups of individuals living together, but
PROPERTY:      excluding multi-class (i.e., commercial, residential, industrial, institutional, etc.)
               properties which include residential uses.
STORMWATER     The system of publicly or privately owned or operated rivers, creeks, ditches,
DRAINAGE       drainage channels, pipes, basins, street gutters, and lakes within the city through
SYSTEM:        which or into which stormwater runoff, surface water, or subsurface water is conveyed
               or deposited.
STORMWATER     The charge authorized by state law and this chapter which is established to pay
MANAGEMENT     operations and maintenance, extension, replacement and debt service of the stormwater
CHARGE:        drainage system.
STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT     The enterprise fund utility created by this chapter to operate, maintain and improve
UTILITY OR     the system and for such other purposes as stated in this chapter.
UTILITY:
               The existing stormwater management facilities, stormwater drainage system, and flood
               protection system of the city and all improvements thereto which by this chapter are
STORMWATER     constituted as the property and responsibility of the utility, to be operated as an
MANAGEMENT     enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water; control discharges and flows
UTILITY SYSTEM necessitated by rainfall events; and incorporate methods to collect, convey, store,
OR SYSTEM:     absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding,
               overdrainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or otherwise affect the
               quality and quantity of discharge from such system.
               Refers to the total amount of revenue required in one year to meet all expenditures
TOTAL ANNUAL   incurred during that year for the financing of construction and for the operations and
REVENUE        maintenance, including administration and renewal and replacement funding, of the
REQUIREMENTS:  stormwater drainage system, including facilities for the collection, transportation,
               and treatment of stormwater, and of the flood control protection system, including
               river levees and stormwater pumping stations.
UNDEVELOPED    Real property that has no impervious area.
PROPERTY:
WASH RACK:     A place other than on residential property where automobiles, trucks, busses or
               tractors are washed with water. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956; amd. Ord. 24-10, 6-4-2024)
 
6-3-2: STORM SEWER DISTRICT:
A storm sewer district to be known as District 1 is established for the purpose
of preserving the health and to meet the demands of the property owners in said
district. The boundary lines of said District 1 are now on file in the Office
of the City Clerk for public inspection. (1953 § 44-1; amd. 1985 Code)
6-3-3: DRAINAGE DISTRICT:
A drainage district to be known as Drainage District 17 has been established
for the purpose of preserving the health and to meet the demands of the
property owners in said district. The boundary lines of said Drainage District
17 are now on file in the Office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (1985
Code)
6-3-4: DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Discharge Into Sanitary Sewers Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer any
wastewater from downspouts, drain tiles, drainage system for surface or
subsurface water or air conditioning or cooling equipment.
   B.   Discharge Into Storm Sewers Required: The owner of property upon which
is situated air conditioning and cooling equipment shall cause the wastewater
therefrom to be discharged into the storm sewer. (Ord. 1568, 7-7-1980)
6-3-5: DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED:
The owner of any lot or property subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall cause all downspouts, drain tiles or drainage systems for surface or
subsurface water to be connected with storm sewers:
   A.   When the roof area exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the lot area; or
   B.   Where the water from the roof area is now discharged directly or
indirectly into a sanitary sewer; or
   C.   Where downspouts now discharge onto, across or under a public sidewalk,
pavement or paved area or onto an area which drains onto a public street,
avenue, alley or sidewalk; or
   D.   Where the area of a paved area is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
the area of the lot upon which it is situated, and where the slope and grade of
such paved area is such that the water from said paved area runs onto or across
any public street, avenue, alley or sidewalk; or
   E.   Where the area of the paved area plus the area of the roof area when
combined exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956)
6-3-6: APPROVAL OF CONNECTIONS:
All connections to storm sewers shall be made under supervision of the City
Engineer in an approved manner. Work shall be done only by a contractor
licensed under the provisions of title 3, chapter 13 of this Code. (Ord. 723,
6-4-1956; amd. Ord. 90-27, 12-18-1990; Ord. 92-20, 11-3-1992; 2017 Code)
6-3-7: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be applicable only to wash racks, grease pits, air
conditioning and cooling equipment, downspouts, drain tiles or other surface or
subsurface drainage systems situated on a lot adjacent to a storm sewer or if
not adjacent, upon a lot which has access not exceeding one hundred feet (100')
distance to a usable storm sewer. (Ord. 723, 6-4-1956)
6-3-8: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No construction shall be allowed within the corporate limits of any Municipally
owned property, sidewalks or alleys by any City licensed excavating contractor
or any other person without first obtaining a permit.
   A.   Fees: The permit and inspection fees for residential, for commercial,
for industrial property, and for each storm sewer disconnection shall be set by
resolution of the Council and shall be payable at time said permit is issued;
and the same shall be issued in duplicate, one (1) copy being given to the
applicant and one (1) filed in the Engineering Department. Permit shall show
the name of the applicant, the exact location of the concrete construction, and
such other information as the Engineering Department may require. (Ord. 92-20,
11-3-1992; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE A. STORMWATER UTILITY POLICY
SECTION:
6-3A-1: ERU Rate, Charges; Utility Revenues
6-3A-2: Residential Property
6-3A-3: Multifamily Residential Property
6-3A-4: Nonresidential Property
6-3A-1:ERU RATE, CHARGES; UTILITY REVENUES:
   A.   Square Feet Equivalency: For purposes of this chapter, an ERU shall be
equivalent to four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of impervious
property or fraction thereof.
   B.   Monthly Service Charge: Except as provided in this chapter, every
contributor owning or occupying a residential property, multifamily residential
property, or a nonresidential property, other than exempt property, shall pay
to the city, at the same time payment is made for water service, sanitary sewer
or refuse, a stormwater management charge to be determined and billed as
provided in this chapter. In the event the owner and the occupant of a
particular property are not the same, the liability for payment of the
stormwater management charge attributable to that property shall be joint and
several as to the owner and occupant. The stormwater management charge shall be
a monthly service charge and shall be determined by this chapter and the ERU
rate which is established in this chapter and from time to time adjusted as
provided in this chapter.
   C.   Application And Computation: The stormwater management charges provided
in sections
6-3A-2 through
6-3A-4 of this chapter shall be applied and computed for each contributor
during the customary billing periods as to all bills mailed by the city
treasurer, and such charges shall thereafter be paid and collected as provided
in this chapter.
   D.   Effective with the July 1, 2024 billing date, ERU rates as follow will
be applied to each property's monthly utility bill:
 
Monthly Charge per ERU
July 1, 2024 - June 30, July 1, 2025 - June 30, July 1, 2026 - Until Amended
2025                    2026
2.92                    2.98                    3.01
 
   E.   Authority To Adjust Rate: If at any time the director determines that
the ERU rate and/or the budget for the stormwater management utility system
requires adjustment, the director shall report such determination to the city
administrator and city council. The city council may at any time adjust the ERU
rate by adoption of an ordinance amending this section and may at any time
adjust the budget for the stormwater management utility system by adoption of
an appropriate resolution.
   F.   Commencement Of Charge: The stormwater management charge attributable
to a newly developed residential, multiresidential, or nonresidential property
shall commence upon the earlier of the following:
      1.   The issuance of a permanent water meter.
   2.   If no water meter is issued for that development or if development has
halted, on the date that the director or the director's designee determines in
reasonable judgment that the development is substantially complete or has been
halted for at least three (3) months.
   G.   Pro Rata Charge: For separately metered occupancy units within a multi-
residential or non-residential property with joint users of common impervious
areas, the director shall calculate and allocate the pro rata stormwater
management charge among the users. (Ord. 24-10, 6-4-2024)
6-3A-2: RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
The stormwater management charge for a residential property shall be based on
one ERU. (Ord. 24-10, 6-4-2024)
6-3A-3: MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
The stormwater management charge for a multifamily residential property shall
be based on one ERU per three (3) constructed units or fraction thereof, with a
minimum charge of one (1) ERU. (Ord. 24-10, 6-4-2024)
6-3A-4: NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Determination And Commencement Of Charge: The stormwater management
charge for nonresidential property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the
numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious area of a
nonresidential property by the number of square feet in one ERU. The minimum
charge for any nonresidential property shall be equal to one ERU rate.
   B.   Appeal Cost Determination: Any owner or occupant of a nonresidential
property aggrieved by the director's calculation of the stormwater management
charge or allocation among users as provided in this section may appeal such
determination to the director as provided in section 13-4-9 of this chapter.
   C.   Adjustment To Charge: An adjustment to the stormwater charge not to
exceed forty percent (40%) may be granted by the director who is hereby
authorized to establish procedures and standards for the adjustment of fees
based on implementation and maintenance of stormwater best management practices
by the property owner.
   D.   Appeal of Impervious Surface Calculation: Any owner or occupant of
nonresidential property aggrieved by the initial or any subsequent calculation
of the total impervious area of such property or calculation of the stormwater
management charge for such property, may appeal such calculations or allocation
to the director. Upon granting of such appeal, the stormwater management charge
shall be recalculated using information obtained as provided in this section.
The adjustment shall be effective with the next billing date and may be applied
retroactively up to but not exceeding the three (3) previous billing cycles.
(Ord. 24-10, 6-4-2024)
TITLE 7
AIRPORT
CHAPTER 1
AIRPORT COMMISSION
SECTION:
7-1-1: Establishing Commission
7-1-2: Compensation; Expenses
7-1-3: Jurisdiction Extended
7-1-4: Powers And Duties
7-1-5: Federal And State Aid
7-1-6: Charges And Leases
7-1-7: Funds
7-1-8: Reports
7-1-1: ESTABLISHING COMMISSION:
There is hereby established the Airport Commission of the City of Mason City,
Iowa, created pursuant to section 330.17, Code of Iowa, to be composed of five
(5) residents of the City of Mason City, Iowa, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council and who shall hold office for
six (6) years from November 1 following their appointment. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-
1975; amd. 1985 Code; 2017 Code)
7-1-2: COMPENSATION; EXPENSES:
All members of the Airport Commission shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other expenses incurred while on
official commission business. Such reimbursement shall come from the funds
appropriated to the airport. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
7-1-3: JURISDICTION EXTENDED:
The police jurisdiction of the City of Mason City, and all applicable laws,
regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto, are hereby extended to and made
applicable to the Mason City Municipal Airport. Any person who violates any
resolution, ordinance or lawful order issued pursuant thereto on or at the
Mason City Municipal Airport shall be subject to prosecution, conviction and
penalty in the same manner as if such violation occurred within the corporate
limits of the City of Mason City. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
7-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Airport Commission shall have the following powers, duties and authority:
   A.   To acquire real estate and personal property for airport purposes in
the name of the City of Mason City, Iowa, by purchase, gift, condemnation,
lease or otherwise.
   B.   To acquire or cause to be moved, removed, abated, eliminated, mitigated
or altered any structure or object protruding above the surface of the ground,
or any use of land obstructing the air space necessary for the safe and
efficient flight of aircraft landing at, or taking off from, the Mason City
Municipal Airport, or otherwise constituting a hazard to such landing or taking
off.
   C.   To make and enforce rules and regulations for the control, supervision
and operation of the Mason City Municipal Airport which authority shall include
space above or in the vicinity of the Mason City Municipal Airport necessary or
desirable for the safe landing and taking off of aircraft.
   D.   To manage, control, improve, maintain and operate the present Mason
City Municipal Airport and any future Municipally owned real estate acquired
for similar purposes. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
   E.   To have and exercise all power, authority and duties which the City of
Mason City might possess or exercise with respect to the Mason City Municipal
Airport, except the power to sell real estate comprising the Mason City
Municipal Airport, which shall be sold only upon the unanimous vote of all
members of the City Council, and except as herein limited. (Ord. 1533, 1979)
7-1-5: FEDERAL AND STATE AID:
The Airport Commission is authorized to accept, receive and receipt for Federal
and State monies and other monies, public or private, for the acquisition,
construction, enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipping and operation of
the Mason City Municipal Airport and other air navigation facilities and sites
therefor, and to comply with provisions of the laws of the United States and of
the State of Iowa, and any rules and regulations made thereunder, for the
expenditure of Federal or State monies upon the Mason City Municipal Airport or
other air navigation facilities. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975)
7-1-6: CHARGES AND LEASES:
The Airport Commission may from time to time fix, establish and collect a
schedule of charges for use of the Mason City Municipal Airport, or any part
thereof, which charges shall be used in connection with the maintenance and
operation of said airport. The Airport Commission may lease all or any portion
of property acquired for airport purposes for a period of years not to exceed
fifty (50), and shall have the authority and duty to hold such public hearings
as may be required in connection therewith, and may sell any equipment no
longer required. (Ord. 1533, 1979)
7-1-7: FUNDS:
The Airport Commission shall annually certify to the City Council the amount of
tax required for airport purposes in the ensuing fiscal year and shall present
to the City Council detailed budget estimates which shall be subject to
approval, increase or decrease at the discretion of the City Council. (Ord.
1333, 7-21-1975)
All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport purposes shall be
under the sole and absolute control of the Airport Commission for the purposes
prescribed herein, and shall be deposited with the City Clerk to the credit of
the Airport Commission, and shall be disbursed only on orders of the Airport
Commission by written warrants of the City Finance Director, pursuant to
mutually acceptable procedures established by the Airport Commission and City
Council. (Ord. 1333, 7-21-1975; amd. 1985 Code)
7-1-8: REPORTS:
The revenues and expenditures of the Airport Commission shall be reported
monthly by the Finance Director, in the manner of other departmental
expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the commission and
in the Finance Director's report to the City Council. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 2
AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Scope And Application
7-2-3: Closing Of Airport
7-2-4: Interfering Or Tampering With Aircraft
7-2-5: Refusal Of Airport Use
7-2-6: Careless Or Negligent Operation
7-2-7: Aircraft Equipment
7-2-8: Aircraft Takeoffs, Landings And Taxiing
7-2-9: Parking Of Aircraft
7-2-10: Aircraft Engine Operation
7-2-11: Inoperable Aircraft
7-2-12: Repair Of Aircraft
7-2-13: Registration
7-2-14: Threats
7-2-15: Stunt Flying; Aerobatics
7-2-16: Fueling And Flammables
7-2-17: Prohibited Acts
7-2-18: Jurisdiction Of Police Department
7-2-19: Commercial Airport Activities
7-2-20: Certificated Air Carriers
7-2-21: Operation Of Motor Vehicles
7-2-22: Specialized Commercial Flying Services
7-2-23: Aircraft Rentals
7-2-24: Aircraft Sales
7-2-25: Aircraft Repair Stations
7-2-26: Avionics And Propeller Service
7-2-27: Charter Services
7-2-28: Flight Instruction
7-2-29: Fueling Service
7-2-30: Multiple Services
7-2-31: Aviation Operators
7-2-32: Flying Clubs
7-2-33: General Regulations
7-2-34: Hangar Development
7-2-35: Compliance And Enforcement
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter mean:
ARFF: Aircraft rescue and firefighting.
AIR OPERATIONS AREAS: Runways, taxiways, safety areas and approach zones on the
airport.
AIRCRAFT: Machine or structure designed or used for flight in air.
AIRCRAFT FACILITIES AREAS: Hangars, ramps, aprons and other areas utilized by
aircraft at the airport outside air operations areas.
AIRPORT: The Mason City, Iowa, Municipal Airport and all its improvements and
appurtenances.
AIRPORT ACTIVITIES: Any one (1) of the following:
Aerial photography or survey.
Aircraft rental.
Aircraft repair station (including paint shop).
Aircraft sales.
Aircraft store.
Avionics sales and repair station.
Banner towing and aerial advertising.
Charter service.
Crop dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing.
Flight instruction.
Fuel service.
Power line or pipeline patrol.
Propeller sales and service.
AIRPORT EMPLOYEE: Employee of the commission.
AVIATION OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing on
the airport and serving the public with one (1) airport activity and otherwise
meeting the minimum standards set forth herein for an aviation operator.
CITY: City of Mason City, Iowa.
COMMISSION: The Airport Commission of the City.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicle of the Police Department, Fire Department, ambulance
or other vehicle transporting an airport official or airport employee in
response to an emergency.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration, United States Department of
Transportation.
FAR: Federal Aviation Regulation written, published and adopted by FAA.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing
on the airport and serving the public with at least five (5) airport
activities, three (3) of which shall be: a) aircraft repair station; b) fuel
service; and c) charter service, and otherwise meeting the minimum standards
set forth herein for a fixed base operator.
FUEL TRUCK: Motor vehicle used for transporting, handling or dispensing of
aviation fuel or petroleum products.
FUELING OPERATIONS: Fueling, defueling, oil service, sumping and any other
activity involving the handling or dispensing of fuel or petroleum products at
the airport.
INOPERABLE AIRCRAFT: Aircraft having: a) no valid airworthiness certificate; b)
no current Federal or State registration; c) broken or missing windshield or
other glass; d) deflated tire(s); or e) damaged propeller(s), control surfaces
or other part rendering the aircraft incapable of safe takeoff or flight.
LOCAL OPERATOR: Person under written lease with the commission providing on the
airport and serving the public with at least two (2) but not more than four (4)
airport activities and otherwise meeting the minimum standards set forth herein
for a local operator.
MANAGER: The Airport Manager appointed by the commission or the airport
employee designated by the Manager with commission approval.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Machine or structure designed or used for self- propelled
movement on ground, except for any emergency vehicle and commission vehicles.
NFPA: National Fire Protection Association.
NONSCHEDULED OPERATOR: Person whose operations are not required to meet
regulations imposed by the FAA upon a scheduled air carrier operating aircraft
at the airport for the purpose of transporting passengers, mail, express,
freight, cargo or for refueling, for hire, gift, remuneration or reward.
PERSON: Individual, legal entity or association.
POLICE OFFICER: Person authorized by law to direct or regulate traffic and
enforce airport rules and regulations.
PRIVATE AREA: Space on the airport to which public access is limited.
PUBLIC AREA: Space on the airport other than private area.
SCHEDULED AIR CARRIER: Person whose operations meet regulations imposed by the
FAA upon a scheduled air carrier operating aircraft at the airport for the
purpose of transporting passengers, mail, express, freight or cargo. (Ord. 08-
09, 8-5-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
7-2-2: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
The operation of aircraft in the air space above the airport and at the airport
and other activity at the airport shall be conducted in conformity with
Federal, State and local law, including the rules, regulations, minimum
standards and other provisions of this chapter. Should any provision of this
chapter or local law conflict with Federal or State law, such Federal or State
law shall take precedence. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive or limit
the application of any Federal, State or local law more stringent, more
restrictive or affording another remedy respecting any matter the subject of
this chapter. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-3: CLOSING OF AIRPORT:
When the Manager believes airport facilities are unsafe for aeronautical
activity, the Manager may close the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-4: INTERFERING OR TAMPERING WITH AIRCRAFT:
No person, except airport employees when acting in their official capacities or
other person designated by the Manager, shall put in motion or interfere or
tamper with any aircraft, aircraft part, instrument or tool, without permission
of the owner. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-5: REFUSAL OF AIRPORT USE:
The Manager may restrict or prohibit any flight or other activity at the
airport in the interest of public safety and welfare. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-6: CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT OPERATION:
No aircraft shall be operated: a) in a careless or negligent manner; b) while
the pilot or any other person aboard the aircraft and controlling any part of
its operation is under the influence of an intoxicating beverage or other drug;
or c) if the aircraft is in a condition or loaded so as to endanger persons or
property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-7: AIRCRAFT EQUIPMENT:
No aircraft may land or take off unless it is equipped with brakes or other
means of preventing movement on the ground and is otherwise in sound condition.
(Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-8: AIRCRAFT TAKEOFFS, LANDINGS AND TAXIING:
   A.   Aircraft takeoffs and landings shall be made only on designated
runways, except by rotary wing aircraft. Turn areas shall not be used for
takeoffs or landings except in emergencies. Taxiways and ramp areas shall not
be used for takeoffs or landings by fixed wing aircraft except in emergencies.
   B.   Rotary wing aircraft, during final landing or takeoff, shall not pass
over any building, motor vehicle parking area or aircraft ramp.
   C.   Aircraft operating under visual flight rules shall conform to a
standard left hand traffic pattern.
   D.   Aircraft shall taxi at a safe speed with due regard for other aircraft,
persons and property and not in excess of ten (10) miles per hour while on
ramps or aprons adjacent to buildings.
   E.   No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of any hangar. (Ord. 08-09, 8-
5-2008)
7-2-9: PARKING OF AIRCRAFT:
   A.   Unhangared aircraft shall be parked only in areas designated by the
Manager and shall be secured when left unattended. Owners of such aircraft
shall be responsible for any damage or loss resulting from noncompliance with
this provision.
   B.   Use by aircraft or motor vehicles of ramp loading areas at the airport
terminal building shall be limited to fifteen (15) minutes unless otherwise
approved by the Manager. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-10: AIRCRAFT ENGINE OPERATION:
   A.   No aircraft engine shall be operated by a person other than a pilot or
mechanic licensed and certified in its operation.
   B.   Aircraft shall be operated only in locations designated by the Manager
and when the operation will not endanger persons or property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-
2008)
7-2-11: INOPERABLE AIRCRAFT:
   A.   Inoperable aircraft shall not be parked on the airport.
   B.   The owner of an inoperable aircraft shall be responsible for the
parking of the inoperable aircraft on the airport in violation of this chapter.
   C.   Upon discovery of an inoperable aircraft parked on the airport,
notification in writing shall be given the owner that:
      1.   Parking of the inoperable aircraft constitutes a violation of this
chapter;
      2.   The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing the
inoperable aircraft within sixty (60) days after service of the notice;
      3.   Failure of the owner to remove or repair the inoperable aircraft
within the sixty (60) day notice period shall be sufficient cause for removal
and disposal of the inoperable aircraft by the City and assessment of costs to
the owner.
   D.   Each day after expiration of the sixty (60) day notice period that the
inoperable aircraft remains parked on the airport, the owner may be charged
with a new violation of this chapter.
   E.   As an alternative to the foregoing provisions of this section, a
citation for a Municipal infraction may be issued to the owner of the
inoperable aircraft, setting forth the violation of this chapter and seeking an
order of removal on conviction.
   F.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to inoperable aircraft
under the custody and control of a person under lease with the commission and
serving the public as an aircraft repair station or as authorized by the
Manager. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-12: REPAIR OF AIRCRAFT:
No person shall repair an aircraft or aircraft part in any area other than that
designated by the Manager, except minor adjustments may be made while the
aircraft is on the loading ramp preparatory to takeoff when such adjustments
are necessary to prevent a delay in departure. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-13: REGISTRATION:
Owners of aircraft using the airport as a base of operation shall register with
the Manager, giving such information as may be required by the Manager for
airport records. Any change in aircraft ownership will require a change in
registration. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-14: THREATS:
   A.   A person having knowledge or suspicion of an aircraft or person
possessing explosives on the airport shall notify the Manager immediately.
   B.   The Manager may issue directives and take action necessary to protect
people and property when a threat involving explosives, weapons or sabotage
exists at the airport.
   C.   The Manager may establish or revise at any time procedures for dealing
with threats involving explosives, weapons or sabotage. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-15: STUNT FLYING; AEROBATICS:
Events involving aerial activities not of a routine nature shall require
authorization by the commission and shall be coordinated with the Manager who
may require an "air boss" experienced in directing and controlling such
activities. Any such activities shall be conducted in a manner that does not
endanger persons or property. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-16: FUELING AND FLAMMABLES:
   A.   Fuelers: The following rules shall apply to persons engaged in fueling
operations:
      1.   Only persons holding a permit issued by the commission may engage in
fueling operations, except owners with respect to their own aircraft.
      2.   Application for a permit shall be made to the commission in writing.
      3.   Permittees shall pay flowage fees as determined and pursuant to
procedures established by the commission.
   B.   Fueling Operations: The following rules shall apply to fueling
operations: (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
      1.   All fueling operations shall comply with applicable FAA and NFPA
Standards and Codes.
      2.   Fueling operations shall be conducted only at locations designated
by the Manager.
      3.   Fuel storage areas shall be fenced, with gates and warning signs
prohibiting public access.
      4.   No aircraft shall be fueled with one (1) or more engines running or
while heat is being applied to the aircraft.
      5.   No aircraft shall be fueled in a hangar, other enclosed space or
congested area.
      6.   No smoking or open flame shall be permitted within one hundred feet
(100') of fueling operations.
      7.   In fueling operations, aircraft and fuel servicing equipment shall
be bonded and operated in a manner that will prevent static ignition of
volatile liquids.
      8.   During fueling operations, a fueler shall have at least one (1)
person on duty who has been trained in fire safety and completed an aviation
fuel training course approved by the Manager.
      9.   During fueling operations, at least two (2) dry chemical fire
extinguishers with a minimum rating of 20B:C shall be available for immediate
use.
      10.   During fueling operations, no person shall operate any radio,
transmitter, receiver, electrical appliance, cell phone or other equipment
having the potential to cause a spark or ignition of volatile liquids.
      11.   Fueling operations shall cease during an electrical storm or when
lightning discharges occur within the vicinity of the airport.
      12.   Fuelers shall take all precautions to prevent spillage of fuel; any
spill in excess of one (1) gallon shall be reported to ARFF personnel for
inspection and cleanup; the fueler shall be responsible for all costs incident
to each spill and cleanup.
      13.   Equipment used in fueling operations shall be maintained in good
and safe condition; fueling shall cease in the event of an equipment
malfunction and shall not resume until the equipment has been repaired or
replaced.
      14.   Electrical switches and fixtures in areas that could be reached by
fuel or fuel vapors shall be explosion-proof.
      15.   Fuel trucks shall not be parked or stored inside a building except
when undergoing maintenance in a building approved for the purpose. (Ord. 08-
09, 8-5-2008; amd. 2017 Code)
      16.   No aircraft engine shall be started when there is gasoline on the
ground under the aircraft.
      17.   No aircraft shall be fueled while passengers are on board, unless a
passenger loading ramp is in place at an open cabin door with attendants
present or nearby.
      18.   No airborne radar equipment shall be operated or ground tested in
an area where the directional beam is within three hundred feet (300') of
another aircraft, fueling operations, fuel truck or fuel storage facility.
      19.   Fuel trucks shall be conspicuously marked.
      20.   No flammable gas or oil exceeding ten (10) gallons in quantity
shall be stored in any structure at the airport unless approved by the Manager.
      21.   No cylinder or flask of compressed flammable gas shall be stored in
any structure at the airport.
   C.   Cleaning Of Aircraft: The cleaning of aircraft and parts thereof using
flammables shall be conducted in open air or in a fireproof room with readily
accessible fire extinguishers.
   D.   Cleaning Of Floors: Flammables shall not be permitted in cleaning
floors, which shall be kept clean and free from oil.
   E.   Disposal Of Toxic Liquids Prohibited: No flammable, corrosive or toxic
liquid shall be disposed of into storm sewer, toilet, shop or hangar drains,
catch basins or ditches, or onto aprons, parking lots, roadways or elsewhere at
the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-17: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person on the airport to:
   A.   Smoke in areas designated nonsmoking by the Manager.
   B.   Deface, damage, destroy or remove any building, other improvement,
traffic sign, signal or device, or other signage permitted by the Manager, or
fence, railing, guard, barrier, light or other device placed in the vicinity of
any excavation, hole, pile of material or other hazard.
   C.   Enter any private area without authorization by the Manager.
   D.   Bring any animal, except for a service dog in the custody of its
master, a dog utilized for law enforcement purposes or an animal properly
leashed and confined for air shipment.
   E.   Fire or discharge any weapon or possess any explosive or other
dangerous article; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to
police officers in the discharge of their duties.
   F.   Interfere in any manner with airport operations.
   G.   Commit any act that would be in violation of law. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-
2008)
7-2-18: JURISDICTION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The jurisdiction of the Police Department of the City is extended to the
airport and all police officers shall have authority to enforce ordinances of
the City at the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-19: COMMERCIAL AIRPORT ACTIVITIES:
No commercial activity may be conducted at the airport without written
agreement with the commission. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-20: CERTIFICATED AIR CARRIERS:
Schedules of rates and charges for all certificated air carriers shall be set
by the commission and revised whenever deemed necessary by the commission.
Rates and charges shall include landing fees, floor rental charges and other
charges that are pertinent to the operation of the airport. Such fares and
charges shall apply without discrimination to all certificated scheduled and
nonscheduled air carriers using the airport. Landing fees will be based on a
weight frequency basis unless otherwise specified in a written agreement
between the commission and the carrier. No person shall operate from the
airport any aircraft that is not fully certificated by and registered with the
FAA and carrying a current certificate of airworthiness, with the exception of
government owned aircraft. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-21: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES:
   A.   No motor vehicle shall be operated in an air operations area without
permission from the Manager.
   B.   Motor vehicle operations in aircraft facility areas may be restricted
by the Manager.
   C.   Motor vehicles shall travel at safe speeds as conditions warrant and in
no event in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on ramps, aprons and in
aircraft facilities areas.
   D.   Aircraft and pedestrians shall at all times have the right- of-way over
motor vehicle traffic.
   E.   All motor vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
   F.   No motor vehicle shall be operated on the airport so as to endanger
persons or property.
   G.   Parking of motor vehicles shall be permitted only in areas and for such
periods of time as designated by the Manager.
   H.   A motor vehicle traversing an air operations area with permission of
the Manager shall be escorted by an airport employee having two-way radio
communication.
   I.   In the event of emergency, there shall be no motor vehicle movement on
the airport unless permitted by the Manager.
   J.   Separate areas may be designated for parking by members of the public,
airport employees, airport tenants or others as designated by the Manager.
   K.   Except for minor repairs necessary to remove motor vehicles from the
airport, no such vehicles shall be cleaned or repaired at the airport, unless
approved by the commission.
   L.   All airport roadways shall have City "status".
   M.   The operation of motor vehicles shall otherwise be governed by
applicable law. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-22: SPECIALIZED COMMERCIAL FLYING SERVICES:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: A specialized commercial flying services operator
is a person providing for hire in the conduct of any of the following
activities:
      1.   Crop dusting, seeding, spraying and bird chasing.
      2.   Banner towing and aerial advertising.
      3.   Aerial photography or survey.
      4.   Power line or pipeline patrol.
      5.   Any other operation specifically excluded from FAR part 135.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of ground space including a
building thereon providing at least two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor
space for aircraft and other storage and at least five hundred (500) square
feet of floor space for office and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible
for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to
the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point
of contact, for customer use.
      2.   An operator engaged in crop dusting, seeding or spraying shall make
suitable arrangements and provide adequate equipment upon the leased premises
for the safe loading, unloading, storage and containment of chemicals.
      3.   The operator shall provide and have based upon the leased premises
not less than one (1) airworthy aircraft, either owned or under written lease
to operator, meeting all requirements of the FAA and other applicable law with
respect to the type of operation being performed.
      4.   The operator shall employ trained personnel in such numbers as may
be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner, but never
less than one (1) person holding a current FAA commercial certificate, properly
rated for the aircraft to be used and the type of operation being performed.
      5.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger
liability, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
         b.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         c.   Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-23: AIRCRAFT RENTALS:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: An aircraft rental operator is a person engaged
in the rental of aircraft to the public.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space
for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible
for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to
the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point
of contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall have available upon the leased premises not less
than two (2) certified and airworthy aircraft, at least one (1) of which shall
be a four-place aircraft, and at least one (1) of which shall be equipped for
and capable of flight under instrument conditions.
      3.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in
an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person holding a current
commercial pilot certificate with appropriate ratings, including instructor
rating.
      4.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence, limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
         b.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         c.   Student and renters' liability: One hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-24: AIRCRAFT SALES:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: An aircraft sales operator is a person engaged
in: 1) the sale of new or used aircraft, on a retail or wholesale basis,
through a franchise, licensed dealership or distributorship of an aircraft
manufacturer; and 2) arranging for such repairs, services and parts as
necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on aircraft sold by the operator.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for
display and storage of aircraft and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet
of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be
responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities,
including a point of contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall make arrangements for such repair, services and
parts as necessary to meet any guarantee or warranty on new or used aircraft
sold by the operator. Such arrangements may be made by written agreement with a
person engaged in activity as an operator of an approved aircraft repair
station at the airport. The operator shall provide an adequate inventory of
spare parts for the type of new aircraft sold by the operator.
      3.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in
an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person having a current,
effective commercial pilot certificate with single-engine rating and instructor
rating.
      4.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger
liability, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
         b.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         c.   Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-25: AIRCRAFT REPAIR STATIONS:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: An aircraft repair station operator is a person
providing either or both airframe and power plant repair service, which shall
include the nonexclusive right to sell aircraft parts and accessories.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for
either or both airframe and power plant repair service and at least one
thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and
restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for heating, lighting and making
adequate arrangements for customer access to the building and furnishing it
with communication facilities, including a point of contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in
an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person currently holding an
FAA inspection authorization and otherwise certified by the FAA with ratings
appropriate to the work being performed.
      3.   The operator shall provide equipment, supplies and parts sufficient
to meet requirements for certification by the FAA as an approved aircraft
repair station.
      4.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         b.   Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
each accident or replacement value of the aircraft being repaired, whichever is
more.
         c.   Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-26: AVIONICS AND PROPELLER SERVICE:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: An avionics and propeller service operator is a
person engaged in the repair of aircraft radios, propellers, instruments and
accessories for general aviation aircraft, which shall include the nonexclusive
right to sell such items.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the airport an area of not less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for repair
service and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for
heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to the
building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of
contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, five (5) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in
an efficient manner, but never less than one (1) person holding appropriate
certifications issued by the FAA for rating as a radio, instrument or propeller
repair person.
      3.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         b.   Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence.
         c.   Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-27: CHARTER SERVICES:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: A charter services operator is a person providing
air transportation to the general public for hire, either on a charter basis
(commercial operation) or as an air taxi operator, as defined by the FAA.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the airport an area of not less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon
providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space
for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible
for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to
the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point
of contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall provide, either owned or under written lease to
operator, not less than one (1) single-engine, four- place aircraft and one (1)
multi-engine aircraft, both of which shall meet the requirements, including for
instrument operations, of the air taxi commercial operator certificate held by
the operator.
      3.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. During all other times, the operator
shall provide on call service. The operator shall employ trained personnel in
such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient
manner, who shall include not less than at least one (1) FAA certified
commercial pilot rated to permit the flight activity offered by the operator.
      4.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger
liability, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
         b.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-28: FLIGHT INSTRUCTION:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: A flight instruction operator is a person
certified by the FAA for and engaged in the instruction of pilots in the
operation of fixed or rotary wing aircraft, with such instruction to include
ground school and flight checks designed to prepare students for meeting
requirements for licensure and rating as pilots.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon providing at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor space for
aircraft storage and at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space
for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible
for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to
the building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point
of contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall have available for use in flight instruction,
either owned or under written lease to operator, not less than two (2) properly
certificated aircraft, at least one (1) of which shall be a four-place
aircraft, and at least one (1) of which shall be equipped for instrument flight
instruction.
      3.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises eight
(8) hours daily, six (6) days per week. The operator shall employ trained
personnel in such numbers as may be required to meet the minimum standards in
an efficient manner, who shall include not less than at least one (1) flight
instructor certified by the FAA to provide the instruction offered.
      4.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Aircraft liability: Bodily injury and property damage combined,
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; passenger
liability, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; limited to two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) per passenger.
         b.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         c.   Student and renters' liability: One hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-29: FUELING SERVICE:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: A fuel service operator is a person engaged in
fueling operations, which may include ramp assistance for and the parking,
storage and tiedown of aircraft within the area leased by the operator.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The operator shall lease from the commission an area of not less
than six thousand (6,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon providing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space for
office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be responsible for
heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer access to the
building and furnishing it with communication facilities, including a point of
contact, for customer use.
      2.   The operator shall have available for use, either owned or under
written lease to operator, at least two (2) 10,000- gallon fuel storage tanks
at the airport and shall provide at least two (2) grades of fuel adequate to
meet the demand of general aviation users of the airport. The operator shall
provide separate meters, filter equipped dispensers and pumps, fixed or mobile,
for each grade of fuel dispensed by the operator.
      3.   The operator may provide minor repair service that does not require
a certificated mechanical rating and cabin services, but only on the ramp or
apron parking area within the leased premises and when such services may be
performed efficiently at that location.
      4.   The operator shall make provision for the transportation of pilots
and passengers of transient general aviation aircraft using the operator's
facilities and services from and to the operator's office and the airport
terminal.
      5.   The operator shall provide and maintain equipment and supplies
appropriate and necessary for the servicing of general aviation aircraft using
the airport.
      6.   The operator shall provide services upon the leased premises at
least nine (9) hours daily, seven (7) days per week, except major holidays.
During such major holidays and all other times, the operator shall provide on
call service. The operator shall employ trained personnel in such numbers as
may be required to meet the minimum standards in an efficient manner.
      7.   The operator shall carry the following insurance with the limits
specified:
         a.   Comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property damage:
Bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
single limit per occurrence.
         b.   Hangar keepers liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence.
         c.   Products liability: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence.
         d.   Motor vehicle liability: Bodily injury and property damage
combined single limit, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
(Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-30: MULTIPLE SERVICES:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: A multiple services operator shall be a fixed
base operator (FBO) or local operator (LO).
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   The FBO shall lease from the commission an area of not less than
twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet of ground space including a building
thereon or to be erected thereon providing at least ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of floor space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The LO
shall lease from the commission an area of not less than sixteen thousand
(16,000) square feet of ground space including a building thereon or to be
erected thereon providing at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor
space for office, customer lounge and restrooms. The operator shall be
responsible for heating, lighting and making adequate arrangements for customer
access to the building and furnishing it with communication facilities,
including a point of contact, for customer use. The operator shall otherwise
meet the minimum standards established by this chapter for each airport
activity engaged in by the operator, except where this would result in
duplication, in which case the operator shall meet the highest applicable
minimum standards among those set for aviation activities engaged in by the
operator.
      2.   The operator shall carry insurance as required to meet the minimum
standards for each airport activity engaged in by the operator, except where
this would result in duplication, in which case the operator shall meet the
highest applicable minimum standards among those set for airport activities
engaged in by the operator. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-31: AVIATION OPERATORS:
   A.   Statement Of Concept: An aviation operator is a person engaged in a
single airport activity.
   B.   Minimum Standards:
      1.   Except as provided hereafter, the operator shall lease from the
commission ground space including a building thereon in size not less than that
required under this chapter for the airport activity engaged in by the
operator.
      2.   The operator shall otherwise meet the minimum standards established
by this chapter for the airport activity engaged in by the operator.
   C.   Minimum Use Fee: In the event the airport activity of the operator, as
determined by the commission, does not require the lease of space upon the
airport, the operator shall pay a fee determined by the commission and the
minimum standard for rental of space otherwise applicable to the aviation
activity shall not apply. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-32: FLYING CLUBS:
   A.   Flying Clubs Permitted: The commission may permit flying clubs at the
airport.
   B.   Organization And Membership: Any group seeking to function as a flying
club at the airport shall make written application to the commission and
provide such documentation and other information as may be required by the
commission. Only groups organized as nonprofit corporations under Iowa law for
the purpose of fostering flying for pleasure, the development of skills in
aeronautics, pilotage and navigation, and increasing related awareness and
appreciation by the general public shall be considered for recognition as
flying clubs at the airport.
   C.   Registration Of Aircraft And Commercial Restrictions: Aircraft owned,
leased or used by a flying club shall be registered with the commission and may
not be leased or used for any commercial purpose. No flying club or member
thereof shall provide instruction for persons other than members of the flying
club, and the flying club shall not operate or provide charter service of any
nature.
   D.   Insurance: The flying club shall carry the following insurance with the
limits specified: comprehensive public liability and comprehensive property
damage: bodily injury and property damage combined, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-33: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   All leases entered into with the commission shall contain provisions
required by the FAA for compliance with grant assurances required by the FAA in
exchange for Federal funding relative to development at the airport.
   B.   Evidence of all insurance required under this chapter shall be filed
with the commission by the person obliged to carry the insurance. Insurance
required under this chapter shall be subject to change by the commission.
   C.   Evidence of every certification required under this chapter shall be
filed with the commission by the person obliged to hold the certification.
   D.   Minimum standards relative to building requirements may be satisfied
with one (1) building, attached buildings or separate buildings including at
different locations on the airport. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-34: HANGAR DEVELOPMENT:
Private development may be permitted on the airport at locations and upon terms
and conditions deemed appropriate by the commission. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
7-2-35: COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any police officer shall have authority to enforce ordinances of the
City at the airport.
   B.   Any person acting in violation of a provision of this chapter may be
forcibly ejected and removed from the airport by any police officer or the
Manager.
   C.   The commission reserves the right, power and privilege to exercise all
other reasonable means to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Violation of this chapter is a violation of this Code, and any other
applicable law and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 08-09, 8-5-2008)
CHAPTER 3
AIRPORT ZONING
SECTION:
7-3-1: Short Title
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Airport Zones
7-3-4: General Zoning Regulations
7-3-5: Lighting And Marking
7-3-6: Administrative Procedure
7-3-7: Nonconformities
7-3-8: Airport Zoning Commission
7-3-9: Airport Zoning Board Of Adjustment
7-3-10: Special Exceptions
7-3-11: Variances
7-3-12: Enforcement
7-3-13: Equitable Remedies
7-3-14: Prohibited Acts
7-3-15: Penalties
7-3-16: Conflicting Regulations
7-3-17: Appendices
7-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE or the AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-
2009)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context requires otherwise. In each case the singular shall include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular.
AERIAL NAVIGATION: The movement of an aircraft through the air.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance used or designed for carrying humans in flight
through the air, but not including parachutes.
AIRPORT: The Mason City Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT COMMISSION: The Mason City Airport Commission or its duly appointed
representative.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: One thousand two hundred thirteen feet (1,213') above mean
sea level (MSL).
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the
Federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR FAR, part 77, and which
obstructs or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or takeoff of any aircraft
at the airport, or hazardous to persons or property on the ground.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided by this chapter.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building official of Mason City, Iowa, or the building
official of Clear Lake, Iowa, or a duly authorized designee thereof.
CITY: The City of Mason City, Iowa, and/or the City of Clear Lake, Iowa.
COUNTY: Cerro Gordo County, Iowa.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA): An agency of the United States
government that administers the Federal regulations that relate to the use and
flight of aircraft, and related regulations. The location of the controlling
FAA office may be found in section
7-3-17, "Appendix I", of this chapter.
INNER EDGE: That edge of any zone that is closest to the runway end to which
the zone applies. The inner edge is perpendicular to the runway centerline.
JURISDICTION: The City of Mason City, Iowa, and/or the City of Clear Lake,
Iowa, and/or Cerro Gordo County, Iowa.
NONCOMPATIBLE USE: Any activity that would degrade the safety of people on the
ground, or occupants of aircraft in flight, including, but not limited to:
putrescible waste landfills, smoke or steam producing activities, any activity
that would produce electrical or radio signal interference not compatible with
safe operation of an aircraft, and those that lead to an assembly of people,
including, but not limited to: residences, churches, schools, hospitals, office
buildings, shopping centers, and other uses with similar concentrations of
persons.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure or portion of any structure that is
located within or underlying any of the zones created by this chapter and that
does not conform to the height and use provisions of this chapter.
OBSTRUCTION: Any structure or tree, the height of which exceeds that which is
allowed by this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, assignee or
other similar representative thereof.
RUNWAY THRESHOLD: A designated point on any airport runway that establishes the
end of the runway. The runway threshold may or may not correspond with the end
of the paved portion of the runway.
STRUCTURE: Any object, whether permanent or temporary, stationary or mobile,
constructed or installed by humans, including, but not limited to: buildings,
towers, smokestacks, scaffolds, lighting fixtures, public and private roads,
railways, and overhead transmission lines, including poles or other structures
supporting the same.
TREE: Any object of natural growth twenty feet (20') in height or greater, or
that may be expected to grow to a height of twenty feet (20') or greater.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Zoning Administrator of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, or
a duly authorized designee thereof. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-3: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which are described herein and depicted on the
Mason City Airport Zoning Map, which is hereby made a part of this chapter. Any
structure or tree located in more than one (1) zone is considered to be only in
the zone with the more restrictive height and use limitation. The various zones
hereby established and defined are as follows:
   A.   Approach Overlay Zone (AO):
      1.   Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane extending outward from
each end of each runway, rising uniformly at a fixed ratio, and of fixed size,
through which aircraft commonly operate when arriving at, and departing from,
the airport. AO Zones vary in size and slope based upon the present or future
use that can be expected for each airport runway. The AO Zones at the airport
are as follows:
         a.   Runway 36 (AO36): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended centerline
of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide,
expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000').
The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway
threshold at the centerline. For each fifty feet (50') of horizontal distance
the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (50:1) for a
distance of ten thousand feet (10,000'), and for an additional forty thousand
feet (40,000'), for each forty feet (40') of horizontal distance, rising at a
rate of one foot (1') (40:1).
         b.   Runway 18 (AO18): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
paved portion at the end of the runway and centered on the extended centerline
of the runway, the inner edge of the zone is one thousand feet (1,000') wide,
expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000').
The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the runway
threshold at the centerline. For each fifty feet (50') of horizontal distance
the floor of the zone rises from the inner edge one foot (1') (50:1) for a
distance of ten thousand feet (10,000'), and for an additional forty thousand
feet (40,000'), for each forty feet (40') of horizontal distance, rising at a
rate of one foot (1') (40:1).
         c.   Runway 30 (AO30): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
paved portion at each end of the runway and centered on the extended centerline
of the runway, the inner edge of each zone is five hundred feet (500') wide,
expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand five hundred feet
(3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the
runway threshold at the centerline. The floor of the zone rises from the inner
edge one foot (1') for each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance (34:
1), for a distance of ten thousand feet (10,000').
         d.   Runway 12 (AO12): Beginning two hundred feet (200') beyond the
paved portion at each end of the runway and centered on the extended centerline
of the runway, the inner edge of each zone is five hundred feet (500') wide,
expanding uniformly to an outer edge width of three thousand five hundred feet
(3,500'). The altitude of the inner edge is the same as the altitude of the
runway threshold at the centerline. The floor of the zone rises from the inner
edge one foot (1') for each thirty four feet (34') of horizontal distance (34:
1), for a distance of ten thousand feet (10,000').
      2.   Height Limitations:
         a.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, nor plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any
Approach Overlay Zone created herein.
         b.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any AO Zone by any portion of any
vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
   B.   Controlled Activity Zone (CA):
      1.   Defined: An area of fixed size, underlying the innermost portion
(closest to the runway end) of the AO Zone for that runway, descending from the
floor of the AO Zone to the ground. The width and length of CA Zones may vary,
and may be different on each runway end. The CA Zones for the airport are as
follows:
         a.   Runway 36 (CA36): Underlying the innermost two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of the AO Zone at the south end of the runway, the width
of the CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge and expands
uniformly to a width of one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750').
         b.   Runway 18 (CA18): Underlying the innermost two thousand five
hundred feet (2,500') of the AO Zone at the south end of the runway, the width
of the CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge and expands
uniformly to a width of one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750').
         c.   Runway 30/12 (CA30, CA12): Underlying the innermost one thousand
seven hundred feet (1,700') of the AO Zone at each end of the runway, the width
of each CA Zone is one thousand feet (1,000') at the inner edge, expanding
uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred ten feet (1,510').
      2.   Use Limitation: No person shall establish or maintain any
noncompatible use in any Controlled Activity Zone.
   C.   Horizontal Overlay Zone (HO):
      1.   Defined: The airspace above a horizontal plane, the perimeter of
which is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand foot (10,000') radii from
the center of the inner edge of the AO Zones of Runways 36, 18, and 30, and an
arc of five thousand foot (5,000') radius from the center of the inner edge of
the AO Zone of Runway 12, and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs. The floor of the HO Zone is one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
airport elevation, or one thousand three hundred sixty three feet (1,363')
above mean sea level.
      2.   Height Limitation: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to
penetrate the Horizontal Overlay Zone created herein.
   D.   Transitional Overlay Zone (TO):
      1.   Defined: The airspace above a sloping plane rising from the sides of
each runway and from the sides of each AO Zone at the rate of one foot (1') of
elevation for each seven feet (7') horizontally (7:1). The TO Zones for the
airport are as follows:
         a.   Runway 36 (TO36): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a
point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right
angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at the south
end of the runway, at right angles to the extended runway centerline. The TO
Zone is interrupted at the point where it intersects the HO Zone, and resumes
at the outer edge of the CO Zone (see subsection E of this section) and
continues outward for a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from the edge
of the AO Zone.
         b.   Runway 18 (TO18): Along each side of the runway, beginning at a
point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at right
angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at the north
end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway centerline. The TO
Zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO Zone.
         c.   Runway 30/12 (TO30/12): Along each side of the runway, beginning
at a point five hundred feet (500') from the centerline of the runway and at
right angles to the runway centerline, and from each side of the AO Zone at
each end of the runway at right angles to the extended runway centerline. The
TO Zone ends at the point where it intersects the HO Zone.
      2.   Height Limitations:
         a.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or
alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to penetrate any
Transitional Overlay Zone created herein.
         b.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any Transitional Overlay Zone by
any portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such
roadway.
   E.   Conical Overlay Zone (CO):
      1.   Defined: The airspace above a sloped horizontal plane beginning at
the periphery of the HO Zone and rising one foot (1') in height for each twenty
feet (20') horizontally (20:1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand feet
(4,000').
      2.   Height Limitations: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person
shall construct or alter any structure, or plant or grow any tree, so as to
penetrate the Conical Overlay Zone created herein. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-4: GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall construct or alter
any structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained a
building permit from the building official or a zoning permit from the Zoning
Administrator. No person shall be issued a permit for any construction or
alteration without a determination or finding from the FAA. (See subsection
7-3-6B of this chapter.) Such finding or determination shall not find or
determine that the proposed construction or alteration:
      1.   Would create a hazard.
      2.   Would establish a noncompatible use.
      3.   Would endanger the general safety, health and welfare of persons in
the vicinity of the airport, or occupants of aircraft in flight.
      4.   Would result in the raising of the minimum instrument flight
altitude of any Federal airway, approved off airway route, or instrument
approach procedure to the airport.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall occupy any
structure in any zone created herein without having first obtained an occupancy
permit from the building official or Zoning Administrator. No person shall be
issued an occupancy permit for any noncompatible use.
   C.   No person shall establish or maintain any private roadway in any
location that would result in penetration of any zone created herein by any
portion of any vehicle that shall be permitted to operate upon such roadway.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall,
in any zone created by this chapter, or upon any land or water underlying such
zones:
      1.   Establish any putrescible waste landfill, or open air composting
facility one (1) acre in size, or larger.
      2.   Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would create a
bird strike hazard.
      3.   Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use in such a manner as
to create electrical or radio interference with aviation navigational signals
or aircraft communications.
      4.   Install, align or use any lighting devices that make it difficult
for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, create glare in
the eyes of pilots, or otherwise impair visibility.
      5.   Produce steam, smoke, or other visual hazard that would impair
visibility.
      6.   Create, alter, or maintain any structure or use that would endanger
or interfere with landing, takeoff or maneuvering of any aircraft.
      7.   Plant, or allow the growth of, any tree, which, during the normal
life cycle of such tree, can be expected to grow into any zone created herein.
(Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-5: LIGHTING AND MARKING:
   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person
constructing or altering any structure located in any zone created by this
chapter shall install all lighting or markings upon said structure as shall be
recommended by the FAA as a part of its review of the applicant's notice of
proposed construction or alteration. Such lighting or markings shall be made in
a manner consistent with FAA regulations and advisories.
   B.   Any permit or variance granted under the provisions of this chapter may
be so conditioned so as to require the owner of the land, structure, or tree in
question to permit the City or County, at its own expense, to install, operate,
and maintain such lighting and/or markings as the City or County deems
necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of an airport
obstruction. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-6: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE:
   A.   Administration Of Regulations: The building official or Zoning
Administrator shall perform the administration of these zoning regulations.
   B.   Notice Of Construction: Any person who proposes to construct or alter
any structure in or underlying any of the zones created herein shall notify the
Administrator, Federal Aviation Administration, by filing with the appropriate
Federal agency, an executed FAA Form 7460-1, notice of proposed construction or
alteration (see section
7-3-17, "Appendix II", of this chapter). Such notice should be given sixty (60)
days prior to, and shall be given no later than thirty (30) days prior to the
earlier of the following dates:
      1.   The date the proposed construction or alteration is to begin.
      2.   The date an application for a building permit or occupancy permit is
to be filed.
   C.   Waiver Of Notice Requirements: In the event of an emergency involving
essential public services, public health, or public safety that requires
immediate construction, the building official, or Zoning Administrator, may
waive the thirty (30) day notice requirement, provided that the applicant
complies with the requirements of 14 CFR FAR, part 77.17(d).
   D.   Issuance Of Permit: Except as otherwise provided herein, the building
official or Zoning Administrator shall not issue any building permit or
occupancy permit without first:
      1.   Having received from the applicant a copy of the applicable FAA Form
7460-1, as submitted under subsection B of this section, and the corresponding
finding or determination from the FAA that the proposed construction or
alteration complies with section
7-3-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Having determined that the proposed use is not noncompatible, and is
consistent with the zoning provisions contained herein.
   E.   Exceptions: No FAA Form 7460-1 is required to be submitted to the FAA
or to the building official or Zoning Administrator for a building permit for
construction or alteration of any structure which the building official or
Zoning Administrator has determined that:
      1.   The proposed structure meets the requirements for shielding. Each
and all of the following requirements are required for a determination of
shielding:
         a.   The property upon which the construction or alteration is
proposed is located within the congested area of a City.
         b.   The proposed structure does not lie within any CA Zone.
         c.   There exists a structure or structures of a permanent and
substantial nature at least as tall and at least as wide as the proposed
structure, and which lie(s) between the location of the proposed construction
or alteration, and a point on the runway centerline at the threshold of the
closest end of the closest runway of the airport.
         d.   The shielding structure is within five hundred feet (500') of the
structure that is proposed for construction or alteration.
         e.   It is evident beyond a reasonable doubt that the shielded
structure will not adversely affect aerial navigation.
      2.   The proposed structure is an antenna that is no greater than twenty
feet (20') in height, and does not increase the height of an existing antenna
structure.
      3.   The proposed structure is an airport, aerial navigation, or
meteorological device, of a type approved by the FAA, the location and height
of which is fixed by function.
   F.   Waiver: The building official or Zoning Administrator shall set aside
the provision of subsection D1 of this section when the following conditions
have been met:
      1.   The applicant has provided evidence that an applicable FAA Form
7460-1 has been submitted in accordance with subsection B of this section, and
that thirty (30) days or more have elapsed since said submission.
      2.   That the FAA has not issued a determination in response to the
applicable FAA Form 7460-1.
      3.   The applicant agrees that should the subsequent FAA determination,
when issued, find that the proposed construction or alteration constitutes a
hazard, or otherwise fails to comply with section
7-3-4 of this chapter, that the construction or alteration shall be revised
and/or reconstructed so as to alleviate the condition which the determination
has found to be adverse.
         a.   The applicant further agrees that required revision and/or
reconstruction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the
issuance of the FAA determination.
         b.   The applicant further agrees that failure to revise or
reconstruct as provided herein constitutes a nuisance, and is subject to
abatement in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-7: NONCONFORMITIES:
   A.   The regulations prescribed herein are not retroactive and shall not be
construed to require the removal of any tree, or the reconstruction or
alteration, or the discontinuation of any use of any structure made
nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter.
   B.   Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction
or alteration, or the intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date hereof, and which is
completed within one (1) year thereafter.
   C.   No preexisting nonconforming structure, use, or tree shall be rebuilt,
altered, allowed to grow higher, or be replanted, so as to constitute a greater
airport hazard than it was at the time that these regulations were adopted.
   D.   Whenever the building official or Zoning Administrator determines that
a nonconforming structure has been abandoned, or more than fifty percent (50%)
torn down, physically deteriorated, damaged, or decayed, no building permit or
occupancy permit shall be issued that would allow such structure to exceed the
applicable height and use provisions of this chapter. Any tree so damaged or
destroyed shall be subject to the provisions of subsection
 7-3-4D7 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, the owner of any
preexisting nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to permit the
installation, operation, or maintenance thereon of any markers and/or lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the City or County to indicate to the operators of
aircraft, the presence of such structure or tree. Such markers and lights shall
be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City or County.
(Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-8: AIRPORT ZONING COMMISSION:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.9 of the Iowa Code, there shall be a
Mason City Municipal Airport Zoning Commission, consisting of seven (7)
members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Mason City, two (2)
of whom shall be appointed by the City of Clear Lake, two (2) of whom shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County, and one (1)
additional member whom shall be selected by a majority vote of the City and
County appointed members, and who shall serve as Chairperson of said
commission. The terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.9 of
the Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-9: AIRPORT ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
Pursuant to the provisions of section 329.12 of the Iowa Code, there shall be a
Mason City Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment, consisting of seven (7) members,
two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City of Mason City, two (2) of whom
shall be appointed by the City of Clear Lake, two (2) of whom shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Cerro Gordo County, and one (1)
additional member who shall be selected by a majority vote of the City and
County appointed members, and who shall serve as Chairperson of said board. The
terms of such members shall be as provided by section 329.12 of the Iowa Code.
The Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the duties and powers
established by the Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-10: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   With the concurrence of a majority vote, the Airport Zoning Board of
Adjustment (the board) may, based upon a written determination from the FAA,
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative
official and may modify the provisions of this chapter in favor of an
applicant, provided:
      1.   Any height or use limitation contained in this chapter that is
modified by the board shall not result in an obstruction to any aircraft in
flight.
      2.   No use of land shall be permitted that would not be compatible with
airport operations.
   B.   Any application for a special exception to the provisions of this
chapter shall include as a part thereof, the written determination of the FAA
pertaining to the application, and no application shall be set for hearing by
the board in the absence of such FAA determination. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-11: VARIANCES:
   A.   Any person desiring to construct or alter any structure, or permit the
growth of any tree, or otherwise use property in a manner that would constitute
a violation of this chapter, may apply to the board for a variance from these
regulations. The board shall consider no application for a variance to the
requirements of this chapter unless a copy of the application has been
submitted to the Airport Commission for their opinion as to the aeronautical
effects of such a variance. If the Airport Commission fails to respond to the
board within sixty (60) days from its receipt of the copy of the application,
the board may make its decision in the absence of the Airport Commission
opinion. Such variances may be granted by the board only where the literal
application of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship, and are
subject to the following:
      1.   Such variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
      2.   Such variance would be in the spirit of this chapter and of chapter
329 of the Iowa Code.
      3.   Such variance shall be granted subject to any reasonable conditions
that the board may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and of chapter 329 of the Iowa Code.
      4.   Such variance shall be subject to the requirement that the applicant
shall install, operate, and maintain such markings and lighting, at the
applicant's own expense, as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft operators
the existence of an airport obstruction as determined by the board.
      5.   Such variance shall be subject to the reservation of the right of
the City and the airport, at their own expense, to go onto applicant's property
to install, operate, and maintain thereon such FAA approved markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to operators of aircraft the existence of an
airport obstruction.
   B.   Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the Airport Zoning
Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision, pursuant to the provisions of the
Iowa Code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-12: ENFORCEMENT:
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of
the building official or Zoning Administrator, or such person(s) as the
building official or Zoning Administrator shall, from time to time, direct.
However such duties of enforcement and administration shall not include any of
the powers herein delegated to the Airport Zoning Board of Adjustment. (Ord.
09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-13: EQUITABLE REMEDIES:
The City or the airport may, pursuant to section 329.5 of the Iowa Code,
maintain an action in equity to restrain and abate as a nuisance the creation,
establishment or maintenance of an airport hazard, in violation of any
provision established by this chapter, on any property, whether within or
without the territorial limits of the City. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-14: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
alter any structure, use any land, or grow any tree in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-15: PENALTIES:
Each violation of these regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor and the
perpetrator thereof, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not
more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day a violation occurs or continues
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-16: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In the event of any conflict between regulations contained in this chapter and
any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with
respect to height of structures or trees, use of structures or land, or any
other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall prevail. (Ord.
09-01, 1-6-2009)
7-3-17: APPENDICES:
Appendix I
The controlling Federal authority for the Mason City Municipal Airport is:
Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region
Office of the Manager, Airports Division
901 Locust
Kansas City, MO 64106-2641
Appendix II
Notice of proposed construction or alteration, FAA Form 7460-1 shall be sent
to:
Express Processing Center
Federal Aviation Administration
Southwest Regional Office
Air Traffic Division Airspace Branch, ASW-520
2601 Meacham Boulevard
Fort Worth, TX 76137-0520
Or may be filed electronically using the internet at: https://oeaaa.faa.gov/
oeaaa/external/portal.jsp. (Ord. 09-01, 1-6-2009)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC SAFETY AND POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8-1-1: Department Established
8-1-2: Appointments
8-1-3: Chief Of Fire Department
8-1-4: Battalions
8-1-5: Rules And Regulations
8-1-6: Control Of Fires
8-1-7: Calling Of Off Duty Battalions
8-1-8: Outside Employment
8-1-9: Impersonation Of Firefighters
8-1-10: Reports
8-1-11: Fires Outside City
8-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a paid Fire Department of the City which shall
consist of the Chief of the Fire Department and such other officers and
firefighters as are necessary to man the equipment for the proper extinguishing
of fires, pursuant to section 364.16, Code of Iowa. There shall be established
within the Fire Department the following bureaus, namely:
Division of Fire Operations
Division of Fire Prevention and Code Enforcement
Division of Emergency Medical Services
(1953 Code § 32-1; amd. 1985 Code; Ord. 92-5, 2-18-1991; 2017 Code)
8-1-2: APPOINTMENTS:
   A.   All appointments of the Fire Department shall be made by the Chief of
the Fire Department with the approval of the City Council, in accordance with
chapter 400, Code of Iowa, relating to the civil service laws and the rules and
regulations of the Mason City Civil Service Commission, pursuant to title 2,
chapter 1 of this Code. (1953 Code § 32-2; amd. 1985 Code)
   B.   All firefighting personnel appointed to or employed by the Fire
Department shall, on or before completion of the probationary period, live
within a ten (10) mile radius of the City limits. (1985 Code)
8-1-3: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
As set out in section 400.13, Code of Iowa, the Chief of the Fire Department
shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the
City Council, and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly
appointed and qualified. The Chief shall have had a minimum of five (5) years'
experience in a Fire Department, or three (3) years' experience in a Fire
Department and two (2) years of comparable experience or educational training.
Any person who becomes Chief of the Fire Department shall be allowed to
transfer all rights the person may have acquired under chapter 410 or 411, Code
of Iowa, including employer contributions during the person's years of service
in a City, employee contributions, and interest, to the retirement system of
the City that hires the person as Chief. Such person shall also transfer the
number of years served as seniority toward other benefits provided by the City
which hires the person. If the Chief is relieved of that position, the person
shall be entitled to remain in the department for which the person was Chief at
a position commensurate with the person's civil service status, even if this
means that the City must create a position for the person to fill until a
regular position becomes vacant. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be
responsible for the discipline, control and efficiency of the department and
shall have authority over all members of the department and the assignments
thereof. The Chief shall have full control over all apparatus, equipment, tools
and other property belonging to the Fire Department. (Ord. 94-16, 7-19-1994;
amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-4: BATTALIONS:
The Fire Department shall be divided into three (3) shifts, to be known as
"battalions", designated as first, second and third battalions. One (1)
battalion shall be on duty from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. one day to eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, and shall be known as the duty battalion. Two
(2) battalions shall be off duty from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. one day to
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next day, and shall be known as off duty
battalions. (Ord. 1128, 10-5-1970)
8-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval and consent of the City
Administrator, shall make all the rules and regulations for the government of
the department. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also keep such records
as will accurately show the activities of the department and the members
thereof. (1953 Code § 32-5; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-6: CONTROL OF FIRES:
The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence at a fire, the ranking
officer present thereat, shall have full control and command at all fires and
of all persons present in the vicinity of such fires; he shall have authority
to summon any and all persons present to aid under his direction in the
extinguishment of any fire, in removing of personal property from burning
buildings or any other building; he shall have the power to cut off gas, to cut
off electric wires, etc., in the vicinity of the fire, or to blow up or to
cause to be blown up or otherwise dispose of any building or structure for the
purpose of checking the progress of any fire. He shall have authority to
suppress all tumult or disorder at a fire and to require any person to leave
the vicinity of the fire. (1953 Code § 32-6)
8-1-7: CALLING OF OFF DUTY BATTALIONS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the power to call the off duty
battalion and to call outside aid from other cities at any time he deems it
necessary. (1953 Code § 32-7)
8-1-8: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:
The Chief of the Fire Department may assign to any employee or firefighter, on
his off duty time, any work similar to his duties as employee or firefighter.
For the purposes of pension and retirement rights, injuries, disabilities or
death suffered while on such assigned work shall be considered as being
suffered in line of duty. (1953 Code § 32-8; amd. 1985 Code)
8-1-9: IMPERSONATION OF FIREFIGHTERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the Fire Department to wear
any cap, badge or other insignia or any part of the uniform of a member of the
Fire Department. (1953 Code § 32-10)
8-1-10: REPORTS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall make monthly and annual reports to the
City Administrator of such data and information as may be required by the
Mayor. In his annual report, the Chief of the Fire Department shall include a
detailed statement of the condition of the apparatus and property in the
custody of the department, together with his recommendations for the
improvement of the department. (1953 Code § 32-11; amd. 2017 Code)
8-1-11: FIRES OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Duties At Municipal Airport: The jurisdiction of the City, for fire
prevention and fire protection and the giving of other emergency assistance, is
hereby extended to the Municipal Airport, and the Chief of the Fire Department
is hereby authorized and directed to cause inspections to be made of property
thereon, and to enforce fire prevention regulations thereat, to fight fires and
give other emergency assistance thereto in the same manner as within the
corporate limits of the City. (1953 Code § 33-1)
   B.   Aid To Other Communities: The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his
absence the person acting in his place and stead, is hereby authorized, when
called upon by a community having an organized Fire Department, to send to the
relief of such community such personnel and equipment from the Fire Department
of the City as in his judgment may be spared from the City at that time for
such purpose. This subsection shall not require the Fire Department to answer
calls from such communities, but the answering of such calls shall be in the
discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department or, in his absence, a person
acting in his place and stead. (1953 Code § 33-2; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Aid Outside Communities: The Chief of the Fire Department or, in his
absence, the person acting in his place and stead is hereby authorized to
answer calls for emergency assistance within Cerro Gordo County and within the
limits of counties adjacent to Cerro Gordo County, and to communities having an
organized Fire Department, and to send to the relief thereof such firefighters
and equipment from the Fire Department of the City as, in his judgment, may be
spared from the City at that time for such purpose. This subsection shall not
require the Fire Department to answer such calls, but the answering of such
calls shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department or, in his
absence, a person acting in his place and stead. (1953 Code § 33-3; amd. Ord.
92-5, 2-18-1991; 2017 Code)
   D.   Contracts For Aid: The Chief of the Fire Department, or in his absence
the person acting in his place and stead, is hereby authorized when called upon
by any person or other municipality with whom the City has heretofore
contracted or with whom the City may hereafter contract to provide fire
protection or other emergency assistance, to send to the relief of such person
or other municipality such firefighters and equipment from the Fire Department
of the City as, in his judgment, may be spared from the City at that time for
such purpose. This subsection shall not require the Fire Department to answer
such calls from such persons or other municipalities, but the answering of such
calls shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department or, in his
absence, a person acting in his place and stead. (1953 Code § 33-4; amd. Ord.
92-5, 2-18-1991)
   E.   Pension, Retirement Privileges: All firefighters and equipment of the
Fire Department, while engaged in answering calls provided for in this section,
shall be considered as being in the service of the City and acting in the
course of their employment and in the line of duty. Firefighters, while
answering such calls, shall have the same rights, privileges and protections as
though answering calls within the corporate limits of the City, including
rights to pension and retirement fund privileges. (1953 Code § 33-5; amd. Ord.
92-5, 2-18-1991)
ARTICLE A. CITY OPERATED AMBULANCE SERVICES
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Rates Established
8-1A-2: City Administrator's Authority To Adjust
8-1A-3: Transport Service Agreements
8-1A-1: RATES ESTABLISHED:
Rates for ambulance service shall be established from time to time as set forth
by the City Council in resolution form. (Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
8-1A-2: CITY ADMINISTRATOR'S AUTHORITY TO ADJUST:
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered, in the City
Administrator's discretion, to make adjustments in the rates and charges to be
fixed for City ambulance service in such cases where the need for such
ambulance service is required to repeatedly transport a person of limited
financial means. The City Administrator shall have the authority to require
proof of the financial status of a person seeking the benefits of this section
for such service. (Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
8-1A-3: TRANSPORT SERVICE AGREEMENTS:
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into
agreements with any authorized officials or Governing Body to provide emergency
ambulance transport service. Such agreement shall be reduced in writing and
signed before any such service is rendered and shall provide that such official
or Governing Body shall guarantee the payment of fees. All service authorized
by County officers shall be billed directly to the County Sheriff's Office.
(Ord. 06-13, 5-16-2006)
CHAPTER 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8-2-1: Organization
8-2-2: Appointments
8-2-3: Chief Of Police
8-2-4: Duties Of Chief Of Police
8-2-5: Records And Reports
8-2-6: Rules And Regulations
8-2-7: Discipline
8-2-8: Extra Duty Assignment
8-2-9: Powers And Duties Of Members
8-2-10: Reserve Police Force
8-2-1: ORGANIZATION:
Pursuant to section 372.14, Code of Iowa, there is hereby established the Mason
City Police Department consisting of the Chief of Police, Captains,
Lieutenants, Sergeants, police officers, clerks and other employees, the number
of any rank to be determined by the City Council. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-2: APPOINTMENTS:
All appointments to the Police Department, except that of the Chief of Police,
shall be made by the Chief of Police with the approval of the City Council in
accordance with chapter 400, Code of Iowa, relating to the civil service laws
and the rules and regulations of the Mason City Civil Service Commission,
pursuant to title 2, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017
Code)
8-2-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
As set out in section 400.13, Code of Iowa, the Chief of Police shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, subject to the approval of the City
Council, and shall hold office thereafter, or until a successor is duly
appointed and qualified. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
discipline, control and efficiency of the department and shall have authority
over all members of the department and the assignments thereof. (Ord. 11-11, 9-
20-2011)
8-2-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall have the general management, supervision, control and
direction of all members of the Police Department, police radio system and of
all property belonging to or appertaining to the Police Department. He shall be
the executive head of the Police Department. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-5: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of arrests made by
any member of the Police Department, whether such arrest is made under the
provisions of this Code or under the laws of the State of Iowa, which record
shall show the offense for which the arrest was made, by whom made and the
disposition of the charge. He shall make such periodical reports requested. He
shall supervise the collection and accounting of all parking fees, fines for
overtime parking and other parking violations collected by or through the
Police Department or Parking Enforcement Bureau for and on behalf of the City
Clerk. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
8-2-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police shall have power and it shall be his duty to promulgate
orders, rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of
the Police Department, not inconsistent with law or the provisions of this
Code, and shall see to the enforcement thereof. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-7: DISCIPLINE:
The Chief of Police may peremptorily suspend, demote or discharge any member of
the department for neglect of duty, disobedience of orders, misconduct or
failure to properly perform his duties. Such actions will be in accordance with
applicable laws, policies, and current collective bargaining agreement. (Ord.
11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-8: EXTRA DUTY ASSIGNMENT:
The Chief of the Police Department may assign to any employee or police
officer, on his off duty time, any work similar to his duties as employee or
police officer. For the purposes of pension and retirement rights, injuries,
disabilities or death suffered while on such assigned work shall be considered
as being suffered in line of duty. (Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-9: POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and of every member of the Police
Department to preserve the peace, to enforce the laws of the State and the
provisions of this Code, to protect persons and property, to guard the public
health, to prevent crimes and to arrest persons offending against the laws of
the State, the provisions of this Code or the lawful orders of the police.
(Ord. 11-11, 9-20-2011)
8-2-10: RESERVE POLICE FORCE:
   A.   Force Created: There is hereby created and established the Mason City
reserve police force as provided by chapter 80D, Code of Iowa, and subject to
the regulations therein contained. The reserve police force shall serve until
abolished by the City Council.
   B.   Membership: Membership in said reserve police force shall be as
prescribed in said reserve's bylaws, rules and regulations and shall be subject
to the approval of the Chief of Police and City Council. The Chief of Police
may, from time to time, prescribe such other bylaws, rules and regulations as
they, in their sole discretion, may deem to be desirable. All rules,
regulations or bylaws of said reserve shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
Members of the reserve shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police and
shall be removed and discharged from said reserve at any time upon violation of
any bylaw, rule or regulation prescribed as aforesaid or upon recommendation of
the reserve police executive council.
Members of the reserve shall be subject to lawful orders of a member of the
Mason City Police Department.
Members of the reserve shall be considered employees of the City during those
periods when they are performing police duties as authorized and directed by
the Chief of Police or his designee, and they shall receive a salary of one
dollar ($1.00) per year. However, said reserve members shall not be entitled to
benefits or obligations of police retirement benefits or civil service. (Ord.
11-11, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Barbed Wire
8-3-2: Cemeteries; Protection Of
8-3-3: Dead Animals; Hauling Of
8-3-4: Defacing Or Injuring Notices Or Public Signs
8-3-5: Discharge Of Firearms
8-3-6: Disorderly Conduct
8-3-7: Distribution Of Bills, Posting
8-3-8: Consumer Fireworks
8-3-9: Reserved
8-3-10: Games In Street
8-3-11: Inhalation Of Toxic Vapors Prohibited
8-3-12: Litter, Deposit Of
8-3-13: Skateboards
8-3-14: Obstructing Use Of Street, Sidewalk, Alley
8-3-15: Obstructing Visibility At Intersection
8-3-16: Parades
8-3-17: Permitting Disturbing The Peace
8-3-18: Poison Food
8-3-19: Public Property, Private Property; Defacing
8-3-20: Radio Interference
8-3-21: Shooting, Throwing Missiles
8-3-22: Streets, Injury To Paved Or Oiled
8-3-23: Street Materials, Taking Of
8-3-24: Street Guards, Removal Of
8-3-25: Streets, Repair And Maintenance
8-3-26: Survey Marks, Stakes
8-3-27: Urinating And Defecating
8-3-28: Bow And Arrow Hunting; Public Property, Private Property; Archery
Ranges
8-3-1: BARBED WIRE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use barbed wire for the purpose of
constructing any fence or of enclosing any tree, ornament, lot, park or plot of
ground except as follows:
   A.   Where said fences or enclosures exist at the time of passage of this
section, used in agricultural situations permitted by zoning, City Council
approval shall be required to construct a new fence or replace an existing
fence.
   B.   In industrial and commercial installations, when used atop a security
type fence where said barbed wire is at least six feet (6') above ground level.
   C.   In other special areas as approved by the City Council.
The use of barbed wire shall not be permitted where it projects over street
rights-of-way or over other private property. (Ord. 1363, 6-21-1976)
8-3-2: CEMETERIES; PROTECTION OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, mutilate, deface or
remove any gravestone, monument or other structure in a cemetery or to
mutilate, cut, injure or destroy any fence, railing, tree, shrubbery, flowers
or lawn in a cemetery, or to walk or drive in any cemetery except upon the
walks and drives therein provided, or to use any cemetery for any disrespectful
or improper purposes. It shall also be unlawful for any person to enter or be
within the cemetery grounds from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. (Ord. 10-17, 10-5-2010)
8-3-3: DEAD ANIMALS; HAULING OF:
Pursuant to title 4, chapter 2, article A of this Code, it shall be unlawful to
haul, drag or otherwise transport any dead animal or portions of such animal
through the streets of the City without having the same in a covered,
watertight container. (1985 Code)
8-3-4: DEFACING OR INJURING NOTICES OR PUBLIC SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tear down, deface, injure or
destroy, or interfere with any notice, proclamation, publication, placard,
traffic sign, signal or device, street name or number or house number or
railway crossing sign or signal or sign posted or placed by authority of the
City or under license therefrom at any time before such notice, proclamation,
publication, placard or sign shall have expired. (1985 Code)
8-3-5: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except Federal, State, County and
Municipal law enforcement officers in the performance of duty or training, to
shoot or discharge any firearm or air gun except when authorized and permitted
by the Chief of Police after investigation for the following purposes:
   A.   The lawful activity of a person or firearm organization upon premises
which are safe for said activity and which will not interfere with the peaceful
use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
   B.   To abate a nuisance caused by birds or animals upon the property owned
or rented by said applicant.
All persons discharging firearms within the Municipality for the purposes set
forth in subsections A and B of this section must have the written permit to
discharge said firearm(s) at the time of discharge or, when issued to a firearm
organization, said permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place when said
activity is being conducted. The permits shall be nonassignable and may only be
used for the purposes and at the time specified therein. (Ord. 1430, 3-20-1978)
8-3-6: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for a person to do or permit any of the following:
   A.   Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or near any
lawful assembly of persons; provided, that participants in athletic contests
may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport. (1985
Code)
   B.   Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence, public
building, or hospital which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants
thereof. (1985 Code; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
   D.   Without lawful authority or color of authority, the person disturbs any
lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly.
   E.   By words or action, initiates or circulates a report or warning of
fire, epidemic or other catastrophe knowing such report to be false or such
warning to be baseless.
   F.   Without authority or justification, the person, group or assemblage of
persons obstructs any street, sidewalk, highway or other public way with the
intent to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others. (1985 Code)
8-3-7: DISTRIBUTION OF BILLS, POSTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or attach, paint, print or write
any placard, notice, poster, bill, advertisement, announcement, picture or sign
on any pole, post, fence, hydrant, bridge, wall, building, window, structure,
sidewalk, tree or any public property, nor shall the same be placed upon any
such privately owned property without first having secured the consent of the
owner or person controlling such privately owned property. It shall also be
unlawful to scatter or throw upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
any bills, pictures, notices or advertisements.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to throw, place, deposit or in any
manner attach any bills, paper, cards, samples or other advertising matter in
or on any automobile or vehicle while such automobile or vehicle is standing or
is parked upon any public street, alley or parking lot within the City, except
that this provision shall not apply to legal notices as provided by law. (1953
Code § 28-60)
8-3-8: CONSUMER FIREWORKS:
The purpose of this section is to regulate the sale, use, or exploding of
consumer fireworks within the City. All sales, use, and exploding of consumer
fireworks shall conform to Iowa Code section 727.2, the requirements of this
section, and all other applicable requirements of this Code.
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Shall have the same meaning as defined in Iowa Code
section 727.2.
   FIRE MARSHAL: An inspector appointed by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal, or, if so designated by the State Fire Marshal's Office, the City Fire
Marshal.
   PERMANENT BUILDING: A structure enclosed within interior walls and having a
roof, built, erected and framed of a combination of materials for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A tent, canopy, stand, converted metal container, or
similar enclosure that is not permanently affixed to the land, which is not
intended for permanent use, and is erected for the purpose of retail sales of
consumer fireworks.
   B.   Sales; General Requirements:
      1.   Conformance With State And Local Law: All sales of consumer
fireworks shall conform to the requirements of Iowa Code section 727.2, title
12, "Zoning Regulations", of this Code, and all other applicable sections of
this Code.
      2.   Application: Prior to establishing any sales outlet for consumer
fireworks, an application on a form supplied by the Fire Department shall be
submitted, along with all required attachments, and the initial inspection fee,
to the City Fire Marshal. Attachments shall include:
         a.   Proof Of License: Proof of licensing from the Office of the State
Fire Marshal.
         b.   Proof Of Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance,
separate from the building property insurance, covering all aspects of consumer
fireworks sales per occurrence and in aggregate in amounts set by resolution of
the Council.
         c.   Site Plan: All initial applications for establishment of a
consumer fireworks sales outlet shall include a detailed site plan, drawn to a
measurable scale, showing the location of all permanent buildings on the site
and the location of any temporary structures erected for sales of consumer
fireworks.
         d.   Emergency Contacts: The applicant shall submit a completed
emergency contact information form for fireworks sales from the Mason City Fire
Department.
         e.   Transient Merchant License: Except for non-temporary sales and
wholesale operations, all applicants shall provide proof of application for a
transient merchant license from the City Clerk.
      3.   Review: All initial applications for sales of consumer fireworks
shall be reviewed and determined to be in compliance by the Development Review
Committee, as created in title 12, chapter 7 of this Code prior to
establishment of the sales outlet or erection of any temporary structure. Upon
determination that the application is complete, the Fire Marshal shall forward
the application to the Development Review Committee. The Development Review
Committee shall determine whether the request for retail sales of consumer
fireworks is in compliance with the requirements of the State Code, this
section and all other applicable requirements of this Code.
         a.   Compliance: All sales shall comply with Iowa Code section 727.2.
Location of sales, storage of consumer fireworks, and setbacks of temporary
structures shall comply with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
standards, as adopted by State Code, and with the International Fire Code, as
adopted by the City, as well as with all applicable City zoning and building
ordinances.
         b.   Sales In A Permanent Building:
         (1)   Sale of consumer fireworks within a permanent building are
allowed only within a building constructed and intended for use as a commercial
or retail/service form within the Z4, Multi-Use District, or an industrial form
within the Z6, Industrial District, as set forth in section 12-8-3, table 2,
subsections D and J of this Code; however, sales of consumer fireworks may not
be conducted within any part of a self storage building, or a building
containing a tavern function; and further provided that all other requirements
of applicable State and local codes are met.
         (2)   Only the initial application to establish sales of consumer
fireworks shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee to determine
that sales will be in compliance. However, any expansion of the building or
expansion onto additional properties shall not commence until the Development
Review Committee has reviewed the expansion and determined it to be in
compliance.
         c.   Sales In A Temporary Structure:
         (1)   Sales of consumer fireworks in a temporary structure shall be
permitted only upon property containing commercial forms and functions within
the Z4, Multi-Use District and the Z6, Industrial District, as designated by
Title 12 of this Code.
         (2)   The initial application for sales in a temporary structure shall
be reviewed by the Development Review Committee to determine that sales will be
in compliance. When future inspections by the Fire Marshal identify that a
change in the location of fireworks sales, display or storage, setback of
temporary structures, or other material change from the approved plan has
occurred, the Fire Marshal shall order sales to cease until a revised plan has
been reviewed by the Development Review Committee and determined to be in
compliance.
      4.   Inspections: Upon determination that all application and review
requirements are complete, the City Fire Marshal shall notify the applicant and
schedule an inspection.
         a.   Sales of consumer fireworks within a permanent building shall be
inspected annually.
         b.   Sales of consumer fireworks from a temporary structure shall be
inspected after erection of the temporary structure for each season in which
sales will be conducted, but prior to any sales.
         c.   If a transient merchant license is required, the operator shall
present a copy of the license to the Fire Marshal upon the initial inspection.
      5.   Violations: Should the Fire Marshal find any violation of this
section, State Code or other applicable codes or ordinances, sales shall
immediately cease. Sales may not resume until the violation has been corrected
and the Fire Marshal has determined that the operation is in full conformance.
      6.   Renewal:
         a.   Permanent Building: An emergency contact information form and
transient merchant license, if applicable, for sales of consumer fireworks in a
permanent building shall be renewed annually. The Fire Marshal shall inspect
the premises to determine that the sales conducted therein continue to comply
with State and local codes.
         b.   Temporary Structures:
         (1)   A consumer fireworks permit for a temporary structure shall
expire on the date that the temporary structure is removed, or July 8 of each
year, whichever is sooner.
         (2)   Each such temporary structure must be removed by July 15 of each
year.
         (3)   If the permit holder wishes to reestablish sales in a temporary
structure at the same location the next year, the applicant shall obtain a new
updated permit or license from the State Fire Marshal's Office, as required by
State Code. The application and review process for the reestablished temporary
structure sales shall be the same as required for the original application.
      7.   Revocation: The Fire Marshal may revoke the approval at any time due
to false or fraudulent information during the application and inspection
process, or any violation of State or local requirements.
      8.   Inspection Fees: Inspection fees shall be set by resolution approved
by the City Council.
   C.   Dates Of Permitted Sales:
      1.   All sale dates and requirements shall conform to the required City
Code. Consumer fireworks may only be sold during those periods allowed under
the applicable Iowa Code.
      2.   Sales within a permanent structure or building shall be allowed
between June 1 and July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
      3.   Approved temporary structure or stand sales shall be allowed between
June 13 and July 8.
   D.   Fireworks; Dates Of Exploding, Discharge And Use: No person shall
explode or discharge a consumer fireworks device outside the following dates
and hours:
      1.   July 3 through July 4, from the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
      Exemption: Except as provided in subsection G, "Sanctioned Fireworks
Shows And Displays", of this section.
   E.   Prohibited Discharge: Fireworks may not be set off on public property
that includes cemeteries and parks.
   F.   Location Restrictions: Fireworks, when set off, must be more than two
hundred (200) yards from hospitals, hospice care centers, and nursing homes.
   G.   Sanctioned Fireworks Shows And Displays: A special fireworks permit may
be obtained from the Fire Department for display of fireworks by a display
operator or operators certified by the Pyrotechnics Guild International,
outside the above listed dates for a public event approved by Fire Chief or the
City Council.
   H.   Other Use: Use of pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances using
blank cartridges shall only be used for bona fide athletic purposes, permitted
displays, or other uses approved by Fire Chief or the City Council.
   I.   Property Control/Penalty:
      1.   A person who uses a consumer firework in violation of subsection D
of this section; or any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant, or otherwise
having any possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any
premises who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites or permits the use of
consumer fireworks on said premises which is in violation of subsection D, E or
F of this section, and is the intentional result of, or within the reasonable
expectations of, the person or persons having such possessory control is deemed
to be in violation of this section.
      2.   Violation of this section shall be a Municipal infraction punishable
by a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Alternatively, violation
of this section can be charged by a peace officer of the City as a simple
misdemeanor. (Ord. 17-10, 6-20-2017; amd. Ord. 18-11, 11-20-2018; Ord. 18-12,
12-4-2018; Ord. 18-13, 12-4-2018; Ord. 22-09, 7-5-2022; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
8-3-9: RESERVED:
(Reserved by Ord. 19-14, 11-19-2019)
8-3-10: GAMES IN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any game or sport on any
street, highway or public grounds within the business section of the City, or
to use any street, avenue, sidewalk or public grounds within the City for such
purpose in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or travel thereon, or to
continue such use in any event contrary to the orders of any police officer.
(1953 Code § 28-58; amd. 1985 Code)
8-3-11: INHALATION OF TOXIC VAPORS PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the
purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration,
stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system, or possess, buy, or use
any such substance for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate
this section. But this section does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia
for medical or dental purposes.
As used in this section, the term "toxic vapors" means the following substances
or products containing such substances: acetone, alcohols (methyl, isopropyl,
propyl, or butyl), aliphatic acetates (ethyl, methyl, propyl, or methyl
cellosolve acetate), allyl isothiocyanate, benzene, butane, carbon
tetrachloride, cyclohexane, ether, freons (Freon 11 and Freon 12), hexane,
methyl ethyl ketone, methyl isobutyl ketone, methylene chloride, naphtha,
nitrous oxide, perchlorethylene, propane, toluene, trichloromethane,
trichloroethylene, or xylene, or other chemical substance capable of causing
similar effects upon the human body. Evidence that a container, or a similar
container, if the label is missing, lists one (1) or more of these substances
is prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic
vapors and emits the fumes thereof. (Ord. 11-12, 9-20-2011)
8-3-12: LITTER, DEPOSIT OF:
   A.   Litter Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, leave
or permit to remain upon any street, alley, stream or public place, or upon any
privately owned property any litter, debris or refuse of any kind, including,
but not limited to, cigarette butts, garbage, paper, cardboard, cans, bottles,
tacks, wires, nails, discarded glassware, floor covering, building material,
clothing, ashes, brush; such as straw, weeds and tree trimmings, except that
the owner may deposit the same upon his premises when confined in a proper
working receptacle with a tight fitting cover except that it shall be lawful
for such litter, debris and refuse to be properly transported and discarded at
the Cerro Gordo County landfill.
   B.   Fine: Any person convicted of violating this section is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   C.   Exception: Property owners or tenants who create a nuisance upon
property under their control would be subject to the provisions of the nuisance
ordinance. (Ord. 08-13, 9-16-2008)
8-3-13: SKATEBOARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable rules and
regulations for the use and operation of skateboards, and to establish areas
where the use and operation of same are prohibited for the protection, safety
and general welfare of the public in the City.
   B.   Definitions: For use within this section, the following terms are
defined:
    BUSINESS: Any property open to the public upon which activities of a
commercial or retail nature are routinely conducted.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT: That area bounded by and including all streets which lie
between Connecticut Avenue on the east, Jefferson Avenue on the west, Fourth
Street South on the south and Fifth Street North on the north.
   SKATEBOARDS: A foot, motor or wind propelled vehicle consisting of a board
equipped with two (2) or more wheels tandem and guided by the user or rider
standing on same and pushing same with foot power or operating with motor or
wind power.
   C.   Use; Restrictions: The riding or use of skateboards within the
corporate limits of the City shall be subject to the following:
      1.   No person shall ride or use a skateboard at any time on any street,
sidewalk, plaza area or public parking lot in the business district.
      2.   No person shall ride or use a skateboard on a street in a
residential district or area which runs parallel to a hard surface sidewalk.
      3.   No person shall ride or use a skateboard in a publicly owned parking
lot.
      4.   All persons using or riding skateboards within the City shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall give an audible signal before
overtaking and passing a pedestrian using the same sidewalk.
      5.   All persons using or riding a skateboard on any street or alley
shall:
         a.   Observe all traffic regulations, laws, and ordinances.
         b.   Stay as near to the side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
      6.   No person shall use or ride a skateboard on privately owned parking
lots unless written permission has been obtained from the owner(s).
      7.   No person shall use or ride a skateboard on any sidewalk abutting a
business. (Ord. 90-9, 6-4-1990)
8-3-14: OBSTRUCTING USE OF STREET, SIDEWALK, ALLEY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to shovel, rake, throw, place or deposit
any snow, leaves or other material or thing onto any public street or sidewalk
so as to hinder or obstruct the regular use of such street, alley or sidewalk
to its full width by vehicular or pedestrian traffic. (1953 Code § 57-3; amd.
Ord. 904, 11-19-1962; 1985 Code)
8-3-15: OBSTRUCTING VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the visibility at any street
intersection by placing any vehicles, trailers, equipment or machinery, or by
shoveling, raking, throwing, blowing or depositing any snow, leaves or other
materials onto a public street, sidewalk, alley or parking so as to obstruct
the view of persons regularly using such streets for vehicular traffic. (1953
Code § 57-3; amd. Ord. 904, 11-19-1962; 1985 Code)
8-3-16: PARADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to inaugurate, cause, lead or participate
in any parade, celebration or demonstration upon any street, avenue or public
grounds unless a written permit for such parade, celebration or demonstration
shall first have been obtained from the Chief of Police; provided, however,
that such permit shall not protect any person from prosecution for or
conviction of disorderly conduct or for the violation of any of the provisions
of this Code on account of conduct during the course of such parade or
procession. (1953 Code § 28-12)
8-3-17: PERMITTING DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any quarreling, fighting or
unusual noise or affray, or any act or conduct prohibited in any house or upon
any premises owned, occupied, possessed or controlled by such person, in such a
manner as to disturb the peace of others or the public quiet of the
neighborhood. (1953 Code § 28-2)
8-3-18: POISON FOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any poison food or substance on
any street, alley or other public or private grounds in such a way that it may
endanger human life or the life of any domestic animal, except that it shall be
lawful to set poison on one's own premises for the purpose of ridding the same
of vermin. (1953 Code § 28-30)
8-3-19: PUBLIC PROPERTY, PRIVATE PROPERTY; DEFACING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure or destroy, or to assist
or abet in defacing, injuring or destroying, any public building, bridge,
pavement, sidewalk, drain, sewer or any other public property or improvement,
or to cut, hack, injure or destroy, or to assist or to abet another in cutting,
hacking, injuring or destroying, any pole, wire, tree, fence, railing, building
or other property not owned by such person. (1953 Code §§ 28-36, 28-37; amd.
1985 Code)
8-3-20: RADIO INTERFERENCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be responsible for the
operation of any machine, apparatus or equipment generating or causing high
frequency oscillations such as to interfere with radio reception or
broadcasting, without first providing for the elimination of such interference
insofar as it is possible. (1953 Code § 28-79)
8-3-21: SHOOTING, THROWING MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any missile, dart, shaft,
slingshot, stick, stone or ball in such a manner as to hit, injure, or endanger
any person, window or other property. (1953 Code §§ 28-65, 28-67; amd. 2017
Code)
8-3-22: STREETS, INJURY TO PAVED OR OILED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any tractor, engine or
other vehicle having cleats, spurs or other nonslipping devices upon its wheels
upon any paved or oiled streets, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
drive, drag or propel any vehicle or other heavy object on or across any of the
paved or oiled streets in such a manner as to injure or deface such street.
(1953 Code § 28-42)
8-3-23: STREET MATERIALS, TAKING OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or appropriate to his private use
any dirt, stone or other material or thing from any street, alley or public
ground, or from any other premises, unless consent of the owner has been first
obtained. (1953 Code § 28-56)
8-3-24: STREET GUARDS, REMOVAL OF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove or carry away any
fence, railing or other guard placed about any excavation, hole or pile of
dirt, rock or other material or to remove or carry away or extinguish the light
of any lantern or other light which has been set as a warning at any
excavation, hole or pile of material. (1953 Code § 28-33)
8-3-25: STREETS, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, scrape or grade the surface of any
public street or portion thereof, or to place any oil, gravel or any other type
of surfacing material upon any public street or portion thereof, or perform any
maintenance or repair upon any public street or portion thereof without having
first obtained written permission from the City Council. (Ord. 1018, 9-5-1967)
8-3-26: SURVEY MARKS, STAKES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, disturb, destroy, move
or remove any survey marks or stakes, bench or grade marks or monuments placed
upon any public or private place for the purpose of fixing grades, locating
streets or marking boundary lines or for any other purpose. (1953 Code § 28-35)
8-3-27: URINATING AND DEFECATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally urinate or defecate upon
any public street, public sidewalk or other public property or within public
view upon private property. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to
prohibit any person from urinating or defecating in any public or private
restroom. (Ord. 1674, 3-21-1983)
8-3-28: BOW AND ARROW HUNTING; PUBLIC PROPERTY, PRIVATE PROPERTY; ARCHERY
RANGES:
   A.   Permit: It shall be unlawful for anyone to hunt with a bow and arrow
inside the City limits except when a permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police after investigation and submission of proof of possession of all
applicable State licenses and game stamps and submission of written consent
from the owner(s) or person(s) in control of said private property; or, if upon
public property, written consent of the proper authority. The Mayor, subject to
the approval of the City Council, shall have the authority to sign the written
consent for use of bow and arrows upon City owned public property.
Exception: Properties under the jurisdiction of the Parks and Recreation Board.
Each permit shall be for a period stated on its face, but not longer than the
duration of any single bow hunting season. (Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-11-
1990)
Permits issued by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources as part of a Deer
Management Zone Program will be valid for the duration of the program, as
stated on the permit face. (2017 Code)
   B.   Archery Ranges: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or
shoot a bow and arrow within the City limits for any other purpose; unless upon
an archery range for which a permit has been obtained from the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-11-1990; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Archery Range Permits Issued By Chief Of Police: Permits for the
operation of an archery range shall be issued by the Chief of Police for a
period of not to exceed one (1) year; only upon submission of satisfactory
proof or investigation by the Chief establishing that such activity can be
carried on at the particular location in reasonable safety and so as not to
interfere with the peaceable use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
All persons using bow and arrows within the Municipality for the purposes set
forth above must have the written permit to discharge said arrows at the time
of discharge, or when issued for an archery range, said permit must be
displayed in a conspicuous place when said activity is being conducted. The
permits shall be nonassignable and may only be used for the purpose(s) and at
the time(s) specified therein. (Ord. 89-34, 12-18-1989, eff. 1-11-1990)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Keeping Of Livestock
8-4-3: Feeding Of Garbage To Livestock
8-4-4: Keeping Of Rabbits Or Poultry
8-4-5: Beekeeping
8-4-6: Sanitary Conditions
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BEEKEEPING: Apicultural activities, which includes raising bees in one (1) or
more hives, boxes or colonies occupied by bees and using the honey produced,
but not including commercial honey processing or honey warehousing.
LIVESTOCK: Any animal customarily kept by humans for the purpose of providing
food, fiber or work, including, but not limited to, cattle and other bovines,
horses, mules, donkeys and other equines, goats and other caprines, swine, hogs
and other porcines (except oriental potbellied pigs as outlined below), and
chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys and other poultry, but excluding bees. (Ord.
14-11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-2: KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, raise or harbor livestock
in any zoning district other than the Z1 Agricultural District and the Z7-2 and
Z7-4 Specific Use Districts, in accordance with the requirements of title 12 of
this Code. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
   B.   Notwithstanding the above, an oriental potbellied pig shall not be
considered livestock and may be kept as a companion animal in accordance with
article A of this chapter, provided:
      1.   The animal's tusks must be trimmed and maintained in a manner that
no tusk appears outside of the mouth of the pig when the mouth is closed;
      2.   All oriental potbellied pigs must be neutered or sterilized.
      3.   Oriental potbellied pigs kept as companion animals may not exceed a
total weight of two hundred fifty (250) pounds. Pigs of any breed or type that
exceed two hundred fifty (250) pounds shall be considered livestock. (Ord. 14-
11, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4-3: FEEDING OF GARBAGE TO LIVESTOCK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed table scraps, garbage or partially
spoiled or decayed vegetable or animal matter to any livestock. (Ord. 14-11, 9-
16-2014)
8-4-4: KEEPING OF RABBITS OR POULTRY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise more than a
combined total of twenty five (25) rabbits, chickens or other poultry in any Z2
Sub-Urban District or Z3 General Urban District, except where the occupant
shall be in possession of at least two (2) acres of ground for the carrying on
of farming or poultry raising operations.
   B.   Where permitted, rabbits or poultry shall be kept within enclosures set
back at least ten feet (10') from any lot line and at least thirty five feet
(35') from any residence on adjoining property or City right-of-way. (Ord. 14-
11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-5: BEEKEEPING:
Beekeeping shall be allowed in the Z1, Z2 or Z3 Zoning Districts with the
following restrictions:
   A.   The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
   B.   Maximum number of hives allowed is two (2) hives in Z2 and Z3 Districts
and ten (10) hives in Z1 District;
   C.   Hives shall be located in the rear yard and a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') from property lines;
   D.   A flight path barrier shall be located in front of the hive(s),
consisting of a six foot (6') fence that is one hundred percent (100%) opaque,
or a similar structure or planting not less than six feet (6') in height of
sufficient density to create an opaque or nearly opaque barrier;
   E.   A source of water accessible to the bees must be provided on the
property. (Ord. 14-11, 9-16-2014)
8-4-6: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
It shall be the duty of any person keeping or raising livestock, rabbits,
poultry or bees to keep the pens, yards, hives or boxes wherein such livestock,
rabbits, poultry or bees are confined in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord.
14-11, 9-16-2014)
ARTICLE A. COMPANION ANIMALS
SECTION:
8-4A-1: Purpose
8-4A-2: Definitions
8-4A-3: Animal Control
8-4A-4: Rabies Vaccination
8-4A-5: License Required
8-4A-6: Rabies And License Tags
8-4A-7: Right To Capture Or Kill An Animal
8-4A-8: Impounding And Reclamation Of Animals
8-4A-9: Animals At Large
8-4A-10: Dangerous Or Vicious Animals
8-4A-11: Report Of Animal Bite; Suspected Or Confirmed Rabies; Confinement
8-4A-12: General Animal Requirements
8-4A-13: Standards Of Care
8-4A-14: Trapping And Poisoning
8-4A-15: Animal Waste Disposal
8-4A-16: Penalties
8-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations regarding the treatment
and control of companion animals in the City of Mason City in order to protect
public safety while providing for recreation and enjoyment of our pets. (Ord.
14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
ANIMAL: A nonhuman vertebrate.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any person designated by the City Administrator to
enforce the regulation of animals, as outlined in this Code.
AT LARGE: Any animal off the premises of its owner. An animal shall not be
deemed at large if the animal is under the direct control of its handler, and:
   A.   The animal is on the owner's property or on other private property with
the property owner's consent, or confined within a yard. The confinement
mechanism or structure must be sufficiently constructed to contain the animal.
If the animal is restrained on private property using a tie out, the tie out
line shall not be long enough to allow the animal to interfere with the lawful
use of public right-of-way; or
   B.   The animal is confined in a cage or motor vehicle; or
   C.   The animal is restrained by a leash of sufficient strength to restrain
the animal, not exceeding six feet (6') in length, held by a person competent
to restrain and control the animal; or
   D.   While in a City park, all ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining
to the exclusion, control or restraint of animals are obeyed, including within
a City designated dog park; or
   E.   The animal is a draft animal engaged in drawing vehicles or
conveyances; or
   F.   The animal is a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog
acting on behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties, or
is engaged in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills;
service dog; certified therapy dog; or
   G.   The animal has been approved to participate in a parade or other event
approved by the City Council; or
   H.   The animal and its owner are actively engaged in obedience training.
Such training is prohibited on City streets, sidewalks, and in City parks (see
park rules, subsection
 5-2-2O of this Code), except in a City designated dog park.
ATTACK: To approach in a hostile or aggressive manner as would cause a
reasonable person to fear serious injury to self or property.
CANINES: All members of the dog family including the canids, both male and
female, whether altered or not.
CITY ANIMAL SHELTER: The facility maintained by the City of Mason City for
temporary domicile of companion animals that have been collected by an
enforcement officer when found stray, abandoned, or at large; or are considered
dangerous or vicious; or have been relinquished.
COMPANION ANIMAL: An animal kept primarily for a person's company, service or
protection, as opposed to working animals, sport animals, livestock, and
laboratory animals, which are kept primarily for performance, agricultural
value, or research.
CONSTANT RESTRAINT: Fixed confinement.
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal is deemed to be vicious when it meets
any one (1) or more of the following:
   A.   Attacks, bites or claws any person while the person is on public
property or lawfully on private property, including the property of the owner
of the animal.
   B.   Without provocation, bites, claws or otherwise injures, kills, or
participates in injuring or killing any domesticated animal or fowl kept as a
pet, as livestock, or for companionship or service when the attacking animal is
off the property which its owner or custodian owns, rents, or otherwise
controls.
   C.   Notwithstanding the above, an animal shall not be deemed to be vicious
as a result of:
      1.   Attacking or causing injury to any person who, at the time of the
attack or injury, was committing a wilful trespass or was committing or
attempting to commit other criminal conduct while upon premises occupied by the
owner or keeper of that animal; or
      2.   Attacking or causing injury to any person who was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal.
      3.   Defending or protecting its owner, keeper or handler from an
unjustified attack or assault.
      4.   Causing injury or death to another animal if it was defending itself
from an unprovoked attack by another animal.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE: Any animal control officer, City animal shelter
operators, employee of the City of Mason City, Humane Society of North Iowa
staff, and any veterinarian or veterinarian employees who are authorized to
sell licenses or perform services on behalf of the City of Mason City.
DOG PARK: A suitably enclosed area, designated by the City, within which dogs
are not required to be leashed or otherwise subject to physical restraint,
subject to the rules adopted by the Park Board.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: An animal control officer, City Attorney, Code Enforcement
Officer or police officer, under the employ of or under contract to the City.
EUTHANASIA: The humane destruction of an animal accomplished via a lethal
injectable anesthesia that results in instantaneous and painless
unconsciousness and immediate and painless death during the loss of
consciousness.
FELINES: All members of the cat family, both male and female, whether altered
or not.
IMMEDIATE THREAT: Any threat to the safety of any citizen that could occur
momentarily if an animal is not impounded by an enforcement officer.
LICENSE: The annual license obtainable from the City Clerk's Office, or a
designated representative, which identifies the animal and its owner.
MICROCHIP: A device consisting of a small piece of semiconductor material
carrying many integrated circuits, which is implanted under the skin of a
companion animal and which is used to identify the animal and other applicable
information. The term microchip shall also refer to the action of implanting
the device.
OWNER: Any person, firm, association or corporation who owns, keeps, shelters
or harbors an animal, or otherwise provides care, custody or has responsibility
for the animal on a permanent or temporary basis, or knowingly permits an
animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person. In the event
that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of that minor
shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article.
PERMIT: To either intentionally or unintentionally allow or fail to take
adequate precautions to prevent.
RELINQUISH OR RELINQUISHMENT: The act by an owner to voluntarily give up
ownership and control of a companion animal. A relinquished animal shall be
placed in the City animal shelter and disposed in accordance with this article.
The animal cannot be considered relinquished unless a signed and witnessed
statement acknowledging the same, on a form created for this purpose, is
provided to the enforcement officer. Upon relinquishment, the owner releases
all rights to the animal. A dangerous and vicious animal, even if given up
voluntarily, is not considered to be relinquished under this definition.
WITHOUT PROVOCATION: Aggressive conduct initiated by any animal or aggressive
conduct by an animal that is not in self-defense or in response to aggressive
conduct by any other animal or person. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-3: ANIMAL CONTROL:
   A.   The City Administrator shall designate an animal control officer and
may designate any City department with the authority to enforce the provisions
of this article and chapter 351, Code of Iowa. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
   B.   When the animal control officer is off duty, the duties and
responsibilities of the animal control officer may be assumed by an enforcement
officer as defined herein. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-4: RABIES VACCINATION:
All animals kept within the City, brought into the City for shows, exhibitions,
or performance, or in transit, shall be vaccinated against rabies, as follows:
(Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
   A.   Every owner of a canine, feline or other companion animal susceptible
to rabies shall obtain a rabies vaccination for the animal. It shall be
unlawful for any person to own or have an animal in his/her possession, six (6)
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. The rabies
vaccination required by this article shall be an injection of antirabies
vaccine approved by the Iowa State Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 14-12, 9-
16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   This requirement does not apply to animals in transit that are
continuously held in secure cages and animals assigned to research, production
of biologics, and licensed animal care shelters or similar facilities. (Ord.
14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License: Owners of all canines and felines over six (6) months of age,
except those exempted in this section, shall obtain a license from the City
Clerk or from a designated representative agreeing to sell license tags on
behalf of the City. Companion animals other than canines and felines residing
in the City of Mason City may be licensed, at the discretion of the owner.
   B.   Vaccination Required: Before a license is issued for any animal, the
owner shall present a certificate of vaccination signed by a licensed
veterinarian that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies.
   C.   Expiration And Renewal: The license shall expire one (1), two (2) or
three (3) years from date of purchase, depending on the expiration of the
rabies vaccination. If the license is purchased from a veterinarian, the
license shall be due and payable on the same day as the vaccination is
acquired. If the license is purchased from the City Clerk, or a designated
representative, it shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the
vaccination date. City licenses shall be renewed for one (1), two (2) or three
(3) years, depending on the expiration of the rabies vaccination, so long as
the animal is living and kept within the City.
   D.   Fee: The license fee shall be established by resolution approved by the
City Council. A lower license fee shall be established for animals that have
been neutered or spayed. Every owner claiming a neutered or spayed animal shall
furnish the veterinarian's certificate showing that the animal for which the
license is sought has had the appropriate operation.
   E.   Issuance Of License: Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk,
or designated representative, shall issue to the owner a license containing a
description of the animal, the name of its owner and his/her place of
residence. A record of each license issued shall be kept on file in the City
Clerk's Office as a public record. A numbered tag displaying the year in which
it expires shall be delivered to the owner. The license tag shall be securely
fastened to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the animal.
   F.   Transfer Of Ownership: When the permanent ownership of an animal is
transferred, the license may be transferred by the City Clerk by notation on
the license record, giving name and address of the new owner.
   G.   Transfer Of Animals Licensed Elsewhere: When an animal licensed in
another Municipal jurisdiction is permanently transferred to Mason City, the
owner shall provide proof of the previous license and proof of current rabies
vaccination to the City Clerk. Any tag issued by the prior licensing
jurisdiction shall be discarded. The Clerk shall issue a new license tag that
shall expire upon expiration of the current rabies vaccination. If the rabies
vaccination is not current, the owner shall obtain the required vaccination
prior to transfer of the license. The Clerk shall note on the license record
that the newly issued license tag effects a transfer of a license from another
jurisdiction. The Clerk shall collect a transfer fee according to the fee
schedule adopted by the City Council.
   H.   Transfer Or Removal Of License Tag Prohibited: A license tag issued for
one (1) animal shall not be transferable to another animal. The removal of a
license tag from an animal prior to the expiration of the license, by any
person who is not the owner thereof or the agent of such owner, shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   I.   Exemptions To License Requirements: The following animals are exempt
from licensing requirements:
      1.   A certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on
behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties.
      2.   Kennel animals that are kept or raised solely for the bona fide
purpose of sale in State or Federally licensed kennels and which are kept under
constant restraint. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-6: RABIES AND LICENSE TAGS:
   A.   All canines and felines over the age of six (6) months shall wear a
collar or harness to which a current and valid rabies vaccination tag and
current City license tag is attached. This requirement shall not apply to
animals being exhibited or trained at a kennel club show, cat show or similar
event or while being transported to and from the event, if the animal is
properly controlled and the owner or trainer possesses documentation of valid
vaccination and licensing.
   B.   Any animal found without a collar or harness upon which the rabies and
license tags are attached, or found without the rabies and/or license tag
attached to its collar or harness, shall be deemed unlicensed until proof of
license and/or vaccination is shown by its owner and the required collar or
harness with valid tags attached is properly worn by the animal. (Ord. 14-12,
9-16-2014)
8-4A-7: RIGHT TO CAPTURE OR KILL AN ANIMAL:
   A.   It shall be lawful for any person to capture for impoundment any at
large animal for which a license is required. Upon capture, the person shall
promptly notify the Police Department or an enforcement officer of the capture.
   B.   It shall be lawful for any person to kill an animal, whether licensed
and wearing a collar with license tag attached or unlicensed, when such animal
is caught in the act of worrying, chasing, maiming or killing any domestic
animal or fowl, or when such animal is attacking or attempting to bite a
person. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-8: IMPOUNDING AND RECLAMATION OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Impoundment: An animal may be impounded in the City animal shelter when
any one (1) or more of the following apply:
      1.   An animal is found at large, whether tame or feral.
      2.   An animal is not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag, and current
City license tag.
      3.   An animal is not receiving the proper standards of care as outlined
in this article, or is tortured or otherwise mistreated in such a manner that
the enforcement officer may reasonably determine that the health or life of the
animal is endangered.
      4.   An animal is deemed to be dangerous or vicious, according to section
8-4A-10 of this article.
      5.   An animal has been determined by a veterinary professional to be
feral or wild. Such animals shall be euthanized.
      6.   An animal that has been relinquished (as defined herein) by the
owner to an enforcement officer, provided that the owner has signed a form
designed for this purpose and witnessed by the enforcement officer,
acknowledging that the owner has relinquished ownership and all rights to the
animal and has no further claim on the disposition of the animal.
   B.   Surrender: Any person holding an animal within the City limits that is
subject to impoundment under this section shall surrender the animal to the
enforcement officer.
   C.   Notice And Reclamation Period:
      1.   Notice Period: Within two (2) business days of impoundment, notice
shall be given that the animal is in the custody of the City to the owner,
where known, by verbal contact, personal service, e-mail with return receipt
required, or United States certified mail with return receipt required.
         a.   The date and time that the owner received notification shall be
recorded by the designated representative serving the notice.
         b.   If the animal has been relinquished, no notice is required.
      2.   Reclamation Period: The reclamation period shall be no more than
seven (7) days and shall begin upon the date and time that the owner received
notification of impoundment; provided, however, that if the owner's name or the
owner's reliable contact information cannot reasonably be determined after two
(2) business days of impoundment, the animal will be held in the City animal
shelter for no more than five (5) additional calendar days. In no case,
however, shall the last day of the reclamation period fall on a day that the
shelter is closed to the public; in such a case, the last day shall be the next
day that the shelter is open.
      3.   Contact To Be Made: If the owner cannot be contacted within two (2)
business days as stated in subsection C1 of this section, the enforcement
officer or designated representative shall attempt to determine ownership and
contact information, to the extent reasonable, during the remaining five (5)
day reclamation period. If an owner is not or cannot be contacted within the
five (5) day period, the animal may be disposed according to subsection I of
this section.
   D.   Reclamation Not Permitted: The following animals may not be reclaimed:
      1.   A dangerous or vicious animal, as determined by this article.
      2.   An animal that is not reclaimed within the reclamation period stated
in this section, or within a City granted extension, as permitted in subsection
F of this section.
      3.   An animal that has been released for adoption according to the
requirements of this article.
      4.   An animal that was relinquished. The relinquishment form, signed by
the owner and witnessed by the enforcement officer, shall be kept on file.
      5.   An animal that is not currently licensed, vaccinated, or
microchipped, unless such services are performed by a designated representative
in the City animal shelter, with all costs thereof paid for by the owner.
      6.   An animal for whom all costs of apprehension, impoundment and
reclamation have not been paid by the owner.
   E.   Reclamation Permitted: An owner may reclaim an impounded animal if:
      1.   The animal is reclaimed within the reclamation period after
receiving notice that the animal is in the custody of the City, or before
expiration of any extension granted by the City beyond the reclamation period;
provided, however, that the last day does not fall on a day that the shelter is
closed to the public, in which case the last day shall be the next day that the
shelter is open.
      2.   All costs of apprehension, impoundment, veterinary care (if
provided) and any other costs outlined in this section have been paid.
      3.   Proof of rabies vaccination as required by this article and proof of
current City license are provided; all impounded animals without proof of
rabies vaccination or current City license must have these services completed
by a designated representative at the City animal shelter at the owner's
expense, before the animal will be released to the owner.
      4.   Proof is provided that the animal is microchipped; if the animal was
not microchipped prior to impoundment, a microchip shall be implanted by a
designated representative and the costs thereof shall be paid by the owner
prior to reclamation.
   F.   Time Extension: The animal control officer, for good and verifiable
cause, may extend the reclamation period for up to three (3) additional days.
      1.   If the final day of the extension falls on a day when the shelter is
not open to the public, the final day shall be the next day that the shelter is
open.
      2.   The owner, if known, and the staff of the City animal shelter shall
be notified of any extension.
      3.   If the animal control officer believes that there is cause to
continue to hold the animal beyond the allowed three (3) day extension, he/she
may request the City Administrator to allow an additional extension of no more
than ten (10) calendar days, provided that the last day does not fall on a day
that the shelter is not open to the public, in which case the last day may be
extended to the following day that the shelter is open.
      4.   If the animal is reclaimed at any time, the cost of boarding and any
other care shall be charged during any extension and shall be paid before the
animal is released.
   G.   Cruelty Or Neglect: In cases of animal cruelty or neglect, the City may
seek remedies available to ensure the animal is not returned to an owner
incapable of or unwilling to provide proper care of the animal.
   H.   Fees: Reclamation fees shall be determined by resolution adopted by the
City Council. The reclamation fee shall increase for each reclamation after the
initial reclamation. Reclamation fees shall be lower if the animal has been
previously microchipped.
   I.   Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: If an animal is not reclaimed within
the reclamation period as outlined above, including any approved extension, or
if an animal is not permitted to be reclaimed as required by this section, it
may be placed for adoption or be euthanized.
      1.   An animal that is relinquished may be disposed before the
reclamation period has passed, at such time determined by the animal control
officer. However, before the relinquished animal may be euthanized, the City
Administrator shall review the case and make a determination, after
investigation, as follows:
         a.   Consultation with the animal control officer;
         b.   Consultation with a veterinary professional or other designated
representative (other than the animal control officer) with knowledge of the
animal in question;
         c.   Review of any circumstances that may lead to a claim against the
City; and
         d.   Determination that proper procedure has been followed.
      2.   If, in the opinion of a designated licensed veterinarian, the animal
is too sick or injured to keep humanely for the designated reclamation period,
the animal may be euthanized before the reclamation period has passed.
      3.   Any animal placed for adoption shall thereafter be under the control
of the adoption agency, and the City shall accept no further liability or
responsibility for the animal.
   J.   Sick Or Injured Animals: When an enforcement officer reasonably
believes an animal taken into custody for impoundment is sick or injured, it
shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination, treatment and care
as soon as possible. The costs thereof shall be included in the cost of
impoundment at the owner's expense.
   K.   Ownership:
      1.   Disputes: After impoundment and during the reclamation period or any
City granted extension, if the shelter is contacted by more than one (1)
individual or party making a reasonable claim of ownership of an impounded
animal, the claimants shall be notified of the requirements of this subsection.
         a.   All claimants must provide a written claim addressed to the City,
stating the basis of the claim of ownership, any documents proving ownership,
and including reliable contact information.
         b.   Disputes or competing claims of ownership by any two (2) or more
individuals or parties of an animal that has been impounded shall be resolved
by the disputing parties within the reclamation period or before expiration of
any extension granted by the City. If such disputes are not resolved within
said time frame, the City may dispose of the animal as stated in subsection I
of this section.
         c.   Questions of ownership shall be considered a civil matter and
will not be decided or adjudicated by the City, except as stated in subsection
K2 of this section. Competing claimants may circumvent City disposition under
this article only if an injunction is granted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, in which case ownership of the animal shall be determined by the
court. The prevailing owner shall be responsible for all costs related to
extended boarding, services performed, and any other fees and penalties, prior
to release of the animal.
      2.   Proof Of Ownership: For the purposes of this section, if ownership
is disputed or claimed by multiple parties, a person may be identified as the
owner via any one (1) or more of the following, at the discretion of the City
Administrator after investigation, shall be determined to be the owner, and the
animal will be released to that individual or party:
         a.   Due to scanning of an implanted microchip;
         b.   Listed on the City license for the animal;
         c.   Via records of multiple visits to a veterinarian;
         d.   A receipt of purchase;
         e.   Proof of adoption;
         f.   Registration with a certified kennel club or breed;
         g.   Upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
         h.   Other reliable means of determining ownership. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-
2014; amd. 2017 Code)
8-4A-9: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
   A.   At Large Animals: No owner, handler or keeper of any animal shall
permit their animal to be "at large" as defined in section
8-4A-2 of this article at any time, whether the animal is licensed or not.
   B.   Exemptions: The following listed dogs are exempt: a certified police
canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency
in the performance of its duties, or is engaged in approved training or a
public demonstration of its skills; service dog; certified therapy dog.
   C.   Special Exemption For Dog Parks: A dog shall be permitted to run
without restraint within the enclosed area of a designated dog park; provided,
that the dog's owner or other person responsible for the dog remains within the
enclosed area of the dog park and exercises appropriate supervision and control
over the dog at all times. Dogs and their owners/handlers shall obey the rules
for the dog park adopted by the Park Board. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-10: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Dangerous Or Vicious Animal Ownership: It shall be unlawful to own,
keep, shelter, or harbor any "dangerous or vicious animal" as defined in
section
8-4A-2 of this article. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
   B.   Investigation And Notice: When the animal control officer or designated
enforcement officer determines, after investigation, that an animal is
dangerous or vicious, the animal control officer or designated enforcement
officer shall notify the owner or possessor by certified mail with signature,
or by hand delivery, of the status of the animal within five (5) business days
of the completion of the investigation.
      1.   The notice shall instruct the owner or possessor of the animal that
it is unlawful to own, keep, shelter or harbor a dangerous or vicious animal
and that doing so is punishable under the provisions of this article. The
notice shall further inform the owner or possessor of the appeal rights set
forth in this article.
      2.   For reasons of public health and safety, failure to provide notice
as outlined above if the enforcement officer is unable to determine the name
and location of the owner after reasonable investigation shall not prevent the
City from taking a dangerous or vicious animal into custody.
   C.   Impoundment Of Dangerous And Vicious Animals:
      1.   Custody:
         a.   If the animal is at large, the enforcement officer may take the
animal into custody immediately and notify the owner or possessor in the
fashion described above.
         b.   If the animal is not at large, the enforcement officer, or
designee, may take the animal into custody at the time of delivery of the
notice or at any time thereafter. The owner shall surrender the animal to the
enforcement officer.
         c.   If it is not reasonably possible to capture or restrain the
animal, it may be destroyed in a reasonable manner as provided by applicable
law.
         d.   The disposition of a dangerous and vicious animal shall be
subject to the requirements of this section, even if the owner voluntarily
surrenders the animal.
      2.   Impoundment: The animal shall be impounded at the City animal
shelter for at least ten (10) calendar days to allow the owner or possessor of
the animal to exercise appeal rights, as set out below.
      3.   If Owner Cannot Be Contacted: If, after reasonable investigation,
the name and contact information of the owner cannot be determined within ten
(10) calendar days after the animal has been impounded, the animal shall be
euthanized.
      4.   Appeal: The owner of an animal determined to be dangerous or vicious
may appeal such determination in writing, delivered or mailed to the City
Administrator within ten (10) calendar days from the date that the animal is
taken into custody.
         a.   If an appeal is initiated, no action may be taken against the
animal until the City Administrator has ruled on the appeal.
         b.   The City Administrator may consult with a veterinary professional
or other designated representative with knowledge of the animal in question.
         c.   The City Administrator shall determine if the actions of the
enforcement officer are founded, in which case the appeal is denied and the
animal shall be declared dangerous or vicious.
      5.   Appeal Granted: If the City Administrator determines that the action
of the enforcement officer is unfounded, the animal may be reclaimed as
outlined in subsection
8-4A-8E of this article, including licensing, rabies vaccination and
microchipping as needed. The owner or possessor of the animal shall be
responsible for all costs of impoundment.
      6.   No Appeal Filed, Or Appeal Denied: If no appeal is pursued, or if
the appeal is denied, the animal shall be euthanized, unless such action is
restrained by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd.
2017 Code)
8-4A-11: REPORT OF ANIMAL BITE; SUSPECTED OR CONFIRMED RABIES; CONFINEMENT:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal which has bitten or
attacked a person, or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack, to
immediately report this bite or attack to an enforcement officer. (Ord. 14-12,
9-16-2014)
   B.   Any animal that has bitten any person shall be confined in a place
designated by the animal control officer for a period of ten (10) calendar
days, at the owner's expense. The enforcement officer may monitor the animal as
necessary during the confinement period. Unless the animal is suspected of, or
has been confirmed to be, suffering from rabies, after that time period, the
animal may be released to the owner; provided, that the animal has been duly
licensed, vaccinated and microchipped under the provisions of this article.
   C.   If the enforcement officer is provided with a copy of a current valid
rabies vaccination certificate for the animal, the animal control officer may,
at his/her discretion, permit the animal to be confined by the owner, on the
owner's property or other site, if the owner can assure the animal will be
confined within a secure site for the entire ten (10) calendar days. The animal
control officer shall be permitted to inspect the site to determine it is
secure, at the animal control officer's request. The animal may not leave the
premises for any reason during the ten (10) day period.
      1.   The animal shall be on a leash and attended at all times whenever
outside of an enclosed building.
      2.   Failure of an animal's owner or keeper to comply with these
confinement requirements shall cause the animal to be impounded immediately, as
outlined in section
8-4A-8 of this article and the owner shall be subject to penalties as provided
in this article. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   If a physician (in the course of treating a human victim of a bite),
enforcement officer or veterinarian suspects that an animal is suffering from
rabies, this information shall be reported immediately to the animal control
officer. The animal shall be taken into custody by the enforcement officer and
examined by a licensed veterinarian before being confined as outlined above.
The animal shall be reexamined prior to coming out of quarantine. All
associated costs shall be paid by the owner.
   E.   Any animal exhibiting symptoms consistent with rabies shall be humanely
euthanized and tested for rabies by an authorized diagnostic laboratory at the
owner's expense. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-12: GENERAL ANIMAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Disturbing The Peace: A person or owner shall not harbor an animal that
howls, barks, whines, bays or makes sound of any kind or nature that disturbs
the peace and quiet of the vicinity for a duration of more than fifteen (15)
minutes (whether consecutive or not) in any twenty four (24) hour period.
   B.   Harassment: The owner of any animal shall not permit the animal to
attack, harass, bite, scratch or otherwise injure or place in fear of injury
any person or animal on public or private property who has a legitimate reason
to be thereon.
   C.   Molesting Of Animals: A person may not wilfully molest, provoke or
mistreat an animal while it is confined on its owner's premises. (Ord. 14-12,
9-16-2014)
   D.   North Iowa Band Festival: During the North Iowa Band Festival, it is
unlawful for a companion animal to be along the parade route.
   E.   Companion Animals In Public Parks: The City Council may, by resolution,
prohibit companion animals from being present on any City right-of-way, City
owned property, or in any designated public park during any sanctioned special
event. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017 Code)
   F.   Exempted Dogs: The following listed dogs are exempt from the above
requirements: a certified police canine, rescue dog or tracking dog acting on
behalf of a public safety agency in the performance of its duties, or engaged
in approved training or a public demonstration of its skills; service dog;
certified therapy dog.
   G.   Microchip Removal: No person, other than a licensed veterinarian, may
attempt to remove a microchip that has been implanted in an animal. A microchip
may be removed by a veterinarian only when necessary for the health of the
animal or for repair, replacement or upgrading of the microchip. (Ord. 14-12,
9-16-2014)
8-4A-13: STANDARDS OF CARE:
Any owner or keeper of any animal shall not abandon the animal or cease to
provide companion animal care requirements as listed in this section. An owner
shall arrange a competent, reliable person to provide the following
requirements in the owner's absence. The following requirements shall be
sufficient to meet specific health requirements of the animal. Failure to
comply with any standard shall be a violation of this article. Any person
keeping an animal shall:
   A.   Provide sufficient wholesome food at intervals and quantities
appropriate for the species, suitable for the physical health and age of the
animal. Food shall be served in a clean receptacle or container.
   B.   Provide adequate shelter for an animal, appropriate to the species:
      1.   When kept outdoors, a tangle free, structurally sound, weatherproof
and properly ventilated shelter providing access to shade and shelter from
exposure to weather conditions;
      2.   When kept indoors, a shelter that is properly ventilated and
illuminated and sufficiently regulated by heating or cooling to protect the
animal from extremes of temperature, and to provide for its health and comfort.
   C.   Provide reasonable access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water in
a sanitary manner. If potable water is not accessible to the animal at all
times, it shall be provided daily, for such duration and of sufficient quantity
as appropriate for the species.
   D.   Provide adequate sanitation via periodic cleaning or sanitizing indoor
and outdoor facilities, and any area where the animal is confined or restrained
to remove excreta and other waste materials and dirt.
   E.   Provide adequate space, appropriate for the species, whereby primary
enclosures and housing facilities are securely constructed and properly
maintained to provide sufficient space and confinement while allowing freedom
of movement.
   F.   Provide adequate veterinary care during the life of the animal. All
animals shall be provided with proper immunizations and preventive healthcare,
including parasite control.
   G.   Keep the animal cleaned and provide proper grooming as appropriate for
the species. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-14: TRAPPING AND POISONING:
   A.   Humane live box traps are the only approved means of trapping nuisance
animals and/or birds with the exception of instant kill snap traps designed for
small rodents. Use of the following traps are prohibited: cannibear traps,
snare traps, steel jaw traps, leghold traps, spring traps, or any similar
device designed to catch and hold the animal by the leg or other part of the
body, or which is likely for any reason to cause injury, pain and suffering
before death.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to poison or attempt to poison any animal, except
the use of retail rodent poison intended to poison small rodents inside
buildings.
   C.   Certified or licensed exterminators as set out in chapter 206, Code of
Iowa are exempted from these requirements. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-15: ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Any person who walks or takes an animal upon public property, public
right-of-way, parks, school grounds, playgrounds or the private property of
another person, shall immediately clean up, remove and properly dispose of
solid waste excreted or deposited upon such public or private property. This
section shall not apply to animals participating in any parade or similar event
approved by the City Council.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to keep an animal or animals
in such a manner that allows the accumulation of solid waste to become a
detriment to or menace to the health of the animal, or an annoyance or health
hazard to humans. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014)
8-4A-16: PENALTIES:
Any person or other entity violating any regulation in or any provision of this
article, or of any amendment or supplement thereto, shall be:
   A.   Guilty of a simple misdemeanor, as outlined in section 903.1 of the
Iowa Code, which is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days; or
   B.   Guilty of a Municipal infraction punishable by a civil penalty of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first and single offense, seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any second offense and one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each subsequent and additional offense.
   C.   The charge of either a simple misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or
both, shall be determined by the enforcement officer filing the citation.
   D.   Each separate violation of this article, and each day such violation
continues, constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 14-12, 9-16-2014; amd. 2017
Code)
CHAPTER 5
INOPERABLE VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Violation Declared
8-5-4: Owner Of Motor Vehicle Or Vehicle Parts Prima Facie Responsible
8-5-5: Notice
8-5-6: Duty Of Owner To Remove Or Repair
8-5-7: Abatement
8-5-8: Auction Sale
8-5-9: Interpretation
8-5-10: Violation
8-5-11: Exceptions
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared that the parking, dismantling, or storage of inoperable
vehicles or vehicle parts upon public or private property within the corporate
limits of the City is a threat to the public health, welfare and safety and
constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall govern the interpretation of this chapter:
CITY: The City of Mason City.
DISMANTLE: To take apart; disassemble; tear down.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle that has any one (1) of the following
characteristics:
   A.   Any vehicle that does not display current State registration.
   B.   Any vehicle with a broken, or missing windshield, missing window,
headlight, or any other missing glass.
   C.   Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or missing fender, door, bumper,
hood, roof, steering wheel, trunk lid, muffler or tailpipe.
   D.   Any vehicle that is the habitat of rats, mice, snakes or any other
vermin or insects.
   E.   Any vehicle that lacks an engine, one (1) or more wheels, or other
parts that render the vehicle inoperable, such as a truck without an engine or
a trailer missing a wheel.
   F.   Any vehicle that does not have all tires inflated.
   G.   Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both forward and reverse
gears.
PARKING: The placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle
part for any period of time not exceeding forty eight (48) hours.
PERMIT: To allow or fail to prevent.
PERSON: Any firm, person, partnership or corporation.
STORAGE: The placement on public or private property of any vehicle or vehicle
part for any consecutive period of time exceeding forty eight (48) hours.
VEHICLE: Any implement of conveyance designed or used for the transportation of
people or materials on land, water, or air, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, boats, airplanes, helicopters,
tractors, trailers, campers, motor homes, wagons, etc.
VEHICLE PART: An individual component or subassembly of a vehicle. (Ord. 03-21,
10-21-2003)
8-5-3: VIOLATION DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, dismantle, or store any inoperable
vehicle or vehicle part or to permit the parking, dismantling, or storage of
any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part other than as herein provided by section
8-5-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-4: OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE PARTS PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBLE:
The owner of any inoperable vehicle or vehicle part is prima facie responsible
for the parking, dismantling, or storing of such vehicle or vehicle part upon
public or private property in violation of this chapter. Any owner, occupant or
person in possession of real property within the City upon which one (1) or
more inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts are found is prima facie responsible
for permitting such parking, dismantling, or storage of any inoperable vehicle
or vehicle part upon such property in violation of this chapter. No person
shall be charged with more than one (1) violation of this chapter for any one
(1) vehicle. The owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner
of real estate upon which such inoperable vehicle or vehicle part are found may
both be charged.
Each day the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part and the owner,
occupant or person in possession of real property within the City is found in
violation of this chapter and permits the violation to continue after the
notice period provided in section
8-5-6 of this chapter shall be a new violation of this chapter. (Ord. 03-21,
10-21-2003)
8-5-5: NOTICE:
Upon discovery of any inoperable motor vehicle or vehicle part stored upon
private property within the corporate limits of this City, any police officer,
or other City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility
for enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may notify in writing the owner
of said motor vehicle or vehicle part, and the owner of the property upon which
it is parked, dismantled, or stored that:
   A.   The motor vehicle or vehicle part constitutes a violation under the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing same in
accordance with the terms of section
8-5-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Failure to remove or repair same shall be sufficient cause for removal
and disposal by the City and assessment of costs.
In the alternative, the City may cause to be issued to the owner of the vehicle
or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property on which the vehicle or
vehicle part is found, a citation for a Municipal infraction setting forth the
violation of this chapter and seeking an order of removal on conviction.
The notice provided by this section relates only to the abatement of a
violation of this chapter and is not an element of a violation; provided,
however, that a second and/or any subsequent citation shall not be issued until
after the notice provided herein. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-6: DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE OR REPAIR:
The owner of the inoperable vehicle or vehicle part which violates the
provisions of this chapter, or the owner of the property upon which it is
parked, dismantled, or stored, shall, within ten (10) days after service of a
written notice from any police officer, or other City officer, official or
employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions
of this Code, remove or repair same. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-7: ABATEMENT:
If the owner of an inoperable vehicle or vehicle part or the owner of the
property upon which it is parked, dismantled, or stored, shall fail to remove
or repair same in accordance with the requirements of section
8-5-6 of this chapter, any police officer, or other City officer, official or
employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any provisions
of this Code, may abate such violation by causing same to be towed to a place
of safekeeping and the cost of the towing and storage shall be charged to the
owner of the vehicle or vehicle part, or to the owner of the property upon
which it was parked, dismantled, or stored. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-8: AUCTION SALE:
Inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts impounded by the City may be sold at
auction as provided in section 321.89, Code of Iowa, for motor vehicles
otherwise impounded. All revenues derived from the sale of inoperable vehicles
or vehicle parts, however, shall accrue to the City. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-9: INTERPRETATION:
Where any other ordinance of the City is more stringent or more restrictive
than the requirements set forth herein, or any ordinance of the City affords
any other remedy, nothing herein shall be construed to waive or limit the use
of and/or compliance with the provisions of such other ordinance. (Ord. 03-21,
10-21-2003)
8-5-10: VIOLATION:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as a
Municipal infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
8-5-11: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to inoperable vehicles or
vehicle parts parked, stored, or dismantled:
   A.   Within a garage or other fully enclosed building;
   B.   Within a fully enclosed vehicle;
   C.   On the premises of a business operating in a properly zoned area, when
necessary to the operation of said business, as authorized under the zoning
ordinance of the City. (Ord. 03-21, 10-21-2003)
CHAPTER 6
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose, Scope And Decibel Measurement
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Exceptions To Chapter
8-6-4: Noise Disturbance Prohibited
8-6-5: Maximum Permissible Sound Levels By Zoned Land Use
8-6-6: Noise Permits
8-6-7: Motorized Vehicles
8-6-8: Powers And Duties Of Noise Control Office; Enforcement
8-6-9: Unlawful Use Of Engine And Compression Brakes
8-6-1: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DECIBEL MEASUREMENT:
   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent excessive sound which is a
serious hazard to the public health and welfare and to the quality of life in
the City of Mason City.
   B.   This chapter shall apply to the control of all noise originating within
the limits of the City of Mason City.
   C.   The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level
meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards
Institute. The instruments shall be maintained in calibration and good working
order. A calibration check shall be made of the system at the time of any noise
measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper
representation of the noise source. The microphone during measurement shall be
positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the
measured noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required.
The measurement shall be an A-weighted, slow response sound level. (Ord. 87-21,
10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terminology used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall be
in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB(a)
or dBA.
CALIBRATION CHECK: Operators of a sound level meter may certify the accuracy of
meter by either witnessing the integrity seal on the meter is intact and that
the device has a current certificate of calibration from an outside sound meter
testing lab; or, using a sound calibrator with the meter before enforcement
sampling to verify the device is functioning properly. The sound calibrator
emits a test sound at specific dB level(s) to compare sound level meter
readings.
DECIBEL (dB): A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in
describing the amplitude of sound.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
infrastructure, or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent danger.
NOISE: A sound, especially one that is loud or unpleasant or that causes
disturbance.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICE: The same as the Mason City Police Department and shall
have the responsibility of enforcing this chapter.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which endangers the welfare, safety or health of a
human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or
devalues or injures personal or real property by exceeding authorized limits.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation or officer
thereof.
REASONABLE OPERATION: Use of construction, power tools, lawn and garden
equipment with a legitimate, timely purpose that minimizes disruption to nearby
persons; not used to cause annoyance or excessive disruption.
SOUND: A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector, integrator or time averager, output or display meter, and weighting
networks used to measure sound pressure levels in decibels when properly
calibrated or currently certified to be working correctly and the instrument is
of type 2 or better, which complies with American National Standards Institute
Standard 1.4-1971 or its successor.
SOUND PRESSURE: The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by
sound energy.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: Twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of
the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of twenty (20)
micronewtons per square meter (120 x 10-6N/m2). The sound pressure level is
denoted Lp or SPL and is expressed in decibels. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd.
2017 Code)
8-6-3: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency. This includes testing and authorized use of outdoor
warning sirens, and authorized use of emergency vehicle warning devices.
Private audible alarms may be tested once per day for a maximum duration of
thirty (30) seconds between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. False or overly sensitive audible alarms that cause a noise
disturbance are not exempt under provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
   C.   Activities of temporary duration, permitted by law, and for which a
valid noise permit has been issued by the Noise Control Office.
   D.   Reasonable operation of construction equipment, domestic power tools,
lawn and garden equipment between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M.
   E.   Nonprofessional athletic contests on school property, school band
practice, and school band performances between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   F.   Funeral or memorial events of limited duration to include, but not
limited to: the playing of trumpets or bagpipes, discharge of blanks during a
gun volley salute, etc.
   G.   Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
   H.   The emission of sound in connection with authorized band festival
related activities, or authorized activities conducted on the County
Fairgrounds during the annual North Iowa Fair and Exposition.
   I.   The emission of sound in the performance of authorized law enforcement
or military operations.
   J.   The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks
displays approved by the City Council or County Board of Supervisors; or when
lawfully allowed by City ordinance.
   K.   The emission of sound in the reasonable operation of snow removal
equipment and street cleaning equipment regardless of time of day.
   L.   Organized racing events on the County Fairgrounds property in such a
manner that the sound level resulting from such operation exceeds ninety (90)
dBA for any period of time during such operation. Sound levels which exceed the
limits herein described at the real property boundary of the receiving land use
shall be deemed a noise disturbance. Said organized racing events must end by
ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and not start before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
(Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-4: NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED:
No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, except as
permitted, any noise disturbance as defined in this chapter, or any noise in
excess of the limits for such noise established in this chapter. (Ord. 87-21,
10-5-1987)
8-6-5: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY ZONED LAND USE:
   A.   No person shall engage or participate in the making and creating of an
excessive or unusually loud sound within the City heard and measured in the
manner prescribed in subsection
8-6-1C of this chapter, and below, except when done under and in compliance
with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   It shall be the duty of persons in a position of ownership, possession
or control of premises to prevent such premises from being the site of
activities producing sound levels in excess of what is permitted under this
chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall constitute a violation
of this section.
   C.   It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings
and assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels
in excess of what is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to
perform such duty shall constitute a violation of this section.
   D.   For the purpose of determining and classifying any sound as excessive
or unusually loud, the following test measurement and requirements are to be
applied:
      1.   The sound shall be measured at the edge of the City street or alley
right-of-way reasonably appearing to be nearest to the source of the sound, or
if in a park zoned area, approximately fifty feet (50') from the source of the
sound. When a complaint is received, a measurement may also be taken at a
location on the property where the complaining party was disturbed.
      2.   The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated in the "A" slow response weighing scale.
      3.   A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum permitted
levels according to the following table, is declared to be excessive and
unusually loud and is unlawful:
 
Neighborhood Zoned               Maximum Permitted
Characteristics
Residential:
 Between 7:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 60
 Between 10:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M. 50
Commercial or agricultural       65
Industrial                       80
Park                             65
 
(Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-6: NOISE PERMITS:
   A.   Application: Applications for a permit for relief from the provisions
of this chapter may be made to the Noise Control Office, or a duly authorized
representative, pursuant to the following procedure:
      1.   All permits must be applied for in writing during normal business
hours stating what devices are to be employed, where they are to be employed,
on what date(s) and at what times of day they are to be used, the nature of the
sounds to be produced or amplified and the number of people in attendance, and
the persons responsible for the activity. Sufficient lead time must be given to
the Noise Control Office to research permit application and consult with
neighboring property owners who may be impacted if a noise permit is issued.
      2.   Permits granted shall state with reasonable specificity the date(s),
location(s), time(s), nature of the sound, devices permitted, number of people
in attendance, and the persons responsible for the activity. Permits are not
transferable. The permit shall be conspicuously displayed on or near main sound
producing object or main entrance.
      3.   Permits shall not be arbitrarily or unreasonably withheld nor shall
the free expression of ideas or lawful speech be restrained, but sound and
noise producing conduct having no communicative value and serving only to
unreasonably disturb and disrupt the enjoyment of residences and normal
pursuits shall be restrained.
      4.   The Noise Control Office may prescribe any conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or
the surrounding neighborhood.
      5.   Approved noise permits may be revoked at any time by Noise Control
Office if permittee or guests fail to comply with permit requirements. Permit
fees are nonrefundable in this case.
      6.   Denied permits may be appealed to the City Administrator or designee
within fourteen (14) calendar days of a permit denial.
   B.   Permit application fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
8-6-7: MOTORIZED VEHICLES:
   A.   No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an
auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more for a consecutive period longer
than twenty (20) minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of property zoned and used for residential purposes
except where such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure.
This section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the
operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads. (Ord. 87-21, 10-
5-1987)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or for the owner to
cause or permit to be operated within the public right-of-way in this City, any
motor vehicle which emits a noise in excess of the dBA level established in
this section.
      1.   The maximum allowable noise levels for motor vehicles shall be
seventy five (75) dBA measured at a distance of twenty five feet (25').
      2.   This section applies to the total noise from a motor vehicle and
shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other
provisions of this chapter.
      3.   No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle or any
other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle or operate any such vehicle or
device in this City in a manner that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is
above that emitted by the vehicles as originally manufactured. Muffler cutouts,
bypasses, or other devices which increase sound emitted shall be unlawful.
      4.   The sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated on the "A" slow response weighting scale. (Ord. 87-
21, 10-5-1987; amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-8: POWERS AND DUTIES OF NOISE CONTROL OFFICE; ENFORCEMENT:
The Noise Control Program established by this chapter shall be implemented,
administered, and enforced by the Noise Control Office. (Ord. 87-21, 10-5-1987;
amd. 2017 Code)
8-6-9: UNLAWFUL USE OF ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES:
The use of any engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or
mechanical exhaust device to brake or slow any motor vehicle that results in
excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, except for the
aversion of imminent danger, is prohibited. Emergency vehicles are exempt from
the application of this section. (Ord. 06-025, 9-19-2006)
CHAPTER 7
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Cleanup Required
8-7-4: Notification
8-7-5: Police Authority
8-7-6: City Liability
8-7-7: Penalty
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
In order to reduce the danger to public health, safety and welfare from the
spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish
responsibility for the removal and cleanup of spills within the City limits.
(Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, these words have the following meanings:
CLEANUP: Actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze,
clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION: Any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable
spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into
water, or into the atmosphere, which creates an immediate or potential danger
to the public health or safety or to the environment. For purposes of this
chapter, a site which is a hazardous waste or hazardous substance disposal site
is a hazardous condition.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance or mixture of substances that presents a
danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or
that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means. Hazardous
substance may include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under
the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The party, whether the owner, agent, lessor, tenant, in
charge of the hazardous substance or hazardous wastes being stored, processed,
or handled, or the owner or bailee transporting hazardous wastes or substances
whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the spill would
cause danger to the public or to any person or to the environment.
TREATMENT: A method, technique, or process, including neutralization, designed
to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of a
hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to render the substance
nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage,
or to reduce it in volume. Treatment includes any activity or processing
designed to change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous
substance to render it nonhazardous. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989; amd. Ord. 96-3, 1-
15-1996)
8-7-3: CLEANUP REQUIRED:
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance or waste or a constituent
of the hazardous waste or substance may enter the environment or be emitted
into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters, the
responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as
defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe
condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If
the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a reasonable time
in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by
an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the
hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the
cleanup or that the City will proceed to procure cleanup services and setting
forth a reasonable estimate of the costs of cleanup and bill the responsible
person for all costs associated with the cleanup, including, but not limited
to, equipment rendered unserviceable; personnel costs, including overtime;
disposal costs; and any other costs associated therewith. If the bill for those
services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City may proceed after
service of notice, either by certified mail or one (1) publication in the local
newspaper and hearing before the City Council, to obtain payment by all legal
means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance
it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any
State or Federal funds available for said cleanup. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-4: NOTIFICATION:
The Fire Department shall be notified immediately when an unauthorized
discharge becomes reportable under State or Federal regulations. The Fire
Department shall notify law enforcement officials and the Emergency Management
Coordinator, and shall file the required reports at the State and Federal
level. (Ord. 96-3, 1-15-1996)
8-7-5: POLICE AUTHORITY:
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the Chief of Police of the Police
Department or his representative, may:
   A.   Evacuate persons, even from their homes, to areas away from the site of
a hazardous condition; and
   B.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition beyond which no person shall cross. (Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-6: CITY LIABILITY:
The City shall not be liable for any losses occurring due to any hazardous
condition created which may be claimed by any person, firm, or corporation.
(Ord. 89-25, 10-2-1989)
8-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision, section, or
subsection of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or a Municipal
infraction and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction, or
both. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
89-25, 10-2-1989)
CHAPTER 8
NUISANCE PROPERTY
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose
8-8-2: Severability
8-8-3: Interpretation
8-8-4: Exclusions
8-8-5: Definitions
8-8-6: Property Nuisances
8-8-7: Prohibition And Enforcement
8-8-8: Inspection Of Premises
8-8-9: Notice To Abate
8-8-10: Notice To Abate; Contents
8-8-11: Notice To Abate; Service
8-8-12: Final Order To Abate And Imposition Of Penalty
8-8-13: Appeal And Hearing
8-8-14: Emergency
8-8-15: Abatement By City
8-8-16: Expenses; Collection
8-8-17: Expenses; Hearing
8-8-18: Unlawful Acts
8-8-19: Penalties
8-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide City officials with legal tools and
procedures to discourage, abate, prevent and punish the use of private
residential or commercial property such that a nuisance related to the use of
said property is encouraged, allowed or created. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-2: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall not affect the remainder of this chapter. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-3: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular; the
word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person"
includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation as well as an individual. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-4: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to active and operating industrial, manufacturing,
and agricultural and food processing facilities. This exclusion does not
prevent the applicability of other zoning, nuisance, or other ordinances and
statutes to such facilities and activities. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-5: DEFINITIONS:
ABATE: To permanently eliminate.
AUTHORIZED VERIFICATION OFFICER: A Mason City police officer, a Mason City fire
inspector, a Mason City building or housing inspector, a Mason City Code
Enforcement Officer, or a Cerro Gordo County health inspector.
BUILDING MATERIALS: Any material, including, but not limited to, lumber, brick,
concrete, plaster, plaster board, gutters, floor coverings, or other similar
substances accumulated as a result of repairs, remodeling, or additions to
existing buildings, or construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing
structures.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator and designees including, but not
limited to, attorneys appointed to represent the City.
ENVIRONMENTAL OR SOLID WASTE VIOLATION: Violation of any portion of State
Statutes or County or City ordinances regarding environmental or solid waste
regulations.
FOUNDED: That a call for service resulted in the written verification to the
City Administrator by an authorized verification officer on a form approved by
the City Administrator that nuisance activity has occurred or that a nuisance
condition exists.
INTERESTED PARTY: A property owner, tenant or contract purchaser, or a spouse,
family member, or housemate thereof.
NUISANCE: Anything defined as a nuisance by State law or County ordinance of
Cerro Gordo County, by any part of this chapter, by any other ordinance of the
City of Mason City, or whatever else poses an unreasonable threat to health or
safety, interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property in an
unreasonable manner, or causes annoyance or distress to a reasonable person of
normal sensitivities. In addition, but without limitation, the following are
declared to be nuisances:
   A.   The erecting, continuing, or using of any building or property for the
exercise of any activity which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive
smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health,
comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
   B.   The storage, placing, keeping, or leaving of building materials,
appliances, furniture, machinery, equipment, trailers or other similar personal
property or fixtures outside of a dwelling or accessory building on residential
lots so as to impair the residential character and/or property value of the
surrounding lots or neighborhood. This definition shall not apply to boats,
camping trailers, or similar recreational vehicles which are not otherwise junk
vehicles under this Code.
PERMITTEE: A person whose presence on the property in issue where the
interested party suffers, allows, or consents to, or whose presence the
interested party acquiesces to by failing to remove or prevent the presence of.
PROPERTY: Any privately owned property and that which is affixed, incidental or
appurtenant, or a particular rental unit on such property.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record titleholder of legal title as shown by the records
of the County Auditor or County Recorder, unless there exists a contract
purchaser of record, in which case it means the contract purchaser.
RESIDENTIAL LOT: A lot of record within the City that has been zoned to
include, or which is allowed by law to include, single- or multi-family
residential structures.
SECURE STRUCTURE: Any structure, whether or not occupied, with effective walls,
roofs, windows, doors and locks so as to prevent unauthorized entry or
infestation by animals or infiltration of weather conditions. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-
2013)
8-8-6: PROPERTY NUISANCES:
A property nuisance exists:
   A.   When one (1) or more of the following acts are committed upon a
property, or within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the nearest
point on the property, by an interested party or their permittee(s):
      1.   Manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance in violation of
Iowa Code chapter 124;
      2.   Kidnapping as defined in Iowa Code chapter 710;
      3.   Arson as defined in Iowa Code chapter 712;
      4.   Burglary as defined in Iowa Code chapter 713;
      5.   Robbery as defined in Iowa Code chapter 711;
      6.   Sex abuse as defined in Iowa Code chapter 709;
      7.   Terrorism as defined in Iowa Code section 708.6;
      8.   Wilful injury as defined in Iowa Code section 708.4;
      9.   Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code section
728.12;
      10.   Felony gambling in violation of Iowa Code chapter 725;
      11.   Felony criminal mischief as defined in Iowa Code chapter 716;
      12.   Animal fighting in violation of Iowa Code chapter 717D.
   B.   When two (2) or more of the following acts are committed within a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months upon, or within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500'), of a property, by an interested party or their permittee
(s):
      1.   Possession of a controlled substance in violation of Iowa Code
chapter 124;
      2.   Any weapons violation as defined in Iowa Code chapter 724 or Iowa
Code section 483A.36 or section
8-3-5 of this title;
      3.   Riot as defined in Iowa Code section 723.1;
      4.   Serious or aggravated misdemeanor criminal mischief as defined in
Iowa Code chapter 716;
      5.   Prostitution as defined in Iowa Code section 725.1;
      6.   Serious or aggravated misdemeanor assault as defined in Iowa Code
chapter 708;
      7.   Serious or aggravated misdemeanor theft as defined in Iowa Code
chapter 714;
      8.   Misdemeanor gambling as defined in Iowa Code chapter 725;
      9.   False imprisonment as defined in Iowa Code section 710.7;
      10.   Failing to keep a secure structure;
      11.   An unpermitted or illegal use under the Mason City zoning
ordinance;
      12.   Discharge of or hunting with a bow and arrow in violation of
section
8-3-28 of this title;
      13.   Violation of Cerro Gordo County ordinance 51 regarding social hosts
and underage consumption;
      14.   A social gathering constituting a disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering in violation of the Mason City nuisance gathering ordinance.
   C.   When three (3) or more of the following acts are committed within a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months upon a property, or within one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the property, by an interested party or
their permittee(s):
      1.   City, County or State Health Code violations;
      2.   City, County or State environmental or solid waste violations,
including, but not limited to, violations of title 4 of this Code;
      3.   Simple misdemeanor criminal mischief in violation of section 716.6
of the Iowa Code;
      4.   Simple misdemeanor assault in violation of chapter 708 of the Iowa
Code;
      5.   Disorderly conduct in violation of section
8-3-6 of this title or permitting disturbing the peace in violation of section
8-3-17 of this title;
      6.   Criminal trespass in violation of chapter 716 of the Iowa Code;
      7.   Criminal sale or use of fireworks in violation of Iowa Code section
727.2 or section
8-3-8 of this title;
      8.   Any violation of chapter 4 of this title regarding animal control;
      9.   Inhalation of toxic vapors in violation of section
8-3-11 of this title;
      10.   Urinating or defecating in public in violation of section
8-3-27 of this title;
      11.   Any violation of chapter 5 of this title regarding inoperable
vehicles;
      12.   Any violation of Iowa Code section 124.414 regarding the
manufacture, delivery, sale or possession of drug paraphernalia.
   D.   Any other condition on, or activity carried on within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of any part of the property, and participated in, or
permitted or contributed to by, the owner, permittee, or interested party, that
otherwise constitutes a "nuisance" as defined in section
8-8-5 of this chapter.
The above references to provisions of the Iowa Code, Cerro Gordo County
ordinances, or this Code should not be interpreted to mean that a prosecution
or conviction of the specific charge is a necessary prerequisite to an action
under this chapter nor shall it be interpreted to mean that proof of the
action, or any element thereof, beyond a reasonable doubt is required. (Ord.
13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-7: PROHIBITION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The creation or maintenance of a "nuisance" as defined in this chapter is
prohibited and the City of Mason City may take actions to abate any "nuisance"
as defined in this chapter by the procedures set out below. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-
2013)
8-8-8: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The City Administrator or designee will make every reasonable effort to contact
the private property owner in order to gain permission to enter a property to
investigate reports of nuisance activities or conditions. If unsuccessful in
contacting the owner, the City Administrator or designee is authorized to enter
and remain upon private property to the extent reasonably necessary for the
purpose of investigating reports of nuisance activities or conditions based
upon a founded report from an authorized verification officer. The
investigation may include locating, identifying and documenting evidence
related to the reported nuisance activity or condition. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-9: NOTICE TO ABATE:
When the City Administrator has received founded reports of nuisance conditions
or activities such that a specific property can be identified as a nuisance
property under the provisions of this chapter, the City Administrator may cause
to be served a written notice to abate the nuisance, directed to the property
owner and other interested person responsible for the nuisance condition, as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-10: NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS:
   A.   A notice to abate shall contain:
      1.   A description of the nuisance;
      2.   The location of the nuisance;
      3.   The dates that the nuisance(s) were documented;
      4.   Identification and address of each person causing, creating or
allowing the nuisance;
      5.   An order for abatement requiring the property owner or interested
person or permittee to consent to one (1) of the following alternatives, with
the approval of the City Administrator:
         a.   Agree to take all necessary steps and actions to completely and
permanently abate the nuisance within the required time frame; or
         b.   Submit to the City Administrator a plan for abatement containing
specific and substantive steps designed to eliminate the current nuisance and
to prevent future recurrence of the nuisance. The plan must be submitted to the
City Administrator within twenty (20) days of the date the order for abatement
is mailed or personal service is completed. The plan may be modified or
rejected by the City Administrator and resubmitted as directed by the City
Administrator. Any plan finally approved by the City Administrator shall become
a part of the order for abatement; or
         c.   Consent by the property owner to an occupant violation with a
placard on the property, or the affected unit thereof, prohibiting occupation
of the property or individual unit until reinspection of the property or unit,
with reinspection to occur within three (3) business days after the request
from property owner for reinspection; or
         d.   Consent by the property owner to an owner/interested person
violation with the surrender of the rental dwelling permit for the property, or
the affected unit thereof, with no reinstatement until reinspection and
reapplication. Said reapplication may be denied if the property owner has not
taken sufficient steps to prevent the reoccurrence of the nuisance condition.
After approval of the reapplication, the reinspection will occur within three
(3) business days after the request from property owner for reinspection;
      6.   The period of time in which the actions are to be completed;
      7.   A statement of the terms regarding appeal hearing;
      8.   A statement that:
         a.   If the nuisance is not completely and permanently abated within
the required time period; and
         b.   If a plan for abatement has not been approved and completely
implemented by the owner/interested person within the time period in the
approved plan; and
         c.   If an occupant violation, with surrender of the rental dwelling
permit, has not been consented to by the owner and the nuisance abated within
the required time period; and
         d.   If an owner/interested person violation, with surrender of the
rental dwelling permit, has not been consented to by the owner and the nuisance
abated within the required time period,
then the City may abate the nuisance with costs assessed against the owner and/
or the interested person and/or against the property as a property tax, and/or
the City may suspend or revoke any and all permits affecting the applicable
property issued by the City or City staff, and/or the City may seek a court
order finding a Municipal or criminal violation and ordering abatement.
   B.   The notice to abate may also contain:
      1.   A statement that the property owner shall be assessed the cost of
police response for all founded nuisance incidents that occur following the
date of the notice to abate. Upon demonstration by the property owner that all
reasonable and warranted steps to prevent or resolve the issue(s) giving rise
to the nuisance have been taken in good faith, the assessment for the cost of
police response may be withdrawn. The assessment for the cost of police
response shall terminate at the end of one (1) year if the founded nuisance
incidents during that year do not meet or exceed the criteria for a problem
area "nuisance" as defined in section
8-8-5 of this chapter. If applicable, when the criteria for a problem area
nuisance is met or exceeded for two (2) consecutive years following an
abatement notice, the rental dwelling permit may be revoked for the affected
property or unit with reinstatement only after reinspection and reapplication.
      2.   For nuisances pertaining to debris or environmental violations, a
statement that the City will no longer issue further written warnings and all
violations must be corrected within twenty four (24) hours otherwise the City
will clean up any solid waste at the property owner's cost.
      3.   A statement that any failure to abate the nuisance described in the
notice, and within the stated time frame, may result in the suspension of any
wine, beer or liquor permit or license held by the owner or interested party.
(Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-11: NOTICE TO ABATE; SERVICE:
The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner and any other
interested persons. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-12: FINAL ORDER TO ABATE AND IMPOSITION OF PENALTY:
No sooner than twenty (20) days following the issuance of the notice to abate,
the City Administrator or designee shall issue a final order to abate
containing a description of the nuisance, the location of the nuisance, the
dates that the nuisance(s) were documented, the identification of the person(s)
causing, creating or allowing the nuisance, and the actions that are required
to abate the nuisance and the time frame in which the actions are to be
completed. The final order may also contain any penalty or directions for other
enforcement or abatement actions that are authorized under this chapter. (Ord.
13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-13: APPEAL AND HEARING:
   A.   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing before the
City Council or before such person or hearing body as the City Council may
designate, as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be
made in writing and delivered to the City Administrator ordering the abatement
by first class mail postmarked within twenty (20) days from the date of the
abatement notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists
and it must be abated as ordered.
   B.   Any penalty imposed for failure to abate a nuisance, other than a
Municipal infraction and simple misdemeanor citation, shall provide for an
opportunity to request a hearing before the City Council, or such person or
hearing body as it may designate, as to whether the penalty is warranted. A
request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the City
Administrator ordering the abatement by first class mail postmarked within
twenty (20) days from the date of the final abatement order, or it will be
conclusively presumed that the abatement required and the penalty imposed are
warranted. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-14: EMERGENCY:
If it is determined by the City Administrator that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing presence of a nuisance that constitutes a threat to
one (1) or more individuals or to the public, the City may perform any action
reasonable designed to abate such nuisance without prior notice or hearing. The
City shall assess the costs as provided in sections
8-8-15 and
8-8-16 of this chapter and subject to the provision of section
8-8-15 of this chapter, after notice to the property owner under the applicable
provisions of sections
8-8-9 through
8-8-11 of this chapter, and opportunity for hearing as provided in section
8-8-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-15: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate as
ordered, the City may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate
account of the costs incurred in the abatement of the nuisance. The itemized
account of the costs shall be filed with the Finance Director or his designee
who may pay any outside expenses on behalf of the City. The salvage value, if
any, of any item or items constituting a nuisance which is so abated by the
City, shall be retained by the City to be applied against costs. In the event
the salvage proceeds exceed the costs, any such excess shall be paid to the
former owner of the property, upon proof of such ownership. If ownership is not
proved within sixty (60) days of the disposal of the property, then the excess
portion of the payment shall be applied to the City's General Fund. In
addition, the City, by order of the City Administrator, may suspend or revoke
any and all permits affecting the applicable property issued or granted by the
City or City staff, and/or the City may seek a court order finding a Municipal
or criminal violation and ordering abatement. (Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
8-8-16: EXPENSES; COLLECTION:
The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred, minus any
salvage value, to the person or persons who have failed to abide by the notice
to abate, demanding payment of the expense. Subject to the provisions of
section
8-8-15 of this chapter, if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid
by the person within thirty (30) days, it shall then be collected with, and in
the same manner as, special taxes, as provided in Iowa Code section 384.59(2).
(Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-17: EXPENSES; HEARING:
Any person notified pursuant to section
8-8-16 of this chapter who objects to the amount of expense demanded from him
may have a hearing before the Finance Committee of the City Council, or such
other person or hearing body as it may designate. The hearing shall be limited
to the question of the reasonability of the amount of expense demanded. A
request for hearing must be in writing and filed with the City Administrator
within ten (10) days after the date of the Finance Director or designee's
demand for payment. Any collection actions will be stayed upon the filing of a
request for hearing until a final determination by the committee. The
determination of the committee shall be conclusive, and shall be communicated
in writing to the objector. The City Clerk shall then proceed in the manner set
forth in Iowa Code section 384.59(2), taking into account any modifications by
the committee in the amount of expense due. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-2013)
8-8-18: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Create or maintain or allow a "nuisance" as defined in this chapter.
   B.   Fail to abate within the time period originally prescribed by the
notice to abate described in section
8-8-10 of this chapter, or such additional time period as may be designated
pursuant to the appeal process outlined in section
8-8-13 of this chapter, any "nuisance" as herein defined after having been
ordered to do so by written notice and/or order to abate under the provisions
of sections
8-8-9 through
8-8-12 of this chapter.
   C.   Resume or allow the resumption of a nuisance after having been ordered
to abate the nuisance by a written notice or final order to abate under the
provisions of sections
8-8-9 through
8-8-12 of this chapter.
   D.   Otherwise hinder, delay, or interfere with the City Administrator in
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Terminate a lease agreement with or otherwise retaliate against a
tenant because that tenant complained or otherwise notified the police or City
official about nuisance activities at the owner's premises. (Ord. 13-23, 7-16-
2013)
8-8-19: PENALTIES:
The following are penalties that may be imposed for violating this chapter.
These possible penalties may be imposed in addition to, and not in lieu of, any
sanctions specified in an abatement plan or order otherwise entered pursuant to
this chapter.
   A.   A violation of this chapter may be punished as a simple misdemeanor in
accordance with the penalties set forth in the Iowa Code.
   B.   A violation of this chapter may be punished as a Municipal infraction
with a scheduled fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first
offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second offense, and seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
   C.   A violation of this chapter may be punished by revocation or suspension
of any license or permit, affecting the subject property, issued by the City of
Mason City or by City staff, in the discretion of the City Administrator and
with the approval of the City Council.
   D.   Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 13-15, 5-7-2013)
CHAPTER 9
NUISANCE GATHERINGS AND DISORDERLY PREMISES
SECTION:
8-9-1: Definitions
8-9-2: Hosting Of Disorderly Premises Or Nuisance Gathering Prohibited
8-9-3: Penalties
8-9-4: Police Service Fee
8-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings ascribed:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: As defined in Iowa Code chapter 123.
DISORDERLY PREMISES: Any premises that constitutes a threat to public peace,
health, safety or general welfare of the public by constituting the source of:
   A.   Persons engaging in fighting or threatening violent or tumultuous
behavior;
   B.   Unreasonable noise as defined as a "noise disturbance" in chapter 6 of
this title or noise which is otherwise prohibited in said chapter;
   C.   Hazardous or offensive conditions such as, but not limited to, solid
waste violations, public urination, public defecation, and indecent exposure.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of two (2) or more persons who have assembled or
gathered together for a social function or other activity on public or private
property whether indoors or outdoors.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, control or overtly permit a gathering
or event. Mere knowledge that an event or gathering is occurring is
insufficient to constitute host status; but presence at the gathering or event
combined with right of possession or control of the premises upon which the
event or gathering is occurring is presumed to satisfy host status.
NUISANCE GATHERING: An event or gathering that constitutes, or results in the
occurrence of two (2) or more illegal activities at or as a result of the event
or gathering at the premises, including, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Noise in violation of chapter 6 of this title;
   B.   Public disturbances, assaults, brawls, fights, indecent exposure,
public urination or public defecation;
   C.   Unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage or
public intoxication;
   D.   Unlawful deposit of solid waste in violation of title 4 of this Code or
section
8-3-12 of this title;
   E.   Criminal mischief in violation of chapter 716 of the Code of Iowa;
   F.   Criminal trespass in violation of chapter 716 of the Code of Iowa;
   G.   Unlawful sale, manufacture, or possession of any controlled substance;
   H.   Any violation of Iowa Code section 124.414 regarding the manufacture,
delivery, sale or possession of drug paraphernalia;
   I.   Violation of Cerro Gordo County ordinance 51 regarding social host and
underage consumption;
   J.   Violation of section
8-3-6 of this title regarding disorderly conduct;
   K.   Criminal sale or use of fireworks in violation of Iowa Code section
727.2 or section
8-3-8 of this title;
   L.   Driving any motorized vehicle or other self- propelled machine
resulting in a crash, property damage, personal injury, reckless driving, or
otherwise in a careless, dangerous or reckless fashion within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of the closest point on the property at issue.
PREMISES: Any house, residence, yard, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or
motel room, park, business, or other place of assembly, private or public,
whether owned, leased, or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under the age of twenty one (21) years of age.
(Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
8-9-2: HOSTING OF DISORDERLY PREMISES OR NUISANCE GATHERING PROHIBITED:
No person shall host a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering. A person or
persons who own the property where the disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering occurs or the person or persons in possession or control of the
premises where the disorderly premises or nuisance gathering takes place, or
the person or persons in possession or control of the location of the nuisance
gathering, may each, jointly and severally, be charged with violating this
section whenever any premises owner, occupant, tenant or other person having a
possessory interest or control hosts, sponsors, conducts, suffers or permits an
event or gathering that at any time of the event or gathering becomes a
disorderly premises or nuisance gathering. However, any owner, occupant, tenant
or other person having a possessory interest or control who requests assistance
from the police to prevent a gathering from becoming a disorderly premises or
nuisance gathering prior to the police receiving complaints related to the
event or gathering being a disorderly premises or nuisance gathering shall not
be considered to be in violation of this section. This exemption is only valid
for one (1) occurrence per property in any calendar year. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-
2013)
8-9-3: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates this chapter may be charged with a simple
misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than the maximum fine allowed for a
single misdemeanor or a Municipal infraction under Iowa law.
   B.   The penalty provided herein may be imposed in addition to any penalty
that may be imposed for any other criminal offense or Municipal violation
arising from the same incident. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
8-9-4: POLICE SERVICE FEE:
A police service fee may be imposed whenever a police officer or other Police
Department representative has given notice to a person who hosts a disorderly
premises or nuisance gathering that a second response based upon a disorderly
premises or nuisance gathering complaint within the next twenty four (24) hours
may result in the assessment of a police service fee. The imposition of a
police service fee is in addition to the authority of the police to otherwise
take enforcement action to control the disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering by ordering dispersal, making arrests or issuing citations.
The person or persons responsible for any disorderly premises or nuisance
gathering for which there was a second or subsequent police response after the
provision of notice of the applicability of public service fees shall be liable
to the City for the police service fees to defray the reasonable cost incurred
in any subsequent police response, jointly or severally. The Chief of Police or
designee shall cause appropriate billings to be made through the Finance
Department. If the City's attempt to collect the police service fee is
unsuccessful, the City may bring an action to recover the police service fee,
including reasonable attorney fees, against any person responsible for paying
the debt or the debt may be turned over to a collection agency and any fees
charged by the agency shall be added to the debt. (Ord. 13-16, 5-7-2013)
TITLE 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the definitions detailed in section 321.1, Code
of Iowa, and any revisions thereof are adopted in full by the City and
incorporated as part of this title, to the extent the same are not in conflict
with the following:
              A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or
ALLEY:        buildings in urban areas and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular
              traffic.
AUTHORIZED    Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, ambulances, and emergency vehicles
EMERGENCY     owned by the United States, this State, any subdivision of this State, or any
VEHICLE:      Municipality of this State, and privately owned vehicles as are designated or
              authorized by the Director of Transportation under Iowa Code section 321.451.
BICYCLE:      Any pedal-powered vehicle upon which the human operator sits.
BUSINESS      The territory contiguous to and including a highway when fifty (50) percent or more
DISTRICT:     of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is
              occupied by buildings in use for business.
              A marked or unmarked route, providing an accessible path to travel from one side of
              the street to the other. That portion of a street ordinarily included within the
CROSSWALK:    prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections. Any
              portion of a street distinctly indicated for pedestrians crossing by pavement
              markings or signage.
DOUBLE        Parking on the roadway centerline side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
PARKING:      or curb, or in the absence of a curb at the edge of a street.
DRIVER OR     Every person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle upon a highway.
OPERATOR:
              The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines,
              or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways
INTERSECTION: which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which
              vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
              conflict.
MOTOR         Every vehicle which is self-propelled and not operated upon rails. The term “car” or
VEHICLE:      “automobile” shall be synonymous with the term “motor vehicle”.
MULTI-USE     Any paved or smooth gravel or soil pathway dedicated for walking and bicycling that
TRAIL:        is separated from motor vehicle traffic.
OFFICIAL TIME Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight
STANDARD:     saving time, whichever shall be in current use in this City at the time.
OFFICIAL      Any sign, signal, marking, or other device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic,
TRAFFIC       placed on, over, or adjacent to a street, highway, private road open to public
CONTROL       travel, multi-use trail or sidewalk by authority of a public agency or official
DEVICES:      having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
              authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
OVERSIZED     Vehicles that exceed seven (7) feet in height or eight (8) feet in width or twenty-
VEHICLES:     five (25) feet in length.
              An unoccupied vehicle, upon a parking lot, public right-of-way, street, or alley
              except when the operator is temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while
PARK OR       actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, or loading or unloading
PARKING:      merchandise, or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
              the control of the operator of the vehicle or in compliance with a duly authorized
              order from a peace officer.
PARKING LOT:  Real estate purchased, leased or otherwise acquired for the use as a parking lot or
              other off street parking area for the parking of vehicles.
              A continuous area of public land comprising a way of approach or access for
PARKWAY:      pedestrian or park vehicular passage, and which shall be improved with paths,
              drives, plantings or other recreational features in a parklike atmosphere.
PEDESTRIAN:   Any person afoot, traveling by use of a mobility and ambulatory aid, or riding a
              bicycle.
              Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. Where the term
              “person” is used in connection with the registration of a motor vehicle, it shall
PERSON:       include any corporation, association, partnership, company, firm, or other
              aggregation of individuals which owns or controls such motor vehicle as actual
              owner, or for the purposes of sale or for renting, whether as agent, salesperson, or
              otherwise.
POLICE        Municipal agency responsible for enforcing State and local laws, detecting and
DEPARTMENT:   preventing crime, and maintaining the peace within the City limits of Mason City.
POLICE        Officers authorized to enforce laws or to make arrests.
OFFICER:
PRIVATE ROAD  Every way or place in private ownership and use for vehicular travel by the owner
OR DRIVEWAY:  and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other
              persons.
              The area of real property in which the City has a dedicated or acquired right-of-way
PUBLIC RIGHT- interest in the real property. The entire width between property lines open to
OF-WAY:       public use as a matter or right for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
              including any unimproved portions thereof.
RAILROAD:     A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD      An engine or locomotive with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
TRAIN:
              The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business,
RESIDENCE     suburban, or school district where forty (40) percent or more of the property upon
DISTRICT:     such highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet is occupied by dwellings or
              by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
RIGHT-OF-WAY  The permitting of vehicles and/or pedestrians to proceed in a lawful manner in
[ASSIGNMENT]: preference to other vehicles or pedestrians by the display of a sign or signal
              indications.
ROADWAY:      That portion of a street (paved or unpaved) designed or ordinarily used for
              vehicular travel. The entire width of an alley with no curb.
SAFETY OR     A device which, when pressure is removed from the engine accelerator or throttle,
DEADMAN       causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving tract.
THROTTLE:
SCHOOL        The territory contiguous to and including the highway for a distance of two hundred
DISTRICT:     (200) feet in either direction from a school ground.
SIDEWALK:     The improved portion of public right-of-way dedicated to pedestrian circulation.
SNOWMOBILE:   Any self-propelled motor vehicle designed for travel on snow, ice or natural terrain
              steered by wheels, skis or runners.
STANDING:     The practice of a driver keeping a vehicle in a stationary position while continuing
              to occupy the vehicle.
              Complete cessation of movement. When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle
STOP:         except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
              direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET OR     The portion of a public right-of-way situated between the outside edges of the
HIGHWAY:      curbs, or in the absence of a curb, the outside edges of the roadway.
SUBURBAN      All other parts of the City not included in the business, school or residence
DISTRICT:     districts.
              Every highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from
THROUGH       intersecting highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the
STREET:       same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title or such entrances are
              controlled by a peace officer or official traffic control device.
TRAFFIC:      Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly
              or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
TRAILER:      Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for
              being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE:      Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
              drawn upon a highway. (Ord. 11-14, 9-20-2011; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
 
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-2-1: Police Administration Traffic Control Authority
9-2-2: Administrative Officers
9-2-3: Street, Alley Or Sidewalk Closure
9-2-4: Traffic Control Devices
9-2-5: Crosswalks, Safety Zones, Traffic Lanes
9-2-6: No Turn Markers
9-2-7: Loading Zones
9-2-8: Quiet Zones
9-2-9: Public Carrier Stands
9-2-10: Through Highways, Stop Or Reduced Speed Intersections
9-2-11: Hazardous Intersections
9-2-12: Weight Limit, Exceptions; Embargo Established
9-2-13: Penalty
9-2-1: POLICE ADMINISTRATION TRAFFIC CONTROL AUTHORITY:
There is hereby established in the Police Department a Traffic Division, to be
under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible
to the Chief of Police. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such
aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce
the street traffic regulations, to make arrests for traffic violations, and to
investigate accidents and to carry out the duties specially imposed upon said
division by this chapter and the traffic regulations of this Code. The
Engineering Department has the authority to designate roadway, marking, and
regulatory features related to traffic control upon the City's streets. (Ord.
11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS:
Administrative Officers of the City shall conduct analyses of accidents, devise
remedial measures and cooperate with other City officials in the development of
ways and means to improve traffic conditions. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-3: STREET, ALLEY OR SIDEWALK CLOSURE:
   A.   Individuals are not allowed to close or partially block a City street,
alley or sidewalk without prior approval from the Engineering Department.
Public safety and/or City operations and maintenance personnel may temporarily
block streets, alleys or sidewalks for official purposes only.
   B.   A traffic control plan shall be submitted and approved by the
Engineering Department at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the closure of
any street, alley or sidewalk. The traffic control plan must show the proposed
area of the closure including the type and locations of all traffic control
devices. The requested dates of closure and the contact information for a
person responsible for the signage shall be provided. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011;
amd. 2017 Code)
9-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
It shall be the duty of the Engineering Department to install or supervise the
installation of all traffic control devices. The Engineering Department shall
operate and maintain traffic control devices when and as required under the
traffic regulations of this City and may require the placing and maintenance of
such additional traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate
traffic under the traffic regulations of this City or under State law, or to
guide or warn traffic. All traffic control devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the Iowa Department of Transportation. All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of
State law or this title shall be official traffic control devices. (Ord. 11-15,
9-20-2011)
9-2-5: CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES, TRAFFIC LANES:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to:
   A.   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as may be
deemed necessary.
   B.   Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as
may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
   C.   Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as may be
deemed advisable, consistent with the traffic regulations. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-
2011)
9-2-6: NO TURN MARKERS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-
turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The Engineering
Department is hereby authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or
adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated
may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or provisions of this
Code. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-7: LOADING ZONES:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine the location of
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are
applicable. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-8: QUIET ZONES:
The Engineering Department shall have authority to temporarily establish a zone
of quiet upon any street where a person is seriously ill if requested so to do
by the written statement of at least one (1) registered physician certifying to
its necessity. Said temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory within
a radius of two hundred feet (200') of the building occupied by the person
named in the request of said physician. Said temporary zone of quiet and any
other zone of quiet declared by any ordinance shall be designated by the
Engineering Department by placing at a conspicuous place in the street a sign
or marking bearing the words "quiet zone". (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-9: PUBLIC CARRIER STANDS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops and taxicab stands and standards for other passenger common carrier motor
vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as shall be
determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and
every bus stop, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate
signs. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-10: THROUGH HIGHWAYS, STOP OR REDUCED SPEED INTERSECTIONS:
Whenever any provision of this Code designates and describes a through street,
it shall be the duty of the Engineering Department to place and maintain a stop
sign on each and every street intersection or through street or that portion
thereof described and designated as such by any provision of this Code. (Ord.
11-15, 9-20-2011)
9-2-11: HAZARDOUS INTERSECTIONS:
The Engineering Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets
and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to
any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place
where a stop is required. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
9-2-12: WEIGHT LIMIT, EXCEPTIONS; EMBARGO ESTABLISHED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle having a gross weight
in excess of an established weight as set by the City Engineer for a public
way. The exception is City vehicles providing essential services such as snow
removal and garbage collection.
   A.   Streets to which weight limitations have been established at twenty
thousand (20,000) pounds are as follows:
      Cerro Gordo Way from Garfield Avenue to Fourth Street Southwest.
      North Adams Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street
Northwest.
      North Jefferson Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street
Northwest.
      North Madison Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Sixteenth Street
Northwest.
      North President Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Seventeenth
Street Northwest.
      North Washington Avenue from Twelfth Street Northwest to Seventeenth
Street Northwest.
      South Hampshire Avenue from Twelfth Street Southeast to Nineteenth Street
Southeast.
      South Massachusetts Avenue from Twelfth Street Southeast to Nineteenth
Street Southeast.
      First Street Northwest from west line of North Pierce Avenue to east line
of East Parkridge Drive and Winnebago Way from east line of East Parkridge
Drive to north line of Fourth Street Southwest (Highway 18 west).
      Sixth Street Southeast from South Massachusetts Avenue to South Carolina
Avenue.
      Eleventh Street Southwest from Federal Avenue to Washington Avenue.
      Fourteenth Street Northwest from North Federal Avenue to North Quincy
Avenue.
      Fifteenth Street Northwest from Federal Avenue to Quincy Avenue.
      Sixteenth Street Northwest from North Federal Avenue to North Quincy
Avenue.
   B.   Bridges to which weight limitations have been established are as
follows:
      1.   Bridge on Willowbrook Drive between Brook Terrace and Meadow Lane,
weight limitation established at twelve thousand (12,000) pounds.
   C.   The Engineering Department is hereby ordered to post appropriate signs
on said designated public ways giving notice of said weight limit.
   D.   Weight restrictions established on streets, avenues or alleys should
not be applicable to the driving or operation of any such truck or commercial
vehicle upon the streets, avenues or alleys designated if such driving or
operation is necessary in the conduct of a business in order to reach
destinations abutting such designated street or if the destination cannot be
reached except by driving on such designated street nor shall this restriction
be applicable to emergency vehicles responding to an emergency call. (Ord. 11-
15, 9-20-2011; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-9, 10-20-2020; Ord. 24-4, 3-19-2024)
9-2-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11-15, 9-20-2011)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Required Obedience To Traffic Laws
9-3-2: Careless Driving
9-3-3: Accidents And Reports
9-3-4: Obedience To Official Traffic Control Devices
9-3-5: Official Traffic Control Signals
9-3-6: Stop Regulations
9-3-7: Bicycles, Animals Or Animal Drawn Vehicles
9-3-8: Acts Prohibited On Fully Controlled Access Facilities
9-3-9: Vehicle Equipment Requirements
9-3-10: Turning Movements
9-3-11: Overtaking Restrictions
9-3-12: Parades And Processions
9-3-13: Operation Of Vehicles Restricted
9-3-14: Yield Right-Of-Way
9-3-15: Operation Without Registration
9-3-16: Fraudulent Use Of Registration
9-3-17: Signals Required
9-3-18: Roadways Laned For Traffic, Change Of Lanes
9-3-19: Restricted And Prohibited Acts
9-3-20: Drivers' Licenses
9-3-21: Penalty
9-3-1: REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS:
   A.   Required Obedience: State Statute entitled "Provisions Refer to
Highways - Exception" is Iowa Code section 321.228 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Obedience To Police: State Statute for obedience to peace officers is
Iowa Code section 321.229 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-2: CARELESS DRIVING:
State Statute for careless driving is Iowa Code section 321.277A and any
revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-3: ACCIDENTS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Leaving Scene Of Traffic Accident: State Statute for leaving scene of
traffic accident (vehicle damage only) is Iowa Code section 321.262 and any
revisions thereto.
   B.   Striking Unattended Vehicle: State Statute for striking unattended
vehicle is Iowa Code section 321.264 and any revisions thereto.
   C.   Striking Fixtures Upon Highway: State Statute for striking fixtures
upon a highway is Iowa Code section 321.265 and any revisions thereto. (2017
Code)
9-3-4: OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
State Statute for obedience to official traffic control devices is Iowa Code
section 321.256 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-5: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
State Statute for official traffic control signal guidelines is Iowa Code
section 321.257 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-6: STOP REGULATIONS:
   A.   Stop Intersections: State Statute for vehicles entering stop
intersections is Iowa Code section 321.322 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Stop Required At School Crossings: The Engineering Department may
authorize schools to extend or roll out temporary stop signs when school is in
session to control traffic near school crossings. Every driver of a motor
vehicle, bicycle, snowmobile or other vehicle capable of being operated on City
streets shall stop at every such sign, or at a clearly marked stop line before
crossing the crosswalk nearest to him, or before entering the intersection,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer. (2017 Code)
9-3-7: BICYCLES, ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
State Statute for bicycles, animals or animal drawn vehicles is Iowa Code
section 321.234 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-8: ACTS PROHIBITED ON FULLY CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:
State Statute for acts prohibited on fully controlled access facilities is Iowa
Code section 321.366 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-9: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lights:
      1.   Headlamps On Motor Vehicles: State Statute for headlamps on motor
vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.385 and any revisions thereto.
      2.   Rear Lamps: State Statute for rear lamp requirements is Iowa Code
section 321.387 and any revisions thereto.
      3.   When Lighted Lamps Required: State Statute regarding when lighted
lamps required is Iowa Code section 321.384 and any revisions thereto.
      4.   Lamps On Parked Vehicles: State Statute for lamps on parked vehicles
is Iowa Code section 321.389 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Mufflers: State Statute for mufflers is Iowa Code section 321.436 and
any revisions thereto.
   C.   Brake Requirements: State Statutes for brake requirements are Iowa Code
sections 321.430 and 321.431 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-10: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
   A.   Turning At Intersections: State Statute for turning at intersections is
Iowa Code section 321.311 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Left Turns, Yielding Right-Of-Way: State Statute for left turns,
yielding right-of-way is Iowa Code section 321.320 and any revisions thereto.
(2017 Code)
9-3-11: OVERTAKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Overtaking Vehicle:
      1.   State Statute for overtaking vehicle on the left is Iowa Code
section 321.299, paragraph 1, and any revisions thereto.
      2.   State Statute for requirements for a vehicle being overtaken is Iowa
Code section 321.299, paragraph 2, and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Limitations On Overtaking On The Left: State Statute for limitations on
overtaking on the left is Iowa Code section 321.303 and any revisions thereto.
   C.   Overtaking And Passing: State Statute for overtaking and passing is
Iowa Code section 321.302 and any revisions thereto.
   D.   Prohibited Passing: State Statute for prohibited passing is Iowa Code
section 321.304, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-12: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS:
No parades or processions excepting forces of the United States Army or Navy,
the military forces of this State, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (2017 Code)
9-3-13: OPERATION OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
   A.   Limitation On Backing: State Statute for moving vehicle backward on
highway is Iowa Code section 321.323 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Emerging From Alley, Driveway: State Statute for stop before crossing
sidewalk from private drive or alley is Iowa Code section 321.353 and any
revisions thereto.
   C.   Entering Through Highway, Stop Intersections: State Statute for
entering through highways is Iowa Code section 321.321 and any revisions
thereto.
   D.   Driving On Right Hand Side: State Statute for driving on right hand
side of roadway and exceptions is Iowa Code section 321.297 and any revisions
thereto.
   E.   Meeting And Turning Right: State Statute for meeting and turning right
is Iowa Code section 321.298 and any revisions thereto.
   F.   Following Too Closely: State Statute for following too closely is Iowa
Code section 321.307 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-14: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A.   General Restrictions: State Statute for entering through highways is
Iowa Code section 321.321 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Directional Right-Of-Way: State Statute for entering intersections from
different highways is Iowa Code section 321.319 and any revisions thereto.
(2017 Code)
9-3-15: OPERATION WITHOUT REGISTRATION:
State Statute for operation without registration is Iowa Code section 321.98
and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-16: FRAUDULENT USE OF REGISTRATION:
State Statute for fraudulent use of registration is Iowa Code section 321.99
and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-17: SIGNALS REQUIRED:
   A.   When Signals Required: State Statute for when signals required is Iowa
Code section 321.314 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Continuous Signals: State Statute for signal continuous is Iowa Code
section 321.315 and any revisions thereto.
   C.   Signal To Stop Or Decrease Speed: State Statute for signal to stop or
decrease speed is Iowa Code section 321.316 and any revisions thereto.
   D.   Signals Given By Hand And Arm Or Signal Device: State Statute for
signals given by hand and arm or signal device is Iowa Code section 321.317 and
any revisions thereto.
   E.   Method Of Giving Hand And Arm Signals: State Statute for method of
giving hand and arm signals is Iowa Code section 321.318 and any revisions
thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-18: ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC, CHANGE OF LANES:
State Statute for roadways laned for traffic, change of lanes, is Iowa Code
section 321.306 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-19: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Moving Another Vehicle: State Statute for moving other vehicles is Iowa
Code section 321.359 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Projecting Loads On Passenger Vehicles: State Statute for projecting
loads on passenger vehicles is Iowa Code section 321.455 and any revisions
thereto.
   C.   Obstruction To Driver's View: State Statute for obstruction to driver's
view is Iowa Code section 321.363 and any revisions thereto.
   D.   Putting Debris On Highways: State Statute for putting debris on highway
is Iowa Code section 321.369 and any revisions thereto.
   E.   Opening And Closing Vehicle Doors: No person shall open the door of a
motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of
a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than
necessary to load or unload passengers.
   F.   Safety Belts And Harnesses: State Statute for safety belts and
harnesses, use required is Iowa Code section 321.445 and any revisions thereto.
   G.   Child Restraint Devices: State Statute for child restraint devices is
Iowa Code section 321.446 and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-20: DRIVERS' LICENSES:
   A.   Operators Licensed: State Statute for operators licensed is Iowa Code
section 321.174 and any revisions thereto.
   B.   Operation Of Motor Vehicle With Expired License: State Statute for
operation of motor vehicle with expired license is Iowa Code section 321.174A
and any revisions thereto. (2017 Code)
9-3-21: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Speed Restrictions
9-4-2: Control Of Vehicles; Reduced Speed
9-4-3: Speed Limits On Iowa Highway 122
9-4-4: Speed Limits On U.S. Highway 65
9-4-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
Any person operating a motor vehicle on a street or highway within the City
limits of the City of Mason City shall operate said vehicle at a speed in
accordance with, and not in excess of, the speed restrictions established by
Iowa Code section 321.285 and any subsequent revisions thereto, except as
specifically modified below. The following shall be the lawful speeds except as
herein modified, and any speed in excess thereof shall be unlawful:
   15 miles per hour:
      Lime Creek Road, from a point where Nature Center Road intersects, thence
east to a point one hundred fifty feet (150') west of the west entrance to the
Lime Creek Nature Center parking lot.
      Twenty Third Street Southwest, from a point where South Monroe Avenue
intersects, thence west to the eastern border of Frederick Hanford Park.
   25 miles per hour:
      On roads, streets and alleys within the corporate limits of Mason City
that are not classified by this chapter.
   30 miles per hour:
      Birch Drive, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects,
thence southerly and easterly to the south City limits.
      North Kentucky Avenue, from a point where East State Street intersects,
thence north to a point where Twelfth Street Northeast intersects.
      North Pierce Avenue, from a point two hundred fifteen feet (215') north
of the Meadow Lane intersection, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street
Northwest intersects. Exception: When the school zone beacon lights are
flashing, speed limit is reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour.
      South Kentucky Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast
intersects, thence south to a point one hundred feet (100') south of Nineteenth
Street Southeast intersection.
      South Monroe Avenue, from a point four hundred feet (400') south of
Seventh Street Southwest intersection, thence north to a point where Fifth
Street Southwest intersects.
      South Taft Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to the south City limits.
      Fifteenth Street Southwest, from a point where South Federal Avenue
intersects, thence west to a point where South Monroe Avenue intersects.
      Nineteenth Street Southwest from one thousand six hundred feet (1,600')
east of South Pierce Avenue to two hundred feet (200') west of Pierce Avenue.
   35 miles per hour:
      North and South Taft Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street
Southwest intersects, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street Northwest
intersects.
      North Illinois Avenue, from a point six hundred sixty feet (660') north
of East State Street intersection, thence north to a point where Twelfth Street
Northeast intersects.
      South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to a point where Ninth Street Southwest intersects.
      South Iowa Avenue, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects,
thence south to a point where Eleventh Street Southeast intersects.
      South Monroe Avenue, from a point four hundred feet (400') south of
Seventh Street Southwest intersection, thence south to a point where Nineteenth
Street Southwest intersects.
      South Pierce Avenue, from a point where Ninth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to a point where Fifteenth Street Southwest
intersects.
      Eleventh Street Southeast, from a point where South Iowa Avenue
intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
      Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point where North California Avenue
intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
      Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point where North Ohio Avenue
intersects, thence east to a point two thousand six hundred feet (2,600') east
of North Illinois Avenue intersection.
      Twelfth Street Northwest, from a point where North Eisenhower Avenue
intersects, thence west to the west City limits.
      Fifteenth Street Southwest, from a point where South Monroe Avenue
intersects, thence west to a point where South Taft Avenue intersects.
      Nineteenth Street Southeast from a point where South Virginia Avenue
intersects, thence east to South Kentucky Avenue.
      Nineteenth Street Southwest from South Federal Avenue to one thousand six
hundred feet (1,600') east of South Pierce Avenue.
      Nineteenth Street Southwest, from two hundred feet (200') west of South
Pierce Avenue to two-tenths (2/10) of a mile west of the Taft Avenue
intersection. Exception: When school lights are flashing, speed limit is
reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour.
      Thirty Fifth Street Southeast, from a point where South Federal Avenue
intersects, thence east to the east City limits.
   45 miles per hour:
      College Drive, from a point where Fourth Street Southeast intersects,
thence north to a point two thousand two hundred ninety feet (2,290').
      North and South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Twelfth Street
Northwest intersects, thence south to a point where Fourth Street Southwest
intersects.
      South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Ninth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest
intersects.
      South Kentucky Avenue, from a point one hundred feet (100') south of the
Nineteenth Street Southeast intersection, thence south to the south City
limits.
      South Pierce Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to a point two thousand six hundred forty feet
(2,640') south of the Nineteenth Street Southwest intersection.
      Ninth Street Southwest, from a point where South Taft Avenue intersects,
thence west to a point where South Eisenhower Avenue intersects.
      Twelfth Street Northeast, from a point two thousand six hundred feet
(2,600') east of the North Illinois Avenue intersection, thence east to a point
where North California Avenue intersects.
      Twelfth Street Northwest, from a point two hundred fifteen feet (215')
west of North Pierce Avenue intersection, thence west to a point two hundred
seventy five feet (275') west of the western portion of North Taft Avenue
intersection.
      Nineteenth Street Southwest, from a point two-tenths (2/10) of a mile
west of the Taft Avenue intersection, thence west to a point nine hundred fifty
feet (950') west of Country Club Drive intersection.
      North and South California Avenue, from the south City limits, thence
northerly to the north City limits.
      North Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Twelfth Street Northwest
intersects, thence north to the north City limits.
      South Eisenhower Avenue, from a point where Nineteenth Street Southwest
intersects, thence south to the south City limits.
      South Pierce Avenue, from a point two thousand six hundred forty feet
(2,640') south of Nineteenth Street Southwest intersection, thence south to a
point where Forty Third Street Southwest intersects.
      Nineteenth Street Southwest, from a point nine hundred fifty feet (950')
west of Country Club Drive intersection, thence west to the west City limits.
      Forty Third Street Southwest, from a point where South Federal Avenue
intersects, thence west to the west City limits. (Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013; amd.
Ord. 24-5, 3-19-2024)
9-4-2: CONTROL OF VEHICLES; REDUCED SPEED:
Any person operating a motor vehicle on a street or highway within the City
limits of the City of Mason City shall at all times operate the vehicle in
accordance with Iowa Code section 321.288 and any subsequent revisions thereto.
(Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013)
9-4-3: SPEED LIMITS ON IOWA HIGHWAY 122:
The following speeds on the following portions of said primary Iowa Highway 122
within the city shall be lawful speeds except as herein modified, and any speed
in excess thereof shall be unlawful, as follows:
30 miles per hour:
   From the intersection of South Massachusetts Avenue thence westerly to a
point four hundred feet (400') west of the intersection of South Monroe Avenue.
35 miles per hour:
   From a point one thousand fifty feet (1,050') east of the intersection of
South Illinois Avenue thence west to the intersection of South Massachusetts
Avenue. Exception: when the school zone beacons light are flashing, speed limit
is reduced to twenty five (25) miles per hour within the school zone.
   From a point four hundred feet (400') west of the intersection of South
Monroe Avenue thence west to a point five hundred feet (500') west of the
intersection of South Grover Avenue.
40 miles per hour:
   From a point five hundred feet (500') west of the intersection of South
Grover Avenue, thence west to a point one thousand seven hundred feet (1,700')
east of the intersection of South Roosevelt Avenue and Village Green Drive.
45 miles per hour:
   From a point one thousand fifty feet (1,050') east of the intersection of
South Illinois Avenue thence east to a point one thousand eight hundred fifty
feet (1,850') west of the intersection of Farmstead Square. Exception: when the
school zone beacons light are flashing, speed limit is reduced to thirty five
(35) miles per hour within the school zone.
   From a point nine hundred feet (900') west of the intersection of South Taft
Avenue, thence west to the west City limits.
50 miles per hour:
   From a point eight hundred feet (800') east of the intersection of South
Yorktown Pike thence west to a point one thousand eight hundred fifty feet
(1,850') west of the intersection of Farmstead Square.
55 miles per hour:
   From the east city limit thence west to a point eight hundred feet (800')
east of the intersection of South Yorktown Pike. (Ord. 13-01, 1-15-2013; amd.
Ord. 20-7, 9-15-2020)
9-4-4: SPEED LIMITS ON U.S. HIGHWAY 65:
The following speeds on the following portions of said primary U.S. Highway 65
within the City shall be lawful speeds except as herein modified, and any speed
in excess thereof shall be unlawful, as follows:
25 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Eighth Street Southwest/Southeast, thence north to the
intersection of Sixth Street Northwest/Northeast.
30 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Sixth Street Northwest/Northeast, thence north to the
intersection of Seventeenth Street Northwest/Northeast.
35 miles per hour:
From the intersection of Twenty Seventh Street Southwest, thence north to the
intersection of Eighth Street Southwest/Southeast.
45 miles per hour:
From a point five hundred fifty feet (550') south of the intersection of Twenty
Seventh Street Southwest, thence north to the intersection of Twenty Seventh
Street Southwest.
From the intersection of Seventeenth Street Northwest/Northeast, thence north
to a point three hundred thirty feet (330') north of the intersection of Nature
Center Road.
55 miles per hour:
From a point three hundred thirty feet (330') north of the intersection of
Nature Center Road, thence northerly to the north City limits.
From the south City limits, thence north to a point five hundred fifty feet
(550') south of the intersection of Twenty Seventh Street Southwest. (Ord. 13-
01, 1-15-2013)
CHAPTER 5
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Operation Of All-Terrain Vehicles And Utility Terrain Vehicles
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Proof Of Registration, Current Financial Responsibility And Age For
Operation Of All-Terrain Vehicles
9-5-4: Streets Designated For Operation
9-5-5: Prohibited Operation
9-5-6: Prohibited Areas Of Operation
9-5-1: OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES:
A registered all-terrain or utility terrain vehicle may be operated on City
streets that are subject to speed limits of thirty five (35) miles per hour or
less within the City limits of Mason City under the following conditions:
   A.   The operation of the vehicle is for snow removal purposes on private
driveways and sidewalks.
   B.   The operation of the vehicle on City streets is strictly for
transportation to and from the site of the snow removal and the vehicle shall
be equipped with a functioning blade or snowblower at all times during
operation.
   C.   The all-terrain vehicle/utility terrain vehicle and the driver of said
vehicle shall meet all State requirements for the legal operation of the
vehicle. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV: A motorized flotation tire vehicle with not less
than three (3) low pressure tires, but not more than six (6) low pressure
tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than nine hundred (900)
cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than one thousand (1,000)
pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator
and handlebars for steering control.
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY/LIABILITY COVERAGE: Any of the following:
   A.   An owner's policy of liability insurance which is issued by an
insurance carrier authorized to do business in Iowa to or for the benefit of
the person named in the policy as insured, and insuring the person named as
insured and any person using an insured motor vehicle with the express or
implied permission of the named insured against loss from liability imposed by
law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of an insured
motor vehicle within the United States of America or Canada, but subject to
minimum limits, exclusive of interest and costs, in the amounts specified in
section 321A.21 or specified in another provision of the Code, whichever is
greater.
   B.   A bond filed with the department pursuant to section 321A.24.
   C.   A valid statement issued by the Treasurer of State pursuant to section
321A.25 attesting to the filing of a certificate of deposit with the Treasurer
of State.
   D.   A valid certificate of self-insurance issued by the department pursuant
to section 321A.34.
UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE OR UTV OR OFF ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE OR ORV: A motorized
flotation tire vehicle with not less than four (4) low pressure tires, but not
more than eight (8) low pressure tires, that is limited in engine displacement
to less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic centimeters and in total
dry weight not more than two thousand (2,000) pounds and that has a seat that
is bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator and
steering wheel or control levers for control. Off road utility vehicle does not
include dune buggies, golf carts, go-carts or minitrucks. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-
2013)
9-5-3: PROOF OF REGISTRATION, CURRENT FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND AGE FOR
OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES:
No person shall operate an ATV on any public street or alley unless the
operator possesses the following documents. The operator must carry these
documents when operating the all- terrain vehicle:
   A.   Evidence that the ATV is registered according to Iowa law and that such
registration is current. The owner/operator shall maintain such registration.
   B.   Evidence that the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age, and
possesses a valid Iowa driver's license.
   C.   Proof of current financial responsibility/liability in accordance with
section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa. The owner/operator shall maintain such
financial responsibility.
   D.   UTVs are not currently required to be registered with the Iowa DNR but
when registration of UTVs is required, owners shall maintain proof of
registration. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-4: STREETS DESIGNATED FOR OPERATION:
All-terrain vehicles and utility terrain vehicles may be operated upon the
roadway portion of all streets within the City limits except as hereinafter
prohibited by ordinance. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-5: PROHIBITED OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle or
utility terrain vehicle upon a public street as permitted by this chapter
except in strict accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle upon any portion of a street except the roadway portion thereof.
   B.   Any person operating an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle
upon any street shall drive upon the most right hand lane of the roadway
available for traffic or as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge
of the roadway, except when overtaking another vehicle stopped in that lane or
proceeding in the same direction.
   C.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle upon a street in excess of a maximum speed of thirty five (35) miles
per hour, or than is reasonable or proper under all existing circumstances.
   D.   An all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle may make a direct
crossing over a street, including a street which constitutes an extension of a
State or Federal primary highway within the City limits, but no person shall
make a direct crossing of any such street with the all-terrain vehicle or
utility terrain vehicle unless:
      1.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees
(90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
      2.   The all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain vehicle complies with all
traffic regulations;
      3.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
      4.   When crossing a divided street, the crossing shall be made only at
an intersection of such street with another street.
   E.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle except in compliance with all other ordinances of the City, which
pertain to the use, operation and parking of motor vehicles, unless otherwise
expressly provided by this chapter or except those which, by their nature, have
no application to the operation of all-terrain vehicles or utility terrain
vehicles. All ordinances of the City which pertain to the use, operation and
parking of motor vehicles are incorporated herein by reference as though the
same were fully set forth herein.
   F.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
   G.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, habit
forming drugs or psychoactive drugs whether prescribed or not prescribed.
   H.   No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle or utility terrain
vehicle at any time on a street without the required headlight and taillight
being lighted during the operation of such all-terrain vehicles or utility
terrain vehicles. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
9-5-6: PROHIBITED AREAS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an all-terrain vehicle or
utility terrain vehicle within the City:
   A.   Upon any portion of a street other than the roadway portion thereof;
   B.   Upon any portion of a street which constitutes an extension of a State
or Federal primary highway within the City limits, except as otherwise herein
provided with respect to the permitted crossing of such streets;
   C.   Upon public property other than the roadway portion of permitted
streets except as otherwise specifically permitted by ordinance of the City or
by rule or regulation of the Park Board of the City;
   D.   Upon any private property without the specific permission of the owner
of such property or the person in control of such property or upon public
property owned by the State or any other governmental subdivision other than
the City without the specific permission of the State or any such governmental
subdivision. (Ord. 13-33, 12-17-2013)
CHAPTER 6
PARKING ENFORCEMENT BUREAU
SECTION:
9-6-1: Bureau Created
9-6-2: Duties Of Bureau
9-6-3: Bureau Records
9-6-1: BUREAU CREATED:
The Police Chief shall establish a Parking Enforcement Bureau to assist him
with clerical work on parking violations and traffic cases. The Chief of Police
shall be in charge of the bureau which shall be open at such hours as he may
designate. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
9-6-2: DUTIES OF BUREAU:
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Parking Enforcement Bureau:
   A.   It shall collect parking fees, keep sufficient records of the same,
account for the same and transmit the same to the City Clerk, all as prescribed
by section
8-2-5 of this Code.
   B.   It shall collect fines for overtime parking violations and parking
violations other than overtime parking violations, keep sufficient records of
the same, account for the same and transmit the same to the City Clerk, all as
prescribed by section
8-2-5 of this Code.
   C.   It shall keep records of all traffic violations of which each person
has been guilty during the preceding twelve (12) months whether such guilt was
established in court or indicated by the record of the Parking Enforcement
Bureau.
   D.   If a notice of fine for a parking violation, in a form prescribed by
section
9-10-16 of this title, has been given by placing the original or copy thereof
in plain sight on the windshield of the vehicle, and the fine is not paid as
prescribed in such notice and as established by this Code, the bureau shall
cause such violation to be filed against the registered owner thereof who shall
be prima facie responsible for said violation. It shall be a misdemeanor for
any person to permit or allow a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the
provisions of this Code. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
9-6-3: BUREAU RECORDS:
The Parking Enforcement Bureau shall keep records of all notices of fines
issued within the City and all fees and fines collected by the Parking
Enforcement Bureau under the provisions of this chapter. Such records shall be
maintained so as to show all types of violations, final disposition, and the
totals of each. (Ord. 12-15, 12-18-2012)
CHAPTER 7
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
9-7-1: Parking Spaces
9-7-2: Parking Time Limits
9-7-3: Truck Parking
9-7-4: One-Way Traffic
9-7-5: Penalty
9-7-1: PARKING SPACES:
The Mason City Engineering Department is hereby authorized and directed to mark
off individual parking spaces on all parking lots, said parking spaces to be
designated by lines painted or durably marked on the surface or curbing of the
parking lot. At each space so marked off, it shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits
of the space so designated. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-2: PARKING TIME LIMITS:
Parking or standing of a vehicle in a designated public or leased parking space
shall be lawful for a period of time and for such fee as may be fixed by the
City Council. Where no parking time limit is prescribed, it shall be unlawful
for any person to leave, abandon or park any vehicle on any public parking lot
for a period of time exceeding twenty four (24) hours. It shall also be
unlawful to park any vehicle in a leased parking space in a public parking lot
if the vehicle does not display a current leased parking permit issued by the
City for that vehicle on their front dash. Any vehicle parked in violation of
this section or parked in violation of any other ordinance, regulation or
lawful police order of the City is hereby found and declared to constitute an
obstruction to the public parking lot areas, and a public nuisance and may be
issued a parking violation notice of fine and/or removed in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 10 of this title, as they apply to the removal of
vehicles from public streets, avenues or alleys. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-3: TRUCK PARKING:
No vehicle used primarily for the transportation of property, and no vehicle
used primarily for commercial transportation of persons, shall park in or upon
any parking lot unless said vehicle is of such length and width as to park
within the designated lines of the parking space. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-4: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC:
The entrances, drives and exits to any of the off street parking lots shall be
designated as one-way traffic lanes as the Engineering Department shall
designate. The Operations and Maintenance Department is hereby authorized and
directed by the Engineering Department to post signs on said entrances, drives
and exits of parking lots designated one-way traffic as deemed necessary. When
one-way traffic signs are in place on any public parking lot, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle thereon except in the direction
indicated by said posted signs. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
9-7-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-16, 12-18-2012)
CHAPTER 8
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Streets Or Alleys Designated
9-8-2: Penalty
9-8-1: STREETS OR ALLEYS DESIGNATED:
The following streets, avenues, alleys, or parts thereof, are hereby made one-
way streets, avenues and alleys, or parts thereof, and vehicles shall be driven
only in the direction hereinbelow indicated for such streets, avenues, alleys,
or parts thereof: (Ord. 15-08, 8-4-2015)
   A.   Northbound:
Delaware Avenue from Fourth Street Southeast to Fifth Street Northeast.
Frank Lloyd Wright Way from First Street Southwest to West State Street.
North-south alley between Delaware Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue from First
Street Northeast to Second Street Northeast.
South Massachusetts Avenue from Sixth Street Southeast to Fifth Street
Southeast.
Fourth Street Southeast from Federal Avenue to Delaware Avenue. (Ord. 15-08, 8-
4-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Southbound:
Washington Avenue from Fifth Street Northwest to Fourth Street Southwest.
   C.   Westbound:
Fifth Street south from South Massachusetts Avenue to South Madison Avenue.
Eleventh Street Northeast "A" Alley from Pennsylvania Avenue to Twelfth Street
Northeast.
   D.   Eastbound:
Third Street Southeast from Indiana Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
Fourth Street Southwest from President Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Sixth Street south from South Madison Avenue to South Massachusetts Avenue.
(Ord. 15-08, 8-4-2015)
9-8-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1985 Code)
CHAPTER 9
BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Effect Of Regulations
9-9-2: Bicycle License Procedures
9-9-3: Removal Of Tag/Alteration Of Serial Number
9-9-4: Transfer Of Ownership
9-9-5: Rental Agencies
9-9-6: Traffic Laws Apply
9-9-7: Riding On Bicycles
9-9-8: Speed And Stopping Requirements
9-9-9: Pedestrian Right-Of-Way Requirements
9-9-10: Clinging To Vehicles
9-9-11: Carrying Articles
9-9-12: Parking In Business District
9-9-13: Riding On Sidewalks
9-9-14: Lamps And Reflectors
9-9-15: Audible Signal
9-9-1: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required in this chapter. These regulations applicable to bicycles
shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public
path set aside for the use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
herein. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-2: BICYCLE LICENSE PROCEDURES:
Mason City residents may license their bicycles at the Police Department during
normal business hours.
   A.   Application: Application for a bicycle license and license tag may be
made upon a form provided by the Police Department and shall be made in person
at the Police Department.
   B.   Inspection: Police Department staff reserve the right to examine the
bicycle in order to verify ownership and accuracy of information before issuing
a bicycle license.
   C.   Issuance Of License: Upon receiving proper application, Police
Department staff are authorized to issue a bicycle license. Staff shall not
issue a license for any bicycle when he or she knows or has reasonable grounds
to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession
of such bicycle. The Police Department shall keep a record of the numbers of
each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and a brief description of the bicycle licensed. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-3: REMOVAL OF TAG/ALTERATION OF SERIAL NUMBER:
No person shall remove a license tag from a bicycle during the period for which
issued unless the bicycle is permanently dismantled or the bicycle is no longer
operated upon any street in this City. It is unlawful for any person to
wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's
serial number of any bicycle. It is unlawful to possess a bicycle in the City
whose serial number has been intentionally removed, defaced, or altered to
prevent identification. Bicycles with missing, altered, or obscured serial
numbers may be seized by police in an attempt to verify ownership. Police
Department staff have discretion to allow verified legitimate bicycle owners to
retain their bicycle if they have reported their bicycles stolen to police
contemporaneous to the recovery of reported but altered bicycle. (Ord. 13-19,
6-4-2013)
9-9-4: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the new owner may, upon
proper application and verification from the prior owner, have said tag
reassigned to the new applicant/owner. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-5: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle
is equipped as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-
2013)
9-9-6: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
Bicycle regulations are subject to all applicable motor vehicle and traffic
regulations as established by Iowa Code section 321.234 and any subsequent
revisions thereto. The City has enacted additional specific bicycle regulations
by local authority under Iowa Code section 321.236 and any subsequent revisions
thereto. Sections in this chapter without a specific reference to an Iowa Code
section are the additional local bicycle regulations in effect. (Ord. 13-19, 6-
4-2013)
9-9-7: RIDING ON BICYCLES:
Bicycle riding and seating regulations are established by Iowa Code section
321.234 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-8: SPEED AND STOPPING REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing. Speed and stopping regulations are
established by Iowa Code section 321.285 and any subsequent revisions thereto.
(Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-9: PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS:
Stop requirements before crossing a sidewalk, and related right- of-way to
pedestrians is established by Iowa Code section 321.353 and all subsequent
revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-10: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any other
vehicle upon a roadway. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle upon the
public roadways of the City to tow or attach any wheeled cart or extension to
the bicycle unless the attached object is specifically manufactured for such
use and utilized according to the manufacturer's instructions. (Ord. 13-19, 6-
4-2013)
9-9-11: CARRYING ARTICLES:
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one (1) hand upon the handlebar. (Ord.
13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-12: PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle upon the sidewalks, except in
designated areas or stands, or in areas where the parking of automobiles is
prohibited. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-13: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. The
City Engineering Department is hereby authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk
or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon and when such signs are
in place, no person shall disobey the same. Whenever any person is riding a
bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-14: LAMPS AND REFLECTORS:
Lamp and reflector regulations are established by Iowa Code section 321.397 and
any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
9-9-15: AUDIBLE SIGNAL:
Bicycle siren and whistle regulations are established by Iowa Code section
321.434 and any subsequent revisions thereto. (Ord. 13-19, 6-4-2013)
CHAPTER 10
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
9-10-1: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited; No Signs Required
9-10-2: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited At All Times; Signs Required
9-10-3: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours, Or By
Nonpermitted Vehicles; Signs Required
9-10-4: Parking Time Limited On Certain Streets; Signs Required
9-10-5: Standing For Loading Purposes
9-10-6: Bus And Taxicab Stands
9-10-7: Unlawful Parking
9-10-8: Individual Parking Spaces
9-10-9: Vehicles To Be Removed Or Disabled
9-10-10: Notice Of Removal Of Vehicle
9-10-11: Payment Of Costs For Removal Of Vehicle
9-10-12: Starting Parked Vehicle
9-10-13: Collections Of Fines For Illegal Stopping, Standing And Parking Of
Vehicles
9-10-14: Stopping, Standing And Parking Violations
9-10-15: Fines For Parking Violations
9-10-16: Parking Violation, Notice Of Fine
9-10-17: Parking Areas For Persons With Disabilities
9-10-18: Restricted Parking In Fire Lanes
9-10-19: Action Required Upon Notice Of Fine
9-10-20: Denial Of Parking Violation And Assignment Of Court Appearance Date
9-10-21: Administrative Review
9-10-22: Administrative Review Panel; Procedure
9-10-23: Failure To Admit Or Deny
9-10-24: Habitual Violator
9-10-25: Presumption And Penalty
9-10-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no signs shall be required to
make it illegal to stop, stand or park a vehicle contrary to the provisions of
this section. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the
following places:
   A.   On a sidewalk or multi-use trail or in such a manner as to obstruct any
portion thereof.
   B.   In front of a public or private driveway, or alley or approved access
or entrance, or in such a manner as to obstruct any portion of thereof.
   C.   Within an intersection.
   D.   On a crosswalk or in such a manner as to obstruct any portion of a
crosswalk.
   E.   Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop/
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a street.
   F.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   G.   On the roadway centerline side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb, or in the absence of a curb at the edge of the street.
   H.   Upon any portion of a public right-of-way situated between the outside
edge of the curb and the nearest adjacent property line, or in the absence of a
curb any portion of a public right-of-way situated between the outside edge of
the street and the nearest adjacent property line.
   I.   On any street in such manner that the vehicle is headed other than in
the direction of traffic and/or parked farther than eighteen (18) inches from
the face of the nearest curb or in the absence of a curb farther than eighteen
(18) inches from the nearest edge of the street.
   J.   Upon any street unless a different parking time limit is required, for
a period of time exceeding forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. Vehicles must be
moved at least twenty (20) feet in distance during each forty-eight (48) hour
time period in order to avoid penalty under this subsection.
   K.   On any street or alley in such manner or under such conditions as to
leave available the lesser of fifteen (15) feet of the width of the roadway
portion of any street or al-ley for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   L.   Upon any street for a period of time exceeding four (4) consecutive
hours for any oversized vehicle, trailer not attached to a towing vehicle or
any vehicle not registered as a passenger vehicle. The City Engineer or his
designee, upon request, may permit parking of any of the above for a period of
up to twenty-four (24) hours, pro-vided all other provisions of this Code are
complied with.
   M.   Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
   N.   Upon any public right-of-way or street, a vehicle or trailer leaking
motor oil, gasoline, antifreeze, brake fluid, power steering fluid,
transmission fluid, or any other fluid.
   O.   Upon any public right-of-way or street, a vehicle not displaying
current registration, or otherwise constituting an inoperable vehicle as set
out in title. 8, chapter 5 of this Code. Vehicles in violation of this
provision may be immediately towed. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012; amd. Ord. 23-12,
10-3-2023)
9-10-2: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking at any time,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time on any such street or
portion of street as indicated by said signs. The Mason City Engineering
Department shall direct the Operations and Maintenance Department to install
appropriate signs upon order of the City Council. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-3: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS, OR BY
NONPERMITTED VEHICLES; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during
certain hours or by nonpermitted vehicles, no person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle, or allow a vehicle to remain parked, upon such street or portion of
such street during the hours when such is prohibited, or without continuously
displaying a valid and readily visible City issued parking permit for that
section. The Mason City Engineering Department shall direct the Operations and
Maintenance Department to install appropriate signs upon order of the
Administrator.
Where temporary signs are erected at least eight (8) hours prior to the start
of a project prohibiting stopping, standing or parking during certain periods
for the purpose of snow removal, tree removal, street repairs or excavating, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, or allow a vehicle to remain
parked, upon such street or portion of such street during the hours signs are
in place. (Ord. 19-4, 5-21-2019)
9-10-4: PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS; SIGNS REQUIRED:
Where signs are erected limiting the time for which a vehicle may be parked,
then no person shall park a vehicle upon such street or portion of street for a
longer duration than specified by such sign. The Mason City Engineering
Department shall direct Operations and Maintenance Department to install
appropriate signs upon order of the City Council. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-5: STANDING FOR LOADING PURPOSES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or material
in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to such loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not
to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-6: BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS:
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street in any
Business District at any place other than at a bus or taxicab stand,
respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any
such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping and
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers. No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop or a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when
any stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed,
except that a driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers
when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter
or about to enter such zone. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-7: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
   A.   Displaying it for sale;
   B.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-8: INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES:
The Mason City Engineering Department shall designate the individual parking
spaces upon each street or public parking lot by lines or other appropriate
markings painted upon the lot, curb or street. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle across any such line or marking or to park any vehicle in such position
that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or
markings. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-9: VEHICLES TO BE REMOVED OR DISABLED:
Any vehicle parked upon any public street, avenue, alley or Municipal parking
lot in violation of any provision of this chapter may be removed by the Chief
of Police or other designated official to any off street parking area or to a
public or private garage and stored in such off street parking area or public
or private garage or lot until claimed by the owner thereof as hereinafter
provided. In the case of vehicles parked in violation of the habitual violator
provisions of this chapter, any police officer or parking enforcement officer
of the Police Department may, in lieu of removal, place a locking wheel chock
or other similar device on any wheel or tire of the vehicle to prevent its
removal until the owner or operator has appeared before the Parking Enforcement
Bureau as required by section
9-10-22 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-10: NOTICE OF REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
In the event of removal of a vehicle from any public street, avenue or alley by
the Police Department, the officer involved shall take reasonable efforts to
notify the registered owner of said vehicle as soon as possible of the
following facts:
   A.   The fact of removal of said vehicle, together with reasons therefor and
the place to which removed;
   B.   A general description of the vehicle, including license number;
   C.   The charges for removal and the daily cost of storage of said vehicle.
Notification to the registered owner by phone or in person is sufficient. If
unable to contact the registered owner, or, if the vehicle is not reclaimed by
the registered owner within fifteen (15) days of the initial notification,
written notification shall be sent by mail. The mailed notice to the owner
shall be addressed to the registered owner as shown by the registration
certificate on said vehicle and shall be deposited with postage prepaid, by
certified mail with return receipt requested, in the United States Post Office.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-11: PAYMENT OF COSTS FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
Before any vehicle so removed and stored shall be reclaimed by the owner or
other claimant, he shall satisfactorily identify himself and establish his
right, title or interest to said vehicle and shall pay all costs and charges in
connection with the removal and storage of said vehicle and all costs of
service of notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to reclaim such vehicle
without first paying all of the costs and charges pertaining to the removal and
storage of said vehicle. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-12: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-
2012)
9-10-13: COLLECTIONS OF FINES FOR ILLEGAL STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF
VEHICLES:
It shall be the duty of the Parking Enforcement Bureau to make regular
collections of money for violations of this chapter with respect to the
stopping, standing and parking of vehicles and to transmit such funds to the
City Clerk, as provided in section
8-2-5 of this Code, after which time the same shall be deposited with the
Director of Finance who shall credit the same as provided for in this Code.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-14: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Any person who parks any vehicle in any public place in violation of the terms
and provisions of this Code relating to the stopping, standing and parking of
vehicles, shall be guilty of a parking violation. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-15: FINES FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Except where otherwise provided, the fine for a violation of any parking
regulation of this chapter shall be as follows:
Violation Code Section Paid Within 30 Days Paid After 30 Days
                                                                                Code    Paid    Paid
Violation                                                                       Section Within  After
                                                                                        30 Days 30 Days
Failure to properly park in off street public parking space                     9-7-1   $20.00  $30.00
Parking in City parking lot: in excess of posted sign limit, leased parking     9-7-2   $20.00  $30.00
only, or parked more than 24 hours (if no sign)
Truck parking in off street public lot                                          9-7-3   $20.00  $30.00
Restricted parking:                                                                            
   On a sidewalk or multi-use trail or in such a manner as to obstruct any   9-10-1A $20.00  $30.00
portion thereof
   In front of a public or private driveway, alley or approved access or     9-10-1B $20.00  $30.00
entrance or in such a manner as to obstruct any portion thereof
   Within intersection                                                       9-10-1C $20.00  $30.00
   On a crosswalk or in such a manner as to obstruct any portion of a crosswa9-10-1D $20.00  $30.00
   Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop/yield sign o9-10-1E $20.00  $30.00
traffic control signal located at the side of a street
   Parking near street excavation/repair which obstructs traffic             9-10-1F $20.00  $30.00
   Double parking                                                            9-10-1G $20.00  $30.00
   Upon any portion of a public right-of-way situated between the outside edg9-10-1H $20.00  $30.00
of the curb or edge of a street and the nearest adjacent property line
   Headed wrong way or more than 18 inches                                   9-10-1I $20.00  $30.00
   Overtime for 48 hour limit                                                9-10-1J $20.00  $30.00
   Failure to preserve 15 feet roadway                                       9-10-1K $20.00  $30.00
   4 hour limit for non-passenger vehicles                                   9-10-1L $20.00  $30.00
   Parked within 5 feet of fire hydrant                                      9-10-1M $20.00  $30.00
   Vehicle or trailer leaking motor oil, gasoline, antifreeze, brake fluid,  9-10-1N $20.00  $30.00
power steer-ing fluid, transmission fluid, or any other fluid.
   Vehicle not displaying current registration, or otherwise constituting an 9-10-1O $20.00  $30.00
inoperable vehicle as set out in title
   No parking signs                                                          9-10-2  $20.00  $30.00
   During certain hours, or fail to display valid City issued parking permit 9-10-3  $20.00  $30.00
Overtime parking                                                                9-10-4  $20.00  $30.00
Overtime/loading zone                                                           9-10-5  $20.00  $30.00
Bus and taxi stops                                                              9-10-6  $20.00  $30.00
Unlawful parking:                                                                      $20.00  $30.00
   For sale or repair                                                        9-10-7  $20.00  $30.00
Improper parking:                                                                              
   Not within lined space                                                    9-10-8  $20.00  $30.00
   Alternate side parking, snow removal                                      9-10A-3 $20.00  $30.00
   Prohibited act in residential parking permit district                     9-10B-8 $20.00  $30.00
Persons with disabilities parking                                               9-10-17 $200.00 $200.00
Parking in fire lane                                                            9-10-18 $20.00  $30.00
 
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 21-16, 12-21-2021; Ord. 23-12,
10-3-2023)
9-10-16: PARKING VIOLATION, NOTICE OF FINE:
   A.   Issuance; Copies: Where a parking violation is observed for which a
fine is prescribed by section
9-10-15 of this chapter, a parking notice of fine may be issued by any officer
or parking enforcement employee of the Police Department, any officer or
firefighter of the Fire Department or any other City employee, or official,
designated by the City Administrator. Notices of fine shall be issued
electronically, or written upon serially numbered sets of parking notice of
fine forms with each copy to be clearly imprinted with the citation complaint
number. Copies of the notice of fine forms shall be used as follows: one (1)
shall be used as a notice of fine and shall be delivered to the owner or
operator of the vehicle, if present at the time the violation is observed, or,
in the alternative, securely affixed to the vehicle parked in violation of any
provision of this Code for which a parking notice of fine is authorized and one
(1) shall be placed on file with the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason
City Police Department.
   B.   Violations: Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked
or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or
any other City ordinance, an officer or designated City employee finding such
vehicle may take its registration number and such other information displayed
on the vehicle as may identify its owner or operator and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a notice of fine, in writing, on a form as provided
herein, for the owner or operator to appear on the charge against him or her at
the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason City Police Department or at the
City Clerk's Office as designated in the notice of fine.
   C.   Form Of Notice Of Fine: The parking notice of fine shall clearly
identify: the serial number assigned to the notice; the date, time, and
location of alleged violation; the vehicle make and license plate; the
employee's ID number; the alleged parking violation(s); the appropriate fine
for the violation ticketed; and similar instructions on how to respond or deny
the parking notice of fine.
YOU MAY ADMIT THE VIOLATION BY PAYMENT OF A FINE OF $20.00 WITHIN 30 DAYS OR
$30.00 THEREAFTER. THE FINE FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITY PARKING VIOLATIONS ARE
$200.00 IF PAID WITHIN 30 DAYS AND $200 THEREAFTER. YOU MAY DENY THIS CHARGE BY
APPEARING AT THE PARKING ENFORCEMENT BUREAU AT THE MASON CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT
OR AT THE OFFICE OF THE MASON CITY CITY CLERK WITHIN 30 DAYS OF ISSUANCE.
Fines may be paid by depositing the correct amount in the envelope and either
mailing it or delivery to the Mason City Police Department, 78 South Georgia,
or to the Mason City City Clerk's office, 10 1st St. N.W.
NOTICE: It may be illegal to park a vehicle upon the public streets, highways
or parking lots within the City if there are four or more unpaid, unanswered
Notices pending against the owner of such vehicle. Vehicle owners with unpaid
notices will be turned over to the County Treasurer for collection. Vehicle
owners with unpaid parking notices may be unable to register their vehicles
until fines have been paid.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012; amd. Ord. 21-16, 12-21-2021)
9-10-17: PARKING AREAS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
There are hereby established disabled parking areas upon the City streets,
alleys and Municipal and private parking lots to be administered as follows:
   A.   A persons with disabilities parking permit shall be displayed in a
motor vehicle as a removable windshield placard or on a motor vehicle as a
plate or sticker as provided in Iowa Code section 321L.2 when being used by a
person with a disability, either as an operator or passenger. Each removable
windshield placard shall be of uniform design and fabricated of durable
material, suitable for display from within the passenger compartment of a motor
vehicle and readily transferable from one vehicle to another. The placard shall
only be displayed when the motor vehicle is parked in a persons with
disabilities parking space. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
   B.   The use of a persons with disabilities parking space, located on either
public or private property as provided in Iowa Code sections 321L.5 and 321L.6,
by an operator of a motor vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit; by an operator of a motor vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit, but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Iowa Code section 321L.2, subsection 1b;
or by a motor vehicle in violation of the rules adopted by the State Department
of Transportation under Iowa Code section 321L.8, constitutes improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a misdemeanor for which a
scheduled fine shall be imposed upon the owner, operator, or lessee of the
motor vehicle or the person to whom the persons with disabilities parking
permit is issued. The scheduled fine for each violation shall be as established
in section 805.8A, subsection 1c of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012;
amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   The Mason City Engineering Department shall designate, by appropriate
signs, individual parking spaces upon streets, alleys and in Municipal and
private parking lots for vehicles operated by or for disabled persons. (Ord.
12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-18: RESTRICTED PARKING IN FIRE LANES:
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle in any place designated by the Fire
Department as a fire lane and posted as hereinafter provided, whether such fire
lane be upon publicly owned property or right-of-way or upon privately owned
property.
   B.   A fire lane shall be posted at least every fifty (50) linear feet
thereof with signs approximately twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18")
in dimension, which at a minimum shall contain the following language:
   FIRE LANE
   NO PARKING
A fire lane shall be deemed to encompass that area within a twenty five foot
(25') radius of any fire lane signposted pursuant to this section.
   C.   When an area is posted as a fire lane as provided in subsection B of
this section, a presumption shall arise that said area was designated as a fire
lane by or with the authority of the Fire Department. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-19: ACTION REQUIRED UPON NOTICE OF FINE:
The owner or operator of a vehicle alleged to be parked in violation of this
chapter shall admit or deny the violation within thirty (30) days of the date
of the notice of fine. A parking violation may be admitted by depositing the
correct amount of the fine together with the notice of fine and mailing or by
delivery of the payment to the Office of the City Clerk or to the Parking
Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City Police Department. A parking violation may
be denied by appearing in person at the Office of the City Clerk or at the
Parking Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City Police Department. If a parking
violation is neither admitted by payment of the specified fine nor denied by
appearance at the Office of the City Clerk or at the Parking Enforcement Bureau
of the Mason City Police Department within thirty (30) days of issuance, the
violation may be charged by uniform citation in accordance with the laws of
Iowa. More than one (1) parking violation may be alleged in a single citation.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-20: DENIAL OF PARKING VIOLATION AND ASSIGNMENT OF COURT APPEARANCE DATE:
A person who appears at the Office of the City Clerk or at the Parking
Enforcement Bureau of the Mason City Police Department may deny the parking
violation charged and may either request a court appearance date or may request
an administrative review. If a court appearance date is requested, a uniform
citation shall be issued in accordance with Iowa law and a date provided upon
which an appearance and plea to the charges contained in the parking citation
must be entered in the District Court of Cerro Gordo County, Iowa. The Parking
Enforcement Bureau shall then cause the citation to be filed with the Traffic
Division of the Office of the Clerk of the District Court for Cerro Gordo
County, Iowa. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-21: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
An owner or operator of a vehicle alleged to have been parked in violation of
any regulation contained in this chapter may, at the time of appearance at the
Office of the City Clerk or at the Police Department on a notice of fine,
request an administrative review of the alleged violation in lieu of a court
appearance. The request must be filed within thirty (30) days of the notice of
fine. It shall be on a form approved by the Chief of Police and shall include
the name, mailing address and phone number of the person requesting the review
and a statement of the facts upon which a denial of the charge is based. The
request for administrative review may be accepted by either the Office of the
City Clerk or the Parking Enforcement Bureau at the Mason City Police
Department. The date of filing shall be noted on the request and shall stop the
running of the thirty (30) day period during which the violation may be
admitted by payment of the initial fine amount. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-22: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PANEL; PROCEDURE:
   A.   An administrative review panel comprised of a Police Department
Supervisor, the City Clerk or the City Clerk's designee, and one (1) other City
employee designated by the City Administrator shall meet as needed to review
written requests for administrative review. The panel shall rule on all
requests within thirty (30) days of the date the request was filed. The review
shall be based on the written reasons stated in the request. A notice of fine
shall be voided by the panel if it finds the parking laws of the City or the
State have been erroneously applied and may be voided upon a finding of exigent
circumstances which should excuse a violation of the parking laws of the City.
   B.   Persons requesting administrative review shall promptly be notified by
ordinary mail of the action of the administrative review panel. If the panel
determines the notice of fine should be voided, such action shall be promptly
taken by the Parking Enforcement Bureau. If the notice of fine is upheld, the
owner or operator shall be notified of a certain date before which the
violation may be admitted by payment of the fine provided if paid before thirty
(30) days. The date shall allow a period of at least thirty (30) days from the
date of the notice of fine, not including the period provided for
administrative review, and shall in no case be less than fourteen (14) days
from the date of mailing of the notice. The said notice shall also inform the
owner or operator of his or her right to continue to deny the parking violation
by requesting a date upon which to appear and enter a plea before the Traffic
Division of the Iowa District Court for Cerro Gordo County in the same manner
as if the administrative review had not occurred. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-23: FAILURE TO ADMIT OR DENY:
It is a violation of this section for the owner or operator of a vehicle to
which a notice of fine has been issued to knowingly fail to admit or deny the
parking violation as provided in this chapter within thirty (30) days of the
date of the violation. A knowing failure or refusal to admit or deny a parking
violation charged by notice of fine may be inferred whenever a written notice
of failure to appear or admit one (1) or more notices of fine has been sent by
ordinary mail to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as shown by
the vehicle registration, and the owner or driver has not responded within ten
(10) days, and the notice has not been returned as being undeliverable.
Unpaid parking notices of fine will be forwarded to the Cerro Gordo County
Treasurer's Office for collection. Failure to admit or deny a notice of fine
may prohibit the registered owner from renewing his or her vehicle registration
until the notice of fine is resolved. (Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-24: HABITUAL VIOLATOR:
   A.   Habitual Violator Defined: Any person who has allowed four (4) or more
parking violation notices of fine issued on a motor vehicle registered in that
person's name to become delinquent and to whom one (1) or more notices required
by section
9-10-23 of this chapter has been sent shall be deemed to be a habitual
violator. For purposes of this section, a "delinquent parking notice of fine"
is one which has not been paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the
violation and the owner or operator has not appeared within that time to deny
the violation as required by this chapter.
   B.   Illegal To Park On Public Streets Or Lots: It is a violation of this
section for any vehicle owned or operated by a habitual violator to be parked
or allowed to remain standing upon any public street, alley or public parking
facility in the City.
   C.   Subject To Removal: A vehicle parked in violation of this section shall
be in the status of an illegally parked vehicle and the vehicle may be towed or
removed from the public street or City owned parking lot, and may be
temporarily prevented from being removed or moved through the use of a locked
wheel chocking device approved for use by the Chief of Police, as provided by
section
9-10-9 of this chapter.
Before any vehicle removed and stored or disabled pursuant to this section may
be reclaimed or returned to the registered owner or person having a legal
entitlement to the possession of the motor vehicle, such person shall
personally appear in the Office of the Parking Enforcement Bureau of the Mason
City Police Department and pay in full all delinquent parking notices of fine
pertaining to such vehicle. The Parking Enforcement Bureau shall, upon payment
of such delinquent parking citation/complaints, provide the registered owner or
person having a legal entitlement to possession a written release to be
presented to the towing/impoundment entity which, upon payment of all towing
and storing fees by the registered owner or person having legal entitlement to
possession, shall enable the individual to reclaim or redeem the impounded
vehicle. If the vehicle has been disabled, the locking device shall be removed
upon payment of all delinquent notices of fine pertaining to such vehicle.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
9-10-25: PRESUMPTION AND PENALTY:
For purposes of prosecution under this chapter, if a vehicle is found parked or
left unattended in violation of the provisions of this chapter and the identity
of the operator cannot be determined at the scene of the violation, the
registered owner thereof shall be prima facie responsible for said violation.
(Ord. 12-17, 12-18-2012)
ARTICLE A. ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING
SECTION:
9-10A-1: Application Of Article
9-10A-2: Notification To The Public
9-10A-3: Parking Prohibited Under Certain Conditions
9-10A-4: Signs Posted
9-10A-5: Removal Of Parked Or Unattended Vehicles
9-10A-6: Suspension Of Alternate Side Parking
9-10A-7: Penalty
9-10A-8: Extension Of Alternate Side Parking
9-10A-9: Emergency Snow Routes
9-10A-1: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of vehicles
or unattended vehicles on certain designated streets or parts of streets shall
apply from November 15 to March 31 of the fol-lowing year unless suspended by
the City Administrator. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-2: NOTIFICATION TO THE PUBLIC:
Alternate side parking shall be in effect from November 15 through March 31.
The provisions of this article prohibiting parking on parts of streets and
alleys shall become effective on November 15 of each year through March 31 of
the year following. The City shall notify the general public of the November 15
effective date each year through public announcement. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008;
amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-3: PARKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, abandon, or leave unattended any
vehicle on any street or alley in violation of the following provisions:
   A.   Parking shall be prohibited on the odd numbered side of the street
after seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. on an odd numbered day until four o’clock (4:
00) P.M. the following even numbered day.
   B.   Parking shall be prohibited on the even numbered side of the street
after seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. on an even numbered day until four o’clock (4:
00) P.M. the following odd numbered day.
   C.   The changeover period shall be between the hours of four o’clock (4:00)
P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. of each day.
   D.   Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the streets on each Saturday
from four o’clock (4:00) P.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and also on each
Sunday from six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00) P.M.
      Exception: Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the street from four
o’clock (4:00) P.M. to one o’clock (1:00) A.M. on Christmas Eve.
   E.   Parking shall be prohibited on all vehicle turnaround portions of the
cul-de-sac.
   F.   During alternate side parking, signs prohibiting parking at all times
on one (1) entire side of the street only shall not be enforced and alternate
side parking regulations shall be in effect.
   G.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to permit parking
on streets where parking is prohibited on both sides at all times or during
specified hours nor permit parking in areas where parking is otherwise
prohibited at all times except as permitted herein.
   H.   This article shall not apply to Highway 122 and U.S. Highway 65 south
of Eighth Street south and north of Fifth Street north, nor to the business
district.
   I.   For purposes of this article, the term “business district” is defined
as that area bounded by and including all streets which lie between Georgia
Avenue on the east, Adams Avenue on the west, Fourth Street south on the south
and Fourth Street north on the north. Also, the 3 block section of 2nd Street
NE that extends from North Georgia Avenue to North Massachusetts Avenue.
      Exception: During normal business hours, parking shall be permitted
within one hundred feet (100') of the main entrance of a commercial business
location on the side adjacent to the business. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008; amd.
Ord. 09-02, 2-17-2009; Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-4: SIGNS POSTED:
The provisions of this article shall be in full force and effect throughout the
City when signs are posted on primary or secondary roads at or near their
points of intersection with the corporate boundaries of the City stating:
   Alternate side parking is in effect November 15 through March 31.
(Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-5: REMOVAL OF PARKED OR UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
Any vehicle parked or otherwise left unattended in violation of any of the
provisions of this arti-cle is declared to be a nuisance per se and shall be
subject to removal by the City by means of towing or otherwise. Any removal and
resulting storage of such a vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner or
operator thereof as set out in section
9-10-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-6: SUSPENSION OF ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING:
Alternate side parking shall be in effect from November 15 through March 31 of
each year. Al-ternate side parking may be suspended or terminated by the City
Administrator through a public announcement. (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord.
23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-7: PENALTY:
   A.   Any community services or police officer of the Mason City Police
Department shall be authorized to issue notice of fines and or tow vehicles
blocking traffic or parking in violation of this Code. The owner of the vehicle
shall pay the costs of fines, towing and storage occasioned by the removal of
the vehicle as provided herein.
   B.   If a notice of fine for an alternate side parking violation, in a form
and manner prescribed by section
9-10-16 of this chapter, has been given in the manner prescribed in section
9-10-15 of this chapter, and the fine is not paid as prescribed in such notice
and as established by this Code, the bureau shall cause such violation to be
filed against the registered owner thereof who shall be prima facie responsible
for said violation. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to permit or allow
a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the provisions of this Code. The
penalty for each violation shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Fines not paid
within 30 days will increase to thirty dollars ($30). (Ord. 08-16, 11-4-2008;
amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-8: EXTENSION OF ALTERNATE SIDE PARKING:
The City Administrator, Operations Manager or designee may declare a snow
emergency through public announcement between April 1 and November 14 of each
year. Such public announcement of a snow emergency between April 1 and November
14 shall constitute notice to the general public and all the provisions of this
article shall be in effect until terminated by public announcement. (Ord. 08-
16, 11-4-2008; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
9-10A-9: EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES:
The following streets are hereby designated as emergency snow routes:
   First Street Northwest between Monroe Avenue to Pierce Avenue.
Alternate side parking rules in section
9-10A-3 of this article shall not apply to streets designated emergency snow
routes. Emergency snow routes shall be in effect when declared through public
announcement by the City Administrator or designee until terminated by public
announcement. Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of the street
designated as emergency snow routes when emergency snow routes are in effect.
(Ord. 09-02, 2-17-2009; amd. Ord. 23-12, 10-3-2023)
ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICTS
SECTION:
9-10B-1: Definitions
9-10B-2: Establishment Of Residential Parking Permit District Designation
9-10B-3: Posting Of Residential Parking Permit Signs
9-10B-4: Notice To Residents Of Designation Of Residential Parking Permit
District
9-10B-5: Issuance Of Residential Parking Permit
9-10B-6: Renewal Of Residential Parking Permit
9-10B-7: Exceptions
9-10B-8: Prohibited Acts
9-10B-9: Penalty
9-10B-10: Withdrawal Of Designation Of Residential Parking Permit District
9-10B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use within this article, the following words and terms are defined:
ENTITLED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor operated vehicle licensed for use on the
public roadway that is owned or operated by a resident within the residential
parking district listed on the permit or their guest.
PARKING TAG: A hanging tag that allows a person residing within a residential
parking district to park an entitled motor vehicle in that district.
RESIDENT: A person residing within the residential parking districts.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: A contiguous area containing a public street segment
between at least two (2) intersecting streets, alleys or private drives
accessing three (3) or more lots abutted by residential property, or
residential and nonbusiness property including, but not limited to, schools,
parks, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
   A.   Action to establish a residential parking permit district designation
may be made by a petition signed by one (1) adult occupant of each dwelling
unit in the residential district. The signatures must represent at least sixty
percent (60%) of the dwelling units in the residential district.
   B.   Upon receipt of a valid petition, designation of notice shall be sent
by regular mail to each residence in the proposed residential permit parking
district informing owner, tenant or party in possession of the date of Council
consideration of the resolution. The City Council may adopt a resolution
designating the residential parking permit district.
   C.   The resolution establishing the residential parking permit district
shall include the following:
      1.   The boundaries of the residential parking permit district; and
      2.   The days of the week and the hours during which a permit must be
displayed; and
      3.   If the permit restrictions are not intended to be in effect year
round, the dates when permit restrictions are effective; and
      4.   Any other restrictions deemed necessary by the City Council to
ensure adequate parking for residents within the district.
   D.   The effective date of the residential parking permit designation shall
be upon publication of the resolution.
   E.   Detailed records of each residential permit parking district shall be
maintained in the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-3: POSTING OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT SIGNS:
Following adoption of a resolution designating a residential parking permit
district, signs shall be erected in the designated area indicating the hours
which curbside parking in the residential parking permit district is
prohibited, unless the entitled motor vehicle properly displays an authorized
parking tag. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-4: NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT
DISTRICT:
Following adoption of a resolution to designate a residential parking permit
district, the City shall mail the following documents to the residents of every
dwelling within the designated district:
   A.   A notice of designation that shall inform the residents in the
designated district of:
      1.   The existence, exact location and numerical designation, if any, of
the residential parking permit district;
      2.   The parking restrictions applicable to all motor vehicle curbside
parking spaces along streets in the designated area that do not properly
display an authorized parking tag;
      3.   The procedure to obtain residential parking tag(s).
   B.   A residential parking permit on which the applicant is to provide the
following information for each vehicle to receive residential parking tag(s):
      1.   The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle;
      2.   The signature of the applicant for the residential parking permit;
      3.   The number of parking tags requested. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-5: ISSUANCE OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT:
   A.   Residential parking tag(s) shall be issued upon the submission of a
completed residential parking permit. Not more than two (2) residential parking
tags shall be issued to each dwelling unit.
   B.   The residential parking tag shall hang from the interior rearview
mirror with the tag number facing the windshield.
   C.   No residential parking tag(s) shall be issued for a vehicle whose owner
is not a resident in the designated residential parking permit district.
   D.   The holder of the residential parking permit shall be the owner of the
vehicle receiving the parking tag(s). (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-6: RENEWAL OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT:
   A.   The residential parking tag(s) shall be renewed annually during the
month of July and will expire on July 31 of each year.
   B.   Upon the residential permit holder's submission of a completed
residential parking permit, the holder shall receive new parking tag(s) valid
for a one (1) year period. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-7: EXCEPTIONS:
These provisions shall not apply to clearly marked service or delivery vehicles
doing business in the designated residential parking permit district during the
time they are working in the district insofar as they are clearly marked. (Ord.
13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be a violation for any person to:
   A.   Park an entitled motor vehicle in designated residential parking
districts during restricted hours without displaying the proper tag by hanging
the tag from the interior rearview mirror with the tag number facing the
windshield.
   B.   Represent in any manner or form that a motor vehicle is entitled to an
authorized parking permit when it is not so entitled. The display of a parking
tag on a motor vehicle not entitled to such a parking tag shall constitute such
a representation and shall be a simple misdemeanor.
   C.   Duplicate, or attempt to duplicate, by any means, a parking tag. It
shall also be a violation to display upon any vehicle such a duplicate parking
tag. These shall be simple misdemeanors. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
9-10B-9: PENALTY:
If a notice of fine for prohibited acts in a residential parking permit
district violation, on a form and manner prescribed by section
9-10-16 of this chapter, has been given in the manner prescribed in section
9-10-15 of this chapter, and the fine is not admitted or denied as prescribed
in such notice and as established by this Code, the bureau shall cause such
violation to be filed against the registered owner thereof who shall be prima
facie responsible for said violation. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person
to permit or allow a motor vehicle to be parked in violation of the provisions
of this Code. The penalty for each violation shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00)
if paid within thirty (30) days of issuance. After thirty (30) days, the fine
increases to twenty dollars ($20.00).
A violation of prohibited acts in subsections
9-10B-8B and C of this article constitutes a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-30,
11-5-2013)
9-10B-10: WITHDRAWAL OF DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT DISTRICT:
   A.   Action to withdraw a residential parking permit district designation
may be made by a petition signed by one (1) adult occupant of each dwelling
unit in the residential parking permit district. The signatures must represent
at least sixty percent (60%) of the dwelling units in the designated district.
   B.   Upon receipt of a valid petition, the City Council shall set a public
hearing on the question of withdrawing the residential parking permit district
designation. A notice shall be sent by regular mail to each residence in the
residential permit parking district informing owner, tenant or party in
possession of the date of Council consideration of the resolution potentially
withdrawing the residential parking permit district.
Upon completion of the public hearing, the City Council may repeal the
resolution designating the residential parking permit district.
   C.   Following any repeal of the resolution establishing a residential
parking permit district, a notice shall be sent by regular mail to each
residence in the residential permit parking district informing owner, tenant or
party in possession of the withdrawal of residential parking permit district
status.
   D.   The effective date of withdrawal of the designation shall be upon
publication of the repealing resolution. (Ord. 13-30, 11-5-2013)
CHAPTER 11
THROUGH STREETS
SECTION:
9-11-1: Purpose
9-11-2: Streets Designated
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
For the purposes of this chapter, a "through street" shall mean a street
designated as such by the City Council, whereby all vehicles shall stop or
yield right-of-way before entering or crossing the same. (Ord. 12-19, 12-18-
2012)
9-11-2: STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets and avenues are hereby designated as through streets:
   A.   Streets:
State Street from Monroe Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
State Street from Taft Avenue to Grover Avenue.
First Street north from Winnebago Way to East State Street.
First Street south from Connecticut Avenue to Delaware Avenue.
First Street south from Washington Avenue to Crescent Drive.
Fourth Street north from Washington Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Fourth Street south from Monroe Avenue to President Avenue.
Sixth Street south from Garfield Avenue to Monroe Avenue.
Sixth Street south from Kentucky Avenue to Illinois Avenue.
Seventh Street south from Monroe Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Eighth Street north from Pierce Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
Eighth Street south from Jefferson Avenue to Kentucky Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Carolina Avenue to Hampshire Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Pierce Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
Ninth Street north from Monroe Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue.
Ninth Street south from east line Bel Air Addition to Illinois Avenue.
Twelfth Street north from Eisenhower Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Twelfth Street north from Elm Drive to California Avenue.
Twelfth Street south from Federal Avenue to Carolina Avenue.
Thirteenth Street north from Federal Avenue to Elm Drive.
Fifteenth Street south from Taft Avenue to Kentucky Avenue.
Seventeenth Street north from Quincy Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Nineteenth Street south from west City limits to Illinois Avenue.
Twenty Third Street south from Monroe Avenue to Federal Avenue.
Twenty Seventh Street south from Federal Avenue to Monroe Avenue.
   B.   Avenues And Drives:
Benjamin Avenue from Fifteenth Street to Twenty Sixth Street south.
Birch Drive from Hampshire Avenue north to Illinois Avenue north.
California Avenue from north City limits to south City limits.
Carolina Avenue from Fourth Street north to north City limits.
Carolina Avenue from State Street to Nineteenth Street south.
Cerro Gordo Way from Fourth Street south to Garfield Avenue.
College Drive from Fourth Street south to Twelfth Street north.
Crescent Drive from First Street south to Fourth Street south.
Eisenhower Avenue from Nineteenth Street south to north City limits.
Garfield Avenue from Fourth Street south to Tenth Street south.
Grover Avenue from Fourth Street south to State Street.
Hampshire Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Illinois Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Ninth Street south.
Jackson Avenue from First Street north to Ninth Street north.
Jefferson Avenue from Fifth Street south to Eighth Street south.
Jefferson Avenue from Nineteenth Street south to Twenty Ninth Street south.
Kentucky Avenue from south City limits to Twelfth Street north.
Manor Drive from Kentucky Avenue to east line Bel Air Addition.
Maple Drive from Fourth Street south to East State Street.
Monroe Avenue from Twenty Seventh Street south to Twelfth Street north.
Pennsylvania Avenue from Eighth Street south to Thirteenth Street north.
Pierce Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Nineteenth Street south.
President Avenue from Sixth Street south to Fourth Street south.
Quincy Avenue from Fourteenth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Rhode Island Avenue from Twelfth Street north to Seventeenth Street north.
Taft Avenue from south City limits to Twelfth Street north.
Virginia Avenue from East State Street to Nineteenth Street south.
Winnebago Way from Fourth Street south to First Street north. (Ord. 12-19, 12-
18-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
   C.   Highways:
Highway 122 from the west corporate limits to the east corporate limits.
U.S. Highway 65 from the north City limits to the south City limits. (Ord. 12-
19, 12-18-2012)
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Numbering Of Buildings
10-1-2: Duty To Number
10-1-3: New Construction
10-1-4: Maintenance Of Numbers
10-1-5: City To Place Numbers
10-1-1: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS:
All buildings, houses, portions of land and lots adjacent to or abutting upon
streets and avenues shall be known and designated by the numbers on the plat
and schedule of building numbers in the City on file in the Office of the City
Engineer, and entitled and designated HOUSE NUMBERS. (1953 Code § 5-1; amd.
Ord. 91-3, 2-5-1991; 2017 Code)
10-1-2: DUTY TO NUMBER:
As provided in section 364.12(3d), Code of Iowa, it shall be the duty of the
owner of any building facing, abutting or opening upon any street or avenue or
other public way in the City to place upon said building suitable numbers
composed of figures not less than three inches (3") in height and of, or
painted on, glass or some metallic substance, and shall conform to and be in
accordance with the plat and schedule of building numbers referred to in
section
10-1-1 of this chapter. (1953 Code § 5-2; amd. 1985 Code)
At the time of building permit approval, the City Engineer or designee shall
assign an address to a new or relocated structure. Each structure shall be
assigned only one (1) address, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
(2017 Code)
10-1-3: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Any building facing, abutting or opening upon any street, avenue or public way
hereafter moved, erected, constructed or completed shall, upon the completion
of the construction or moving thereof, be promptly numbered by the owner
thereof in accordance with the plat and schedule of building numbers referred
to in section
10-1-1 of this chapter. (1953 Code § 5-3)
10-1-4: MAINTENANCE OF NUMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises required herein to be
numbered to maintain such building numbers in good condition and in a
conspicuous place where the same may be seen and read from the street. (1953
Code § 5-4)
10-1-5: CITY TO PLACE NUMBERS:
Should any owner fail to number or to maintain numbers upon any building owned
by him, as required by the provisions of this chapter, for a period of ten (10)
days after the same is required, the City Engineer may cause such numbers to be
placed and shall report the cost thereof to the City Council who shall assess
the same against the property or premises so numbered and order the same
collected with the ordinary taxes assessed against such premises. (1953 Code §
5-5)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
10-2A-1: Code Adopted
10-2A-2: Amendments To Building Code
10-2A-3: Building Inspections Division
10-2A-4: Building Advisory And Appeals Board
10-2A-5: Appeals, Method Of Filing
10-2A-6: Moving Of Structures
10-2A-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City, the most current
edition of the International Building Code adopted by the State of Iowa
Building Code Commissioner's Office, reviewed and/or modified, from time to
time, by the Building Advisory and Appeals Board and the Chief Building
Official, which Building Code, which by this reference, is duly adopted, with
the following amendments, as fully and completely as if set out in detail
herein.
An official copy of the International Building Code, as hereby adopted,
including a certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective
date thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the City
Public Library for public inspection. (Ord. 17-5, 6-6-2017)
10-2A-2: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
The City Building Code shall be amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. (Name of jurisdiction) City of Mason City, Iowa.
Section 101.4.1 Gas. Change "international" to "uniform".
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. Change "international" to "uniform", delete last
sentence.
Section 101.4.4 Property Maintenance. Delete entire paragraph.
Section 102.6 Existing Structures. Delete "International Property Maintenance
Code".
Section 103.3 Deputies. Delete last sentence.
Section 105.2(1) Work Exempt From Permit. Building.
Section 105.2(1), referring to "one story detached accessory building, used as
tool and storage sheds", shall be and the same is hereby repealed.
Section 109.2, chapter 1 of the International Building Code pertaining to
permit fees, shall be as follows: Building permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
Section 423.3 Critical Emergency Operations. Delete.
Section 423.4 Group E Occupancies. Delete.
Chapter 11 Accessibility. Delete.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Delete.
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Delete.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete.
Appendix A-K. Delete in "International Building Code" 2009.
(Ord. 17-5, 6-6-2017)
10-2A-3: BUILDING INSPECTIONS DIVISION:
There is hereby established in the administrative body of the City, within the
Development Services Department, the Building Inspections Division. Said
division shall be the "enforcement agency" for all matters contained in this
title. The division shall be under the supervision of the Chief Building
Official.
   A.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Official for the
City to administer and enforce all of the Building Codes adopted by ordinance
by the City Council to provide a safe and sanitary environment for the citizens
of Mason City. Said Chief Building Official shall be empowered to inspect any
and all buildings and other structures, public or private and to, as herein
provided, condemn and order removed or remodeled and put into proper and safe
condition for the citizens of this City, as set out in the building codes of
the City. (Ord. 13-07, 3-5-2013)
10-2A-4: BUILDING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
   A.   Board Established: There is hereby created a Building Advisory and
Appeals Board, as required by chapter 1, section 112 of the International
Building Code and this Code, which shall be composed of five (5) members,
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The Chief
Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to
the board.
   B.   Appointment; Terms: Said members of the board shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall serve for a period
of five (5) years from April 1 following their appointment, except appointments
to fill vacancies for the unexpired term of any member. Any member may be
removed from office by the Mayor for cause.
   C.   Organization Of Board: The board shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from among its members. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Vice
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The
board shall meet at City Hall, and all meetings of the board shall be open to
the public. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The
board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
it shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Chief Building Official
and the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
   D.   Duties And Powers: The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have
the following powers and duties:
      1.   Adopt reasonable rules and regulations, and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the Chief Building Official with duplicate
copies to the appellant and the City Clerk.
      2.   Recommend to the City Council such new legislation as is consistent
therewith.
      3.   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by the Chief Building
Official in the enforcement of the Building Code as set out in this article.
      4.   Authorize upon appeal modifications to the Building Code, as
provided in section 104.10 of the International Building Code, the compliance
of any order or interpretation of the Chief Building Official as will not be
contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this Code will result in unnecessary hardship
and so that the spirit of the Code shall be observed and substantial justice
done.
   E.   Factors To Be Considered: In considering all appeals to the Building
Code, the board shall, before making any finding in a specific case, first
determine that the proposed modification will not impair the public health,
safety, comfort, morals and welfare of the City.
In the event that a modification is granted, the board shall observe the
conditions as set out in sections 104.11, 104.11.1 and 104.11.2 of the
International Building Code.
      1.   In lieu of or in addition to administrative regulations, the board
may grant a limited extension of time for the compliance of any order or
notice, provided the board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence
relating to the following:
         a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict
letter of any notice or order; and
         b.   Such an extension is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter in securing the public health, safety and general
welfare.
      2.   The board may grant a modification in a specific case and from a
specific provision of this title subject to appropriate conditions; and
provided the board makes specific findings of fact based on the evidence
presented in the record as a whole and related to the following:
         a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out a strict
interpretation or order; and
         b.   Due to the particular circumstances presented, the effect of the
application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; and
         c.   Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
   F.   Adoption Of Modification: Upon appeal, or by adoption of a
modification, the board, by a majority vote, may approve a modification for the
building of a new structure which cannot practicably meet the standards of the
Code. Prior to considering any modification, public notice shall be given. A
modification, if granted, shall:
      1.   State in what manner the modification from the specific provision(s)
is to be allowed; and
      2.   State the conditions under which the modification is to be made; and
      3.   Be based upon specific findings of fact based on evidence related to
the following:
         a.   There are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict
letter of the specific provision common to structures to which the modification
will apply; and
         b.   Such modification is in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.
   G.   Appeals Board Jurisdiction: Any persons affected by any written notice,
but not limited to the following notices, or any persons wishing to submit any
petition, but not limited to the following petitions, may appeal to the
Building Advisory and Appeals Board in accordance with the City administrative
procedures ordinance:
      1.   Notice of Building Code violation.
      2.   Petition for modification. (Ord. 04-4, 1-6-2004)
10-2A-5: APPEALS, METHOD OF FILING:
The Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or interpretation made by the Chief
Building Official in the enforcement of the Building Code. Appeals to the board
may be filed by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Chief Building Official.
Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the date of the offending
ruling, decision, interpretation or order of the Chief Building Official with
the Building Advisory and Appeals Board, a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. A filing fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council
shall be paid to the City Clerk by the party filing such an appeal.
   A.   Appeals Board Procedures: Any builder, engineer, architect or developer
entitled to service under the Building Code may appeal from any requirement,
decision, interpretation, order or any action of the Chief Building Official
under this title by filing such appeal at the Office of the Chief Building
Official, Mason City, Iowa. All appeals shall be in writing and submitted to
the Chief Building Official containing the following information:
      1.   Names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
      2.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants involved in the notice and order.
      3.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support
the contentions of the appellant.
      4.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reason(s) why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
      5.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses.
      6.   The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at
least one (1) appellant as to the truth of the matter stated in the appeal.
   B.   Scheduling And Notice Of Hearing: As soon as practicable after
receiving the written appeal, the Chief Building Official shall fix a date,
time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall be
not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the
appeal was filed with the Chief Building Official. Written notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the
date of the hearing to each appellant by the Secretary of the board either by
causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by
mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his
address shown on the appeal. Said notice of hearing shall be by certified mail.
   C.   Hearing: The procedures will be conducted as set out in the City
administrative procedures ordinance. The concurring vote of three (3) members
of the board, or in the case of only having a quorum for said hearing the
concurring vote of two (2) members, shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Chief Building Official or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to
pass under the Building Code or to effect any modification in this Code.
      Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of
the Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have recourse to trial as
provided by statute.
   D.   Decision On Appeal: In exercising the powers granted, the Building
Advisory and Appeals Board may, in conformity with law, modify the order,
requirement, decision or interpretation appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or interpretation as should be made, and to that end,
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord.
04-4, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
10-2A-6: MOVING OF STRUCTURES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
 
ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF Interpreted as set out in section 104.11 of
CONSTRUCTION:                      the International Building Code.
MODIFICATION:                      Interpreted as set out in section 104.10 of
                                   the International Building Code.
STREET:                            All public streets, roads, highways, alleys
                                   or other public places.
                                   Any house, garage, building or other object
STRUCTURE:                         which is to be moved on structure movers'
                                   trucks or skids.
TESTS:                             Interpreted as set out in section 104.11.2
                                   of the International Building Code.
 
   B.   License Required, Fee And Term: No person shall move or cause to be
moved upon, over or across any street or from any lot or parcel of ground to
another lot or parcel of ground any structure unless such person has qualified
as a structure mover and has obtained a license to engage in such business from
the City Clerk as hereinafter provided. As application for the license, the
structure mover shall include information related to his/her experience in
moving structures and the equipment to be used. The license fee to be paid for
said license shall be set by resolution of the Council and shall expire on
March 31 of each year.
      1.   Exception: A structure with a ground floor area of seven hundred
fifty (750) square feet or less, has no horizontal dimension greater than
twenty five feet (25') and a loaded height no greater than fifteen feet (15')
may be moved by an unlicensed person; provided, that all other requirements of
this chapter are met.
   C.   Moving Permit Required: Every person shall, before moving any
structure, obtain a moving permit from the Chief Building Official. The fee for
a moving permit shall be calculated in the same manner as a building permit.
   D.   Insurance Required: Except for a move exempted under subsection B1 of
this section, prior to issuance of a moving permit, the applicant shall file
proof of public liability insurance for the period said permit is in effect
with minimum limits set by resolution of the Council for property damage, for a
single personal injury or death, and for multiple injuries or deaths, which
insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the City on account of any and all
damage or injury, including death, to real or personal property, whether public
or private, which arises out of or is connected with or caused by the moving of
any structure over, upon or across any public street, alley or other public
place.
   E.   Application For Permit: An application for a moving permit shall be in
writing upon forms furnished by the Chief Building Official and shall contain,
among other things, the following information:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant, proof of licensing (if not
exempt) and equipment proposed to be used.
      2.   The dimensions of the structure to be moved and its maximum heights
when loaded.
      3.   The present location and the proposed location of the structure.
      4.   The route over which the structure is to be moved, the type and
height above the street of obstructions, including trees, the time when removal
will begin and the approximate length of time necessary to complete the
operation.
      5.   The time when the structure will be first moved into or within the
corporate limits and the length of time said structure will be in the process
of moving within said limits.
      6.   The name and address of the owner of said structure and the proposed
use of said structure upon its new location if such new location is within the
City.
   F.   Additional Notice: The Development Review Committee may require the
owner or mover to provide additional public notice, through publication of a
notice in the official newspaper and/or other means, if the proposed move
involves a long period, may disrupt activities on adjacent properties along the
move route or at the site to which the structure is moved, or will potentially
block or slow progress on arterial or collector streets during peak hours.
   G.   Development Review Committee: All permit applications to move a
structure within the City limits shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee, as established in section 12-7-1 of this Code. The Development
Review Committee shall review the proposed time of the move, the move route of
the structure, determine if City and public utilities are affected, review the
final placement of the structure and advise the Chief Building Official
regarding any pertinent requirements affecting or affected by the proposed
move. Any utility or similar entity with equipment or appurtenances located
within, over or upon any street located within the path of the move shall be
notified of the date, time and place of the meeting. The Development Review
Committee may require additional review for certain structures and moving
routes prior to final consideration of a permit by the Chief Building Official.
   H.   Other Agencies: If a structure is moved upon, over or across any street
or crossing under the jurisdiction of any other agency or entity (such as the
Iowa Department of Transportation or a railroad), the appropriate permits or
waivers, if required, shall be applied for prior to approval of a moving permit
by the City. Proof of application for or issuance of such permit(s) or waiver
(s) shall be provided to the Chief Building Official. If the affected agency or
entity cedes jurisdiction to the City, written confirmation of the same from
the affected agency shall be provided. The structure shall not be moved until
all required permits or waivers have been issued.
   I.   Final Placement Of Structure: The structure shall meet all applicable
requirements of the zoning district applying to the lot upon which the
structure is to be moved, according to title 12 of this Code, as well as all
applicable requirements of this title.
   J.   Issuance Of Permit: Upon a determination by the Chief Building Official
that all requirements are met, the Chief Building Official shall issue the
permit.
   K.   Denial Of Permit: The Chief Building Official shall deny a permit to
move a structure when the City Engineer determines that the structure is of
such size, weight, dimensions or character as to likely cause substantial
damage or injury to any street or to any private property abutting a street,
including trees overhanging a street or alley, unless necessary accommodations
can be made with the City and/or adjoining private property owners to mitigate
any negative impacts.
   L.   Clearing Of Route:
      1.   The City of Mason City Arborist Department, upon request, may assist
the mover in the proper pruning and clearing of City owned trees or trees
otherwise encroaching upon the right-of-way. Should this department be
unavailable to perform said trimming, the mover may employ a licensed and
bonded tree trimmer from a list of such businesses approved by the City.
      2.   The mover shall make all arrangements and accommodations for raising
or otherwise moving of utility lines or structures with the appropriate utility
company.
   M.   Escort: The Chief Building Official, in consultation with the City
Engineer, may require that part or the entire move be escorted by warning
vehicles, consisting of vehicles displaying flashing lights and "Wide Load"
signs as necessary. Alternatively, the Chief Building Official may require the
move to be escorted by police vehicles. The structure mover shall schedule the
move according to available police personnel, as determined by the Chief of
Police, and shall pay all associated costs.
   N.   Planking Street: The City Engineer shall have the authority to require
the planking of any street when such planking is deemed advisable by him,
having due regard for the place, manner, form, condition and type of street
over which the structure is to be moved.
   O.   Restrictions During Move:
      1.   Caution Signals: It shall be the duty of the structure mover to
provide proper caution lights or flares during the hours of darkness and to
provide flagmen when necessary for the safe movement of the structure on any
public street.
      2.   Barricading Intersections: It shall be the duty of the structure
mover to place barricades in the intersections of streets when required by the
City Engineer or when reasonably required for public safety.
      3.   Parking Restrictions: If required by the City Engineer, the
structure mover shall place "No Parking By Order Of Police" signs in visible
locations in the right-of-way, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
move.
      4.   Barricades And Signs: All barricades and signs shall conform to the
current edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). The
applicant shall provide conforming barricades and/or signs, or may obtain them
from the Operations and Maintenance Department during regular business hours,
upon payment of a deposit to ensure return of the barricades and/or signs in
good condition.
   P.   Bridge Restrictions And Weight Limit Embargoes:
      1.   Any move route that requires passage over bridges or overpasses
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer determines that a
structural analysis is warranted, related costs or a portion thereof may be
assessed to the applicant.
      2. Any move route over streets with weight limit embargoes shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may deny use of any embargoed
street.
   Q.   Report To City Engineer And Chief Building Official: Every person
granted a permit for the moving of a structure shall report to the City
Engineer and the Chief Building Official within twenty four (24) hours after
the moved structure is placed upon any lot within the City. It shall be the
duty of the City Engineer, within ten (10) days after receipt of such report,
to inspect all streets over which said structure has been moved and to
determine the extent of the damage to such streets or private property abutting
such streets. If the moving of said structure has caused any damage to such
streets or private property, the said mover shall be responsible for repairs or
replacement, meeting current State, County and/or City requirements and
standards. Upon failure of the mover to complete repairs or replacement in a
reasonable time after notice from the City Engineer of the damage or injury
required to be repaired, said City Engineer may repair or cause to be repaired
said damage and injury and hold sureties on the mover's bond or on the
insurance carrier responsible for payment and the cost of such repairs.
      In addition to the above damages, costs will be filed for damages to
trees and shrubbery at the current cost of the species and labor.
   R.   Report To Police, Fire Department, Utility Companies During Move: Every
mover shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department or his assistants, the
Chief of the Police Department or his assistants, and affected utility
companies each night the exact location of the structure while being moved.
Except under unavoidable circumstances, no structure shall be left standing on
any street for a period of more than twenty four (24) hours.
   S.   Unlawful Moving: It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause
to be moved a structure upon, over or across any street, except the route
designated, within the time specified and with the equipment specified by the
permit granted for the moving of such structure. An extension of time may be
granted by the Chief Building Official under unavoidable circumstances.
   T.   Temporary Placement Of Moved Structure: A structure that has been moved
from its original site shall not be temporarily placed on any parcel for a
period of longer than forty eight (48) hours. The Chief Building Official may
grant an extension if a structure is in the act of being moved in accordance
with a valid moving permit, and unavoidable circumstances require a structure
to be temporarily placed on a parcel other than the parcel indicated on the
moving permit. This requirement shall not apply to structures placed
temporarily on City owned property, if approved by the City Administrator.
   U.   Building Advisory And Appeals Board Authority: In addition to the
authority granted to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board by this article,
the Building Advisory and Appeals Board shall have authority to require the
Chief Building Official to issue or deny issuance of a permit for the moving of
any structure where, by reason of peculiar topographical conditions or other
unusual circumstances or conditions, the strict enforcement of the limitations
of this title would be unreasonable and would amount to a practical
confiscation of the structure, and would result in particular hardship upon the
owner, other than the costs related to the move; provided, that the relief
sought can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without injury to streets and property abutting thereon and without
substantially impairing the general intent and purpose of this title. (Ord. 13-
09, 3-19-2013; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
10-2B-1: General Provisions
10-2B-2: Electrical Inspector
10-2B-3: Licenses
10-2B-4: Classes Of Licenses
10-2B-5: License Fees
10-2B-6: Expiration Of License
10-2B-7: Fraudulent Use Of Licenses
10-2B-8: Board Of Electrical Examiners And Appeals
10-2B-9: Right To Appeal Decision Of Electrical Inspector
10-2B-10: Authority Of Board Of Electrical Examiners And Appeals
10-2B-11: Permits For Electrical Work
10-2B-12: Electrical Service Connections
10-2B-13: Covering Work Before Inspection
10-2B-14: Power Of Inspector If Work Is Covered
10-2B-15: National Electrical Code
10-2B-16: Amendments To National Electrical Code
10-2B-17: Penalty For Violations
10-2B-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   This Electrical Code establishes the office of electrical inspector;
prescribes the duties of said inspector; provides the rules for the prevention
of fire, safety of life and the installation of wiring and equipment and
operation thereof; provides for permits and permit fees for the installation of
electrical equipment and wiring; provides for the examination and licensing of
electricians; provides for the adoption of the current edition of the National
Electrical Code as set out in section
10-2B-15 of this article; and provides a penalty for the violation hereof.
(Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2B-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Office Established: There is hereby established in the Building
Inspections Services Division of the City, an electrical inspection office,
consisting of one (1) electrical inspector, under the supervision of the Chief
Building Official. The term "inspector" as used within this article shall mean
"electrical inspector". The electrical inspector shall enforce the provisions
of this Code and all building codes in a manner consistent with the intent
thereof.
      The inspector shall perform the duties necessary for the enforcement of
the Electrical Code of the City and to act as a designated representative of
the Chief Building Official as needed.
   B.   Qualifications: The electrical inspector shall hold such certifications
necessary to complete residential and commercial building inspections as
required by Iowa Code and this code, including electrical inspections.
   C.   Duties: The inspector shall inspect all work authorized by any permit
to assure compliance with provisions of this Code and peripherally all codes or
amendments thereto, approving or condemning said work in whole or in part as
conditions require. The inspector may issue, upon request, a certificate of
approval for any work approved. The inspector shall condemn and reject all work
done or being done or materials used or being used which do not, in all
respects, comply with the provisions of these codes and amendments thereto; and
shall order changes in workmanship or materials or both, essential to obtain
compliance with the provisions of these codes. The electrical inspector shall
investigate any construction or work regulated by these codes and shall issue
such notices and orders as provided in the following subsections:
      1.   Right Of Entry:
         a.   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of
the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this Code or other applicable
law, the inspector, or a duly authorized representative, hereby is authorized
to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and
perform any duty imposed upon the inspector by this Code or other applicable
law; provided, that:
         (1)   If property is occupied, the inspector shall first present
proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reasons
therefor;
         (2)   If property is not occupied, the inspector shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If entry
cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control
of the property cannot be found, after due diligence or if entry is refused,
the inspector, or authorized representative, shall have recourse to every
remedy provided by law, to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.
         b.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the inspector, or authorized
representative, has reasonable cause to believe the building or premises is so
hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard
the public health or safety, the inspector shall have the right to immediately
enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to
effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied
or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If
the property be occupied, the inspector shall first present proper credentials
to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the
purpose of the inspection.
      No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made as
provided in this subsection, to promptly permit the inspector, or authorized
representative, to make any inspection provided for by this subsection C. Any
person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      2.   Reinspections:
         a.   The inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to make at such
times and as often as, in the inspector's discretion, it may seem necessary,
thorough reinspection of the installation in or on any building, structure or
premises of all electrical wiring, electrical devices and electrical material
now installed or that may hereafter be installed.
         b.   When the installation of any such wiring device or material is
found to be in violation of this Code, the person, firm, corporation or
governmental agency owning, using or operating the same, shall be notified in
writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such
wiring, device or material in compliance with this Code and to have such work
completed within a period of ten (10) days after such notice, or within such
other reasonable period specified by the electrical inspector in said notice
and shall pay such fees as are required by this Code.
         c.   When an additional inspection trip is necessary to correct a
violation of the Electrical Code, an additional fee (set by a resolution of the
City Council) for each trip may be charged at the discretion of the Chief
Building Official.
      3.   Authority To Disconnect:
         a.   The inspector is hereby empowered to disconnect or to order, in
writing, the discontinuance of electrical service to wiring, devices or
materials found to be dangerous and a hazard to life, health and property until
the installation of such wiring device or material has been made safe as
directed by the inspector.
         b.   Any person, firm, corporation, public utility, political
subdivision or governmental agency ordered to discontinue such electrical
service shall do so within twenty four (24) hours after the receipt of such
written notice and shall not reconnect such service or allow or cause the same
to be reconnected until notified to do so by the electrical inspector. Refusal
or failure or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be
considered, by the inspector, a violation of this Code. The inspector may then
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate the refusal to comply with any such notice or order. The Chief Building
Official, the Chief of the Fire Department, or the duty officer, shall also
have the authority to cause the discontinuance of electrical energy to a
structure or component when hazardous to firefighters in their line of duty or
work.
      4.   Stop Orders: Whenever any work regulated by this Code is being done
contrary to the provisions thereof, the electrical inspector may order the work
stopped by notice, in writing, served on any persons engaged in doing or
causing such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such
work until authorized by the electrical inspector to proceed with the work.
(Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. Ord. 24-12, 10-15-2024)
10-2B-3: LICENSES:
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or cause the installation,
maintenance, alteration or repair of any electrical equipment within the scope
of this Code unless such person, firm or corporation shall first have obtained
from the City of Mason City or the State of Iowa an electrical contractor's
license or a City electrical maintenance license. Nor shall any electrical
contractor employ any but licensed master electricians, electrical journeymen,
qualified electrical apprentices or unclassified workers licensed by the State
of Iowa working under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed
master electrician or a licensed journeyman electrician, and also with the
exception that no license shall be required in order to execute or perform any
of the classes of electrical work exempted by the provisions of this article.
Every person holding a valid State of Iowa license shall register with the City
electrical inspector of the City of Mason City prior to performing any
electrical work within the corporate limits of the City of Mason City. Each
registrant shall place on file with the City electrical inspector a copy of
his/her State of Iowa license.
No license shall be required for any of the following described work:
   A.   Electrical Supply Agencies: The installation, alteration or repair of
electrical equipment installed by or for any electrical supply agency in the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity.
   B.   Electrical Equipment Or Apparatus: Any work involved in the
manufacturing, testing, repairing, servicing of electrical equipment or
apparatus, except that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring.
   C.   Elevators And Escalators: Any work involved in the erection,
installation, repairing, remodeling or maintenance of elevators (freight or
passenger), dumbwaiters or escalators, not including electrical energy to the
control panels of elevators, dumbwaiters or escalators.
   D.   No License Required For Homeowners: A permit shall be issued to a
homeowner who proposes to install, repair or add to the electrical system in
said homeowner's existing, single-family dwelling, which is used as the
homeowner's permanent place of residence; provided, that each of the following
conditions shall be fulfilled:
      1.   Such owner has applied, to the electrical inspector, for the
homeowner's permit.
      2.   The fee, for each homeowner's permit, has been paid to the City
through the Building Inspections Services Division.
      3.   Said homeowner shall have submitted a detailed plan of all work to
be performed. This plan shall be reviewed by the electrical inspector to verify
that said homeowner understands the requirements that will be required for all
electrical work pertaining to the permit to be issued.
      4.   The homeowner shall personally perform all labor in connection with
the work done under the provisions of this section, shall meet the materials
and workmanship requirements of the Mason City Electrical Code and shall be
inspected the same as any work done by a licensed electrical contractor.
   E.   Replacement Of Lamps: No license shall be required for the replacement
of lamps.
   F.   Routine Maintenance: Routine maintenance allowed under section
10-2G-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-19, 11-16-2010)
10-2B-4: CLASSES OF LICENSES:
The following classes of licenses shall be issued by the City which shall be
designated as:
 
Class I   Electrical contractor's license
Class II  Electrical maintenance license
Class III Electrical journeyman's license
Class IV  Electrical master's license
 
   A.   Class I, electrical contractor's license: This license shall entitle
the holder thereof to engage in the business of and to secure permits for the
installation, alteration, repair of any electrical devices, appliances or
equipment, but shall not authorize the holder thereof to do the work of
installation, alteration or repair without also being a holder of an electrical
master's license.
Applications must be filed in duplicate on forms provided by the electrical
inspector, for a contractor's license and must include the business address of
his establishment.
A contractor's license may be issued to a person, firm or corporation. If
issued to a firm or corporation, an electrical supervisor, who is a licensed
master electrician, must be employed. In addition to a license, any person,
firm or corporation engaged as a contractor in doing electrical wiring or
installing any electric wires, apparatus or appliances and holding a Class I
license, as provided in this Code, must file with the City Clerk general and
complete operations liability insurance in the amount of at least one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all work performed which requires licensing
pursuant to this Code. The carrier of any insurance coverage maintained by this
licensee to meet this requirement shall notify the City Clerk thirty (30) days
prior to the effective date of cancellations or reduction of the coverage.
   B.   Class II, electrical maintenance license: This license shall entitle
the holder thereof to undertake the work of and secure an annual license for
maintaining and repairing electrical devices, appliances and equipment;
provided, that the holder of such license regularly employs, as supervisor, one
(1) or more persons certified by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals
as being qualified for such work; and provided, that such work shall be
confined to the premises owned or occupied by the holder of said license, the
location of which premises shall be described in the license. Maintenance
workers, performing electrical work, shall place on file with the City Clerk a
copy of his/her electrical license. The electrical inspector shall be informed
of changes in personnel.
   C.   Class III, electrical journeyman's license: This license shall entitle
the holder thereof to perform any work of installing, maintaining, altering or
repairing electrical equipment as an electrical journeyman under the direction
of the holder of an electrical contractor's license by whom he is employed. In
order to obtain a journeyman electrician's license, the applicant for a
journeyman's license shall have completed an Apprenticeship Training Program
registered by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training of the United States
Department of Labor in accordance with the standards established by that
department or shall have received training or experience for a period of time
and under conditions as established by the Board of Electrical Examiners and
Appeals. In addition, an applicant shall meet examination criteria based upon
the most recent National Electrical Code as adopted by the Board of Electrical
Examiners and Appeals. All experience requirements and qualifications must be
met to allow one to take examination.
Every holder of a license shall keep his or their license in his or their place
of business at all times.
   D.   Class IV, master electrician license: Except as otherwise provided by
law, no person shall plan, install, repair, lay out or supervise the
installation of wiring, apparatus, or equipment for electrical light, heat,
power or other purposes unless the person is: 1) licensed by the board as a
master electrician; and 2) the work is for a licensed electrical contractor and
the person is an employee, partner or officer or is the licensed electrical
contractor.
An applicant for a master electrician license shall have had at least one (1)
year's experience acceptable to the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals
as a licensed journeyman and successfully passed the master electrician's
examination approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals. All
experience requirements and qualifications must be met to allow one to take the
examination. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-5: LICENSE FEES:
Fees for the respective licenses shall be set by a resolution of the City
Council. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-6: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   If the license is allowed to expire for more than one (1) year, an
applicant will be required to take the examination and upon passing said
examination and payment of the required fees will be issued a license.
Exception: Licensees that have successfully passed a certified proctored
examination approved by the Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals.
   B.   No examination will be required if contractor's license is not allowed
to expire.
   C.   All locally licensed electricians must complete six (6) hours of
approved continuing education courses before they can renew their local
license. Within a three (3) year period, the contact hours shall include a
minimum of six (6) hours of studying the most current National Electrical Code
as adopted by the City of Mason City. A copy of the certificate of training
must be submitted to the Mason City electrical inspector before renewal of
license. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-7: FRAUDULENT USE OF LICENSES:
It shall be a violation for any person, firm or corporation to misrepresent
fact or attempt to use any license of another person, firm or corporation.
(Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-8: BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS AND APPEALS:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a Board of Electrical Examiners and
Appeals which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the City Council. The members shall be residents or
be employed within the City of Mason City and at least shall be licensed
electrical contractors and at least two (2) licensed electrical journeyman.
Every member shall be appointed for three (3) years, said term beginning on
July 1. The Mayor may remove any member for just cause. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010;
amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Organization Of Board: The members of the Board of Electrical Examiners
and Appeals shall annually elect a Chairman. The electrical inspector shall be
Secretary to the board and shall preserve and keep a record of all proceedings
before the board, including the records and documents pertaining to
examinations and other proceedings. The members of the board shall be provided
a suitable room for its meetings and necessary incidental expenses, said board
to act without compensation.
   C.   Duties Of Board: It shall be the duty of the Board of Electrical
Examiners and Appeals to meet at the call of the Chairman or Secretary or upon
call of a majority of its membership. The board shall, within ten (10) days,
report in writing to the Mayor, City Clerk and the applicant, the result of all
examinations, together with their recommendations, as to the issuance or denial
of all licenses as the case may be. Licenses shall be issued when approved by a
majority of the board by the City Clerk.
   D.   Suspension Or Revocation: The board shall have the power to suspend or
revoke any local license or renewal thereof, for any fraud or misrepresentation
in obtaining the licensing, for failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, the Electrical Code or other ordinances, as for negligence,
incompetence or misconduct in the performance of any duties of an electrical
contractor or electrician, as outlined in the following procedure:
In all cases involving revocation or suspension of a license, at least fifteen
(15) days' notice shall be served upon the holder whose license is in question
and said notice shall indicate the date, time and place of hearing and the
general grounds for the contemplated revocation or suspension. The notice shall
also advise the holder of his or her right to appear at said hearing in person,
or by counsel, for the purpose of being heard.
   E.   Right To Appeal Decision Of Board Of Electrical Examiners And Appeals:
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal to the City Council any ruling of
the board by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within
ten (10) days from the date of ruling therefrom appealed. The Council shall
forthwith fix a date, time and place of hearing on such appeal which shall not
be less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after the date of
said filing of the notice of appeal and the City Clerk shall notify the
interested person, by certified mail, of the time and place of said hearing.
After hearing said appeal, the City Council may sustain or overrule the ruling
of the board. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-9: RIGHT TO APPEAL DECISION OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the electrical inspector or his duly authorized
representative shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Electrical
Examiners and Appeals by filing a written notice of such appeal within ten (10)
days from the date of the offending ruling, decision, interpretation or order.
   B.   Upon fixing of such notice, a date, time and place for the hearing
shall be fixed, which time shall be no more than fifteen (15) days after the
date of filing the notice of appeal, and the person appealing shall be notified
of the date, time and place of such hearing. Hearings on the appeal shall be
open to the public and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to
present their position. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-10: AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS AND APPEALS:
   A.   The Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals shall have the authority
by majority to vote to affirm, modify or reverse any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the electrical inspector and to permit modification
from the strict terms and provisions of this Code when such modification can be
made without increasing the hazards to the health or safety of person or
property and when such modification shall not violate the intent and purposes
of this Code. Mere inconvenience to the appellant shall not be grounds for the
granting of such modification.
   B.   The Board of Electrical Examiners and Appeals will periodically review
the Electrical Code and shall furnish written recommendations to the City
Council for updating said Code. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-11: PERMITS FOR ELECTRICAL WORK:
   A.   Required Prior To Commencement: All electrical work, as set forth in
this section, shall not commence until a permit is issued by the electrical
inspector. Except as provided by law, where work has been started prior to
obtaining a permit, the regular fee therefor shall be doubled. The inspection
and enforcement provisions shall apply to the following:
      1.   All new electrical installations for commercial or industrial
applications, including installations both inside and outside of buildings, and
for public use buildings and facilities and any installation at the request of
the owner.
      2.   All new electrical installations for residential applications in
excess of single-family residential applications.
      3.   All new electrical installations for single-family residential
applications requiring new electrical service equipment or requiring a building
permit.
      4.   Existing electrical installations observed during inspection which
constitutes an electrical hazard. Existing installations shall not be deemed to
constitute an electrical hazard if the wiring when originally installed was
installed in accordance with the Electrical Code in force at the time of
installation and has been maintained in that condition.
      5.   The inspector shall require submission of plans and specifications,
drawings, descriptions and diagrams as necessary to show clearly the character,
kind and extent of electrical work covered by applications for a permit and,
upon approval thereof, shall issue the permit applied for.
      6.   The electrical inspector shall collect such fees as are required by
this Code and issue receipts therefor, copies of which shall be maintained as a
record in said inspector's office. The inspector shall transfer all fees
collected to the proper authority provided by law to receive such funds.
      7.   Minor repairs: A permit is not required for the replacement of
lamps, connection of electrical equipment by attachment cord and cap to
permanently installed receptacles, or the replacement of faulty equipment.
   B.   To Whom Issued: A permit shall be issued only to an electrical
contractor licensed by the City or State of Iowa. Furthermore, any permit
required by this Code may be issued to the owner of a single-family dwelling or
mobile home used exclusively for living purposes, to do any work regulated by
this Code as set forth in subsection
10-2B-3D of this article.
   C.   To Obtain Permit: Prior to commencement of any electrical installation,
the person making such installation shall apply for and obtain a permit for
said work except in the case of an emergency. The application shall include the
name and business address of the person, firm, corporation or other association
that is to do the work. A description of the property, name of the occupant of
said property and a general description of the materials to be used shall be
included and shall specify the particular part or parts of work which requires
inspection in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
The application shall be accompanied by fees in accordance with the schedule of
fees set out in subsection E of this section.
   D.   Permit Regulations:
      1.   Fraudulent Application For Permit Illegal: It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to present any fraudulent information in making
application for any permit from the electrical inspector. Furthermore, it shall
be unlawful to use the name of another person, firm or corporation in order to
secure an electrical permit unless regularly employed by and directly
authorized by the holder of such electrical contractor's license.
      2.   Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued that contains fraudulent
information or violates the rules of any ordinance issued by the City of Mason
City or any Code issued by the State of Iowa shall be subject to revocation at
the direction of the electrical inspector. The person holding the permit shall
be notified to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked and
failure to appear shall be deemed sufficient to cause the permit to be revoked.
   E.   Permit Fees:
      1.   Fees Set By Resolution: Permit fees shall be set by a resolution of
the City Council.
      2.   Payment Of Fees: All fees herein shall be paid to the electrical
inspector payable to the City. Any deficiency in previous fees shall be paid
before another permit is issued. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-12: ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation generating electrical
energy for electric light, heat or power in the City to set a meter for
electrical usage in any building or premises containing electrical wiring or
equipment which has not been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector
or his duly authorized representative. Any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions of this section shall, upon written notice from the
inspector to do so, immediately remove such conditions and discontinue such
electrical usage. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-13: COVERING WORK BEFORE INSPECTION:
No person having charge of construction, alteration or repair of any building
or any other person shall cover or conceal or cause to be covered or concealed
any wires or electrical apparatus for which a permit is required before the
said wiring or electrical apparatus has been inspected and approved. (Ord. 10-
06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-14: POWER OF INSPECTOR IF WORK IS COVERED:
The electrical inspector shall have the authority to remove or cause the
removal of lath, plasterboard or other covering which may prevent the proper
inspection of electrical wiring or electrical apparatus. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-15: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Except as added to, deleted, modified or amended in this article, there
is hereby adopted as a portion of this Electrical Code the current edition of
the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) as published by the National Fire
Protection Association as currently adopted by the Iowa Electrical Examining
Board, Iowa Department of Public Safety.
   B.   The electrical inspector shall require that hereinafter the
installation of all electric light and power wiring, all electrical fixtures
and appliances and all electrical work shall be of such grade and type as to
conform with the standard practices of the National Electrical Code except as
modified or amended in this Code. All existing electrical apparatus, wiring,
fixtures and appliances shall be made to conform to the requirements of this
Code when so ordered by the electrical inspector. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd.
Ord. 21-2, 1-19-2021)
10-2B-16: AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
The National Electrical Code is subject to the following exceptions,
modifications and additions:
   A.   Grounding: The grounding of wiring installation for services shall be
made with an approved clamp on the street side of the water meter at a point
near the entrance to a building. Minimum conductor to be used is size no. 6
copper. This conductor shall be installed in such a way as not to be subject to
severe mechanical injury by following different structural components and
securely fastened in all its travels or it may be laid in the concrete floor,
but the inspector must be assured that it is a continuous piece of copper and
that no connections are made that depend on solder.
   B.   New Service: When a new service is installed to an existing structure
all unfinished areas shall be upgraded to meet all requirements included in
this Code and all requirements of the current NEC. Existing wiring in finished
areas shall meet the Code requirement at the time period of its installation.
   C.   Wiring In Dwellings: For installation of electrical wiring in
dwellings, including multiple-family dwellings, any of the wiring methods of
chapter 3 of the National Electrical Code may be utilized, except above
unstructured ceilings and unfinished basements (exposed floor joists), a
metallic raceway system shall be used. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
Exception: Up to four feet (4') of cable may be exposed if protected from
physical damage. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
   D.   Outside Wiring:
      1.   Overhead conductors between buildings and structures shall be
bracketed on the exterior of each building. When services terminate on the roof
of a building, adequate structural strength must be added to roof structure to
compensate for strain of service conductors on the structure and shall be
securely bracketed and waterproofed at all points of roof rupture.
      2.   Whenever an existing service is repaired, altered, damaged by fire
or in deteriorating condition or damaged by other means, it shall be made to
comply in all respects with the provisions of this Code to the discretion of
the AHJ.
   E.   Commercial Wiring:
      1.   All wiring in excess of ninety (90) V to ground shall be installed
in an approved raceway system.
      2.   When a new service is installed, existing wiring shall meet the Code
requirements for the time period of its installation. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010)
10-2B-17: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
See general penalty section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 10-06, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
ARTICLE C. PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
10-2C-1: Code Adopted
10-2C-2: Amendments
10-2C-3: Code On File
10-2C-4: Plumbing/Mechanical Inspector
10-2C-5: License Required
10-2C-6: Board Of Plumbing Appeals
10-2C-1: CODE ADOPTED:
Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby
adopted as the Mason City Plumbing Code, the most current edition, of the
Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International Association Of
Plumbing And Mechanical Officials, as adopted by the State of Iowa, which
Plumbing Code is, by this reference, duly adopted. Said Plumbing Code of the
City and its provisions shall be controlling in the construction and
maintenance of plumbing and in all other matters covered by said Plumbing Code
within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2C-2: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the Code are hereby amended, deleted, modified or
added to as more specifically set forth in the following subsections:
   A.   Owner's Permit: In cases where the owner of a property desires
personally to do plumbing work upon premises which are then his or her legal
domicile or residence or for which the owner has a valid homestead exemption,
said owner may appear before the plumbing/mechanical inspector and, upon
establishing that said person is competent to do the specific work for which
the permit is desired and upon paying the permit fees as hereinafter set forth,
the plumbing/mechanical inspector shall issue a permit to such applicant and no
other or different license or permit shall be required of such person, any
other terms or provisions of the Plumbing Code to the contrary notwithstanding.
(Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
   B.   Fee Schedule: Plumbing permit fees shall be set by resolution of the
City Council. (Ord. 16-9, 5-17-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
10-2C-3: CODE ON FILE:
An official copy of the Mason City Plumbing Code as hereby adopted, including a
certificate by the City Administrator/City Clerk as to its adoption and
effective date thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Administrator/
City Clerk and the Public Library for public inspection.
Copies of the Uniform Plumbing Code can be obtained from IAPMO Headquarters,
5001 Philadelphia St., Ontario, CA 91761-2816. Copies of the Iowa State
Plumbing Code can be obtained from Department of Health, Lucas Office Building,
321 E. 12th St., Des Moines, IA 50319-0075. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
10-2C-4: PLUMBING/MECHANICAL INSPECTOR:
   A.   Office Established: There is hereby established in the Building
Inspections Division of the Development Services Department a plumbing/
mechanical inspection office, consisting of one (1) plumbing/mechanical
inspector under the supervision of the Chief Building Official.
   B.   Enforcement: The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this Code and all building codes in a manner consistent with
intent thereof. The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall perform the duties
necessary for the enforcement of the Plumbing and Mechanical Codes of the City
and to act as the designated representative of the Chief Building Official.
      1.   The duties of the plumbing/mechanical inspector may be assumed by
the Chief Building Official.
   C.   Qualifications: The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall hold such
certifications necessary to complete residential and commercial building
inspections as required by Iowa Code and this code, including plumbing and
mechanical inspections.
   D.   Duties: It shall be the duty of the plumbing/mechanical inspector to
see that the construction, reconstruction and maintenance of plumbing, roof and
house drainage systems in buildings and the ventilation and water supply
thereto constructed in such buildings and within five feet (5') outside the
foundation thereof, shall conform to and be in compliance with the terms and
provisions of the Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes.
      The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall approve or reject all plans
submitted. He shall keep a daily record of his work, including notices served,
applications received, permits granted and known or suspected violations of the
Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes, and all other matters
pertaining to the terms and provisions of said codes.
      The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall keep a record of all work
hereafter done in new or old structures or buildings and see that all such work
is done in compliance with said codes and pursuant to a permit obtained
therefor. He shall have power to stop any work being done contrary to the terms
and provisions of said codes and to revoke any permit granted for the same. He
shall have the police power to enter any buildings or structures or other
property during reasonable hours for the purpose of executing the duties
assigned to him by said Plumbing, Mechanical or Fuel Gas Piping Codes.
      The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall see that all plumbing, mechanical
and gas piping work receives such tests as are prescribed in said Plumbing,
Mechanical and Fuel Gas Piping Codes, and shall approve or reject all such
work, and shall issue a certificate accepting or rejecting such work by posting
the same in some conspicuous place in the building, structure or other property
in connection with which the work is being done. He shall have the power to
condemn any plumbing, mechanical or fuel gas piping work whenever the same is
not reasonably safe and sanitary or may recommend the condemnation of such work
to the Chief Building Official.
      In newly annexed areas, or in existing areas receiving initial sanitary
sewer main service, the plumbing system in existing buildings may be accepted
by the plumbing/mechanical inspector as suitable for connection to the City
sanitary sewer system; provided, that all new portions of the plumbing system
comply with the provisions of this Code; and further provided, that any unsafe
or hazardous plumbing is corrected. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 23-13, 10-
17-2023)
10-2C-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any plumbing, roof or
house drainage system or the ventilation thereof or repair, install or connect
in any way to the sewer or water supply of the City or do any other plumbing or
gas piping work in or to any building without first having obtained the
necessary license as required by the State of Iowa. A plumbing contractor
license shall entitle the holder to engage in the business of and secure
permits for the installation, alterations, and repair of plumbing appliances
and equipment. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
10-2C-6: BOARD OF PLUMBING APPEALS:
   A.   Board Established: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the plumbing/mechanical inspector relative
to the application and interpretations of this Code, there shall be and is
hereby created a Board of Plumbing Appeals which shall consist of seven (7)
residents of the City. One (1) member shall be a member of the public, one (1)
member shall be a building contractor, two (2) members shall be the holders of
master plumber's licenses, two (2) members shall be the holders of journeyman
plumber's licenses and one (1) member shall be the holder of a master HVAC
license. The plumbing/mechanical inspector shall be an ex officio member and
shall act as Secretary to said board, but shall have no vote upon any matter
before the board. The Board of Plumbing Appeals shall meet as needed. The Board
of Plumbing Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the
administrative provision of this Code nor shall the board be empowered to waive
requirements of this Code.
   B.   Appointment: Members of the Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall
serve a five (5) year term.
   C.   Meetings: Said board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
the conduct of its business and the hearing of appeals and shall make its
decisions or findings in writing. The meetings of said Board of Plumbing
Appeals shall be held in the City Hall in such reasonable quarters as may be
therein provided by the Council, and shall meet at the call of the Chairman of
said board, but not more often than once each calendar month.
   D.   Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the plumbing/mechanical inspector shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Plumbing Appeals by filing a written notice of
such appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from and after the date of
the ruling, decision, interpretation or order from which appeal is taken.
   E.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon the filing of such notice of appeal, a time and
place for hearing by the Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be fixed, which time
shall be not more than fifteen (15) days after the date of filing such notice
of appeal, and the person appealing shall be notified of the time and place of
such hearing. Hearings on appeal shall be open to the public and all interested
persons shall be given an opportunity to present their position.
   F.   Authority Of Board Of Plumbing Appeals: The Board of Plumbing Appeals
shall have authority to determine the suitability of alternate materials or
type of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of the Plumbing Code, and to permit variance from the strict terms
and provisions of the Plumbing Code when such variance can be made without
increasing hazards to public health or safety, and when the granting of such
variance would not violate the intent and purposes of the Plumbing Code. Mere
inconvenience to the aggrieved party shall not be grounds for granting of any
variance or for the modification or reversal of any ruling, decision,
interpretation or order of the plumbing/mechanical inspector.
   G.   Periodic Review Of Mason City Plumbing Code: In addition to the
functions and duties of the Board of Plumbing Appeals as stated in this
section, said board shall periodically review and evaluate the provisions of
the Mason City Plumbing Code and shall furnish written recommendations to the
City Council for updating said Code.
   H.   Right To Appeal Decision Of Board Of Plumbing Appeals: Any applicant
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council any ruling of the Board of
Plumbing Appeals, by filing a written notice of such appeal with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days from the date of ruling therefrom appealed. The Chief
Building Official shall forthwith fix a time and place of hearing on such
appeal which shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15)
days after the date of filing of the notice of appeal, and the City Clerk shall
notify the interested person, by certified mail, of the time and place of said
hearing. After hearing said appeal, the City Council may sustain or overrule
the ruling of the Board of Plumbing Appeals. (Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE D. MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
10-2D-1: Code Adopted
10-2D-2: Amendments
10-2D-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Mason City Mechanical Code the International
Mechanical Code, most current edition of such, adopted by the State of Iowa, as
published by the International Code Council. A copy of said Code is now on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and at the Mason City Public Library for public
inspection. (Ord. 10-07, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2D-2: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Reference Changes: Where the International Mechanical Code refers to
the International Plumbing Code, change to Uniform Plumbing Code.
Where the International Mechanical Code refers to the International Electrical
Code, change to National Electrical Code.
Where the International Mechanical Code refers to the International Fuel Gas
Code, change to Uniform Plumbing Code. (Ord. 06-07, 10-3-2006; amd. Ord. 13-11,
4-2-2013)
   B.   Mechanical Permit Fees: Mechanical permit fees shall be set by
resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 16-10, 5-17-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
   C.   Board Of Appeals: The Board of Plumbing Appeals, as set out in section
10-2C-6, "Board Of Plumbing Appeals", of this chapter shall hear and decide
appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the plumbing/mechanical
inspector relative to the application and interpretations of the International
Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by the City of Mason City. (Ord. 06-27,
10-3-2006; amd. Ord. 13-11, 4-2-2013)
ARTICLE E. RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
10-2E-1: Code Adopted
10-2E-2: Amendments To Code
10-2E-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2009 International Residential Code, or the most current edition adopted by
the State of Iowa, is hereby adopted, as amended herein. (Ord. 17-7, 6-6-2017)
10-2E-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The adopted Code shall be amended as follows:
   A.   R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit:
      1.   Section R105.2 subheading "Building", paragraph 1, referring to one
story accessory structures, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
      2.   Section R105.2, subheading "Building", paragraph 10, referring to
decks not exceeding 200 square feet in area, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   B.   R108.2 Schedule Of Permit Fees, is deleted in its entirety and replaced
by the following:
Fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
   C.   The frost line depth indicated in table R301.2(1), Climactic And
Geographic Design Criteria, shall be forty-eight inches (48").
   D.   R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
   E.   Appendices A through U are hereby deleted in their entirety. (Ord. 17-
7, 6-6-2017)
ARTICLE F. HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
10-2F-1: Purpose And Scope
10-2F-2: Code Adopted
10-2F-3: Amendments To Code; Chapter 1
10-2F-4: Amendments To Code; Chapter 2
10-2F-5: Amendments To Code; Chapter 3
10-2F-6: Amendments To Code; Chapter 4
10-2F-7: Amendments To Code; Chapter 5
10-2F-8: Amendments To Code; Chapter 6
10-2F-9: Amendments To Code; Chapter 7
10-2F-10: Rental Dwelling Permit
10-2F-3: Amendments To Code;
10-2F-11: Inspection And Enforcement
10-2F-12: Owner Responsibilities For Maintenance And Occupancy Of Rental
Dwelling Units
10-2F-13: Occupant Responsibilities For Maintenance And Occupancy Of Rental
Dwelling Units
10-2F-14: Housing Advisory And Appeals Board
10-2F-15: Fees And Penalties
10-2F-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Title: This article shall be known and cited as the MASON CITY HOUSING
CODE hereafter referred to as "this Code" or the "Housing Code". This Code
incorporates the requirements of both the Iowa Code and the housing quality
standards established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the Mason City Housing and Property Maintenance
Code is to ensure that housing facilities and conditions protect and promote
the health, safety and welfare of people who reside in Mason City and the
general public as well.
   C.   Scope: This article shall apply to all dwellings within the
jurisdiction of the City of Mason City used or intended to be used for human
occupancy, except for "temporary housing" as defined herein. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-
2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-2: CODE ADOPTED:
Except as hereinafter added to, deleted, modified or amended, there is hereby
adopted as the Housing Code of the City, the 2015 edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, or the most current edition, as prepared and edited
by the International Code Council, regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupations and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the
City; providing for the issuance of permits and collection fees therefor. (2017
Code)
10-2F-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 1:
Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, of the 2021 International Property
Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby
amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as
follows.
   A.   Section 101.1, Title: delete and replace. These regulations shall be
known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mason City,
Iowa, hereinafter referred to as “the Housing Code,” or “this Code.”
   B.   103.1, Creation of agency: delete, re-title, and replace. General.
Enforcement and administration of this code shall be the responsibility of the
code official, under direction of the Director of Development Services.
   C.   103.2, Appointment: delete and replace. The code official shall be
appointed by the City Administrator and shall serve under the direction of the
Development Services Director.
   D.   103.3, Deputies: delete.
   E.   104.1, Fees: delete and replace. The fees for activities and services
performed by the Development Services Department in carrying out its
responsibilities under this Code shall be determined from time to time by
resolution adopted by the City Council.
   F.   104.2, Refunds: delete.
   G.   107.1, General: delete and replace. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall
have the right to appeal to the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, provided
that a written application for appeal is filed no more than twenty (20)
calendar days after the action or decision being appealed. The Board shall
adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all
decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the
code official.
   H.   108.1 Membership of the board: delete and replace. The Board shall be
comprised of five (5) persons who shall be appointed by the mayor with approval
of the City Council. The code official shall serve as a non-voting ex-officio
member of the Board.
   I.   109.3, Prosecution of violation: delete and replace last sentence only.
Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal means
or resource.
   J.   110.4, Failure to Comply: delete and replace. Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to citation for a simple misdemeanor, as outlined
in section
1-4-1 of the city code.
   K.   111.7 Placarding: delete and replace first sentence only. Upon failure
of the owner, owner’s authorized agent or person responsible to comply with the
notice provisions within the time given, the code official shall post on the
premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing a statement of the
penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or
removing the placard.
   L.   111.7.1 Placard removal: delete and replace. The code official shall
remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding
action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
placard without the approval of the code official shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this code.
   M.   112.1, Imminent Danger: delete and replace first and second sentence
only. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure that endangers life, or when any
structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of
explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, or when the
occupants are using the premises for illegal activities or storage of illegal
substances that may pose a danger to the occupants or persons in proximity
thereof, or a condition exists from which the code official determines that
immediate action is required to protect the health or safety of the occupants
or the general public, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code
official shall cause to be posted at the front or main entrance to such
structure a placard declaring the structure to be unsafe and prohibiting its
occupancy. (Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-4: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 2:
Chapter 2, Definitions, of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code (or
the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted,
modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows.
   A.   201.6, add new subsection: Board: The Housing Advisory and Appeals
Board of the City of Mason City. All references in this Code to "board" or
"Board of Appeals" shall be considered to reference the City of Mason City
Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
   B.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Accessory Building Or
Structure: A structure that is not attached to the dwelling by a common wall
and is not used for living or sleeping or for human occupancy. Examples of
accessory buildings or structures include garages and sheds.
   C.   202, General Definitions, delete and replace: Approved: The dwelling or
referenced feature of the dwelling substantially complies with this Code or
other referenced codes as determined by the Code official.
   D.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Landlord: Any person who
rents to another or who has custody or control of a building, or parts thereof,
in which dwelling units or rooming units are let for occupancy or offered for
rent.
   E.   202, General Definitions, delete and replace: Let For Occupancy Or Let:
To permit, provide, or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure, to be occupied by any
person who is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or
unwritten lease, agreement or license.
   F.   202, General Definitions, Owner, revise second clause only as follows:
"or recorded in the official records of Cerro Gordo County as holder of a
contract to purchase, or as holding title, to the property;". The remainder of
the definition before and after this clause is unchanged.
   G.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Placard: A written
announcement posted on a dwelling unit or rooming unit that has been determined
to be unfit for human occupancy; also referred to as "white tag".
   H.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Reasonable Cause: Any
condition that poses an imminent threat to the health, safety and/or welfare of
the occupant(s) or others.
   I.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Rental Dwelling Permit: A
written certificate of compliance, issued periodically, which grants the
landlord the option of letting for occupancy a specific unit for rental
purposes and showing that the unit for which it is issued was in compliance
with this Housing Code at the time of issuance.
   J.   202, General Definitions, add definition: Rental Dwelling Unit: Any
dwelling unit or rooming unit that is let for occupancy as defined in this
Code, where the owner of record is not an occupant of the unit; regardless of
whether or not rent is charged or paid.
(2017 Code; amd. Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-5: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 3:
Chapter 3, General Requirements, of the 2021International Property Maintenance
Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby amended,
deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as follows.
   A.   302.4, Weeds, delete and replace first sentence only: Premises and
exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess
of twelve inches (12").
   B.   304.14, Insect Screens, delete and replace: During the period from May
1 to November 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per
25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
   C.   307.1, General, delete and replace last sentence only: Guards shall not
be less than 36 inches (914.4 mm) in height above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface.
   D.   309, Pest elimination, add new subsection 309.6, as follows:
309.6, Bedbugs.
309.6.1. Landlord's Responsibilities. In regard to bedbug infestations, the
owner or landlord shall be responsible for the following:
   1. The owner or landlord shall be responsible for all costs related to the
inspection and treatment of a bedbug infestation in any part of a building that
contains two (2) or more rental dwelling units. This includes common areas such
as shared kitchens, lounges, hallways, etc.
   2. The owner or landlord shall have the infested unit(s) and all adjacent
units inspected by a qualified inspector within five (5) business days of
receiving notice from a tenant that his or her unit may be infested.
   3. The owner or landlord shall take reasonable measures to treat the
infestation no more than five (5) business days after the inspection, including
treating adjacent units and hiring a pest control agent.
   4. The owner or landlord shall not apply pesticides, unless he/she is a
certified applicator.
   5. The owner or landlord shall provide reasonable written or oral notice to
a tenant before entering a unit for bedbug inspection or control purposes.
   6. The owner or landlord shall offer assistance to tenants who cannot comply
with treatment procedures, for which they may charge a reasonable amount.
   7. The owner or landlord shall not offer or show a unit for rent if he/she
knows or suspects it is infested.
   8. The owner or landlord shall, upon request from a current or prospective
tenant, disclose the last date when the rental unit was inspected for bedbugs
and found free of infestation.
309.6.2. Tenant's Responsibilities. In regard to bedbug infestations, the
tenant of a rental dwelling unit shall be responsible for the following:
   1. The tenant of a single family rental dwelling unit shall ensure that
bedbugs are eradicated in accordance with this Code and shall be responsible
for the costs of inspection and eradication. The tenant shall notify the owner
or landlord prior to treatment and again after eradication.
   2. The tenant of a unit located within a building containing two (2) or more
rental dwelling units shall:
         a.   Promptly notify the owner or landlord, orally or in writing, when
he/she knows or suspects the unit is infested with bedbugs;
         b.   Grant the owner/landlord, qualified inspector, or pest control
agent access to the unit;
         c.   Comply with reasonable measures to eliminate and control the
infestation, or pay for additional costs arising from noncompliance; and
         d.   Refrain from moving infested material from the unit until
treatment is complete or the landlord gives permission to do so.
(2017 Code; amd. Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-6: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 4:
Chapter 4, Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Requirements, of the
2021International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is
adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as
specifically set forth as follows.
   A.   404.4, Bedroom And Living Room Requirements, add new subsection
404.4.6: Conversion Of Existing Rooms To Bedrooms. Any room in an existing
structure not originally designed or used as a bedroom may not be converted for
use as a bedroom unless the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable requirements are met.
(2017 Code; amd. Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-7: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 5:
Chapter 5, Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements, of the
2021International Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is
adopted, except as hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as
specifically set forth as follows.
   A.   502.1, Dwelling Units, delete and replace first sentence only: Every
dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet,
approved floor covering and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition.
   B.   504.4, Water Heating Facilities, delete and replace last sentence only:
An approved combination temperature and pressure- relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe within 6 inches (6") of the floor shall be properly installed
and maintained on water heaters.
   C.   505.1, General, delete and replace second (last) sentence only: All
kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the
International Plumbing Code, except toilets shall be supplied with cold water
only. Each dwelling unit or multiple family building that provides laundry
facilities shall provide a clothes washer standpipe, which may discharge
directly over a floor drain. A proper air gap shall be provided.
(2017 Code; amd. Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-8: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 6:
Chapter 6, Mechanical and Electrical Requirements, of the 2021International
Property Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as
hereby amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set
forth as follows.
   A.   602.1, Facilities Required, add to end of section: Heating systems
requiring electrical energy for operation shall be provided with an independent
circuit.
   B.   602.2, Residential occupancies: delete and replace the second sentence
only: Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall unvented fuel burning
space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating. No fuel burning
furnace shall be located within any sleeping room or bathroom unless provided
with adequate ducting for air supply from the exterior, and provided the
combustion chamber for such heating unit is sealed from the room in an airtight
manner. Fuel burning space heaters are prohibited in dwelling units.
   C.   602.2, Residential Occupancies, delete the “Exception” paragraph.
   D.   602.3, Heat supply, delete and replace [DATE] to [DATE]: September 15
to May 15.
   E.   602.34, Occupiable Work Spaces, delete and replace: Indoor occupiable
work spaces shall be supplied with heat, during the period from September 15 to
May 15 to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
   F.   604.2, Service, add to end of section: Where fusible equipment is in
place, Type S fuses will be required.
   G.   605.2, Receptacles, delete and replace third (second to last) sentence
only: Any bathroom or toilet room receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
interrupter protection. In any room other than a bathroom or toilet room, any
receptacle within 36 inches (36") of a water source and all exterior outlets
shall have ground fault interrupter protection.
   H.   605.3, Luminaires, delete and replace first sentence only: Every public
hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler
room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire with a
switch that is easily accessible from the entrance to the room. All dwellings
shall have lighted entrances and exits controlled by interior switches that are
convenient and accessible. (2017 Code; amd. Ord. 19-10, 7-2-2019; Ord. 21-10,
9-21-2021)
10-2F-9: AMENDMENTS TO CODE; CHAPTER 7:
Chapter 7, Fire Safety Requirements, of the 2021 International Property
Maintenance Code (or the most current edition) is adopted, except as hereby
amended, deleted, modified, revised, or added to, as specifically set forth as
follows.
   A.   702.1, append to the end of section: A means of escape shall be
provided for all bedrooms.
   B.   702.3, Locked Doors, delete and replace: All means of egress doors
shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without
the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware
conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code, or where the
dwelling is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   C.   702.4, Emergency Escape Openings, add the following subsections:
      1.   702.4.1 Windows And Similar Means Of Egress. The bottom edge of any
window in a habitable space that serves as an emergency escape opening shall be
no more than forty-four inches (44") above the floor.
      2.   702.4.2 Habitable Spaces In Basements. Each bedroom in a dwelling
unit located within a basement, where fifty percent (50%) or more of the
vertical height of the room is below the exterior grade, shall have at least
one operable emergency escape (egress) window or exterior door, with a minimum
openable area of 5.7 square feet, leading directly to a public way.
      3.   702.4.3 Window Wells. Window wells are required whenever any portion
of the vertical dimension of a basement egress window is below the outside
grade. The minimum horizontal area of a window well shall be nine (9) square
feet, with a minimum horizontal projection and width of thirty-six inches
(36"). The area of the window well shall allow the egress window to be fully
opened. Window wells with a vertical depth greater than forty-four inches (44")
shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the
window in the fully open position. Ladders, rungs, or steps shall have an
inside minimum width of twelve inches (12"), shall project at least three
inches (3") from the wall, and shall be spaced not more than eighteen inches
(18") on center vertically for the full height of the window well.
      4.   702.4.4 Fire Escapes. No existing fire escape shall be deemed a
sufficient means of egress unless it is inspected and approved by the Code
official and the Mason City Fire Marshal.
   D.   704.1, General, delete and replace: All systems, devices and equipment
to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any
combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
in accordance with the International Fire Code, subject to the approval of the
Mason City Fire Marshal or his/her representative.
(2017 Code; amd. Ord. 21-10, 9-21-2021)
10-2F-10: RENTAL DWELLING PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required For Specific Structure: No person shall rent for
occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit, duplex, apartment, rooming unit (except
a rooming unit or units within owner occupied single-family dwellings,
condominiums and containing no more than 2 roomers) or rooming house unless the
landlord has obtained a rental dwelling permit for the respective dwelling unit
(s) from the Code official applicable to those portions of the specific
structure used for residential rental purposes.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Issuance Upon Compliance: A rental dwelling permit shall be issued
by the Code official indicating compliance with this Code at the time of
issuance.
         a.   Valid Period: A rental dwelling permit shall be valid for no more
than five (5) years from the date of issuance. If a rental dwelling unit is not
occupied for any length of time during the five (5) year period, the permit
shall remain valid, provided the permit is not revoked, the unit does not
become a nonrental (owner occupied) unit, and the unit continues to comply with
this Code.
         b.   Transfer Of Permit: A rental dwelling permit shall be
transferable from one landlord or owner to another at any time prior to its
expiration, termination or revocation if a notice, including name and contact
information of the new landlord, is given to the Code official no more than
thirty (30) calendar days after the transfer. A rental dwelling transfer late
penalty shall be charged to the subsequent landlord if more than thirty (30)
calendar days passes between the change in ownership and notification of the
Code official.
      2.   Penalty For No Rental Dwelling Permit: All dwelling units and
rooming units being let for rent and occupancy without a valid rental dwelling
permit, or an application for a permit is on file with the Code official, may
be ordered vacated or it may be ordered that no further rent shall be
recoverable by the landlord of such units until compliance with this Housing
Code is met. In addition, the Code official may impose a penalty if the
respective landlord does not submit an application for the necessary permit(s)
more than thirty (30) calendar days after notification by the Code official
that the proper permit has not been obtained. All fees and penalties shall be
in an amount established by resolution adopted by the City Council.
      3.   Issuance After Inspection: After inspections have been completed
according to section
10-2F-11 of this article, and the Code official has determined that all
provisions of the Housing Code have been met, the Code official shall issue a
rental dwelling permit no more than ten (10) business days after the final
inspection or reinspection. A rental dwelling permit shall not be issued unless
the furnace check has been provided according to subsection
10-2F-11G1 of this article and all applicable fees and penalties have been
paid.
   C.   Extension Of Permit: Rental dwelling permits shall be valid through the
expiration date contained thereon. However, extensions, which shall not exceed
sixty (60) calendar days, may be granted to cover any time period between the
stated expiration date and the period of time permitted by the Code official to
remedy any violations cited subsequent to an inspection or reinspection,
provided that an application to renew the rental dwelling permit is on file.
   D.   Permit Renewal: A rental dwelling permit may be renewed for an
additional five (5) years upon or before expiration of the current permit. To
renew the rental dwelling permit, the dwelling must be inspected as described
in section
10-2F-11 of this article and found to comply with the terms of this Code.
   E.   Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Causes: The Code official may revoke a rental dwelling permit at any
time if:
         a.   Fraud, collusion or an illegality has been documented in the
inspection or permitting process.
         b.   A dwelling unit fails to meet the requirements of the Housing
Code, and the owner or landlord does not address the deficiencies within thirty
(30) calendar days after the initial inspection, or within fifteen (15)
calendar days after the most recent reinspection. The Code official or the
Board of Housing Appeals may extend this period for due cause.
         c.   Fees or penalties are outstanding for more than ninety (90) days.
      2.   Appeal: The owner or landlord shall be notified in writing that the
rental dwelling permit is being revoked and shall have ten (10) business days
to file an appeal with the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-
2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-11: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspection Notices: A written notice for each inspection or
reinspection shall be sent or delivered to the owner, or the owner's designated
agent, prior to conducting inspections except when a potential threat to health
or safety exists which would create the need for a more immediate inspection.
The City's failure to demonstrate proof of having sent the notice shall not
relieve the owner or landlord of the corrective actions ordered by the Code
official to bring the dwelling unit into compliance, nor from the associated
reasonable time to complete them.
   B.   Search Warrant: When entry is lawfully refused, the Code official may
apply to the court of jurisdiction for a search warrant. No owner, landlord, or
occupant shall fail, neglect, or attempt to permit full access to the Code
official after a search warrant, issued by the court, is presented.
   C.   No Show Or Failure To Notify City To Reschedule: If an owner, landlord
or occupant fails to provide for access to a unit for a scheduled inspection,
including refusing entry, a "no show" penalty may be charged, unless the owner,
landlord, or occupant, at least twelve (12) hours prior to the scheduled
inspection or reinspection, notifies the Code official that he/she cannot
attend at the scheduled time and the inspection or reinspection is therefore
rescheduled.
   D.   Inspection Of Owner Occupied Dwellings: Inspection of owner occupied
single-family dwellings, owner occupied condominiums, owner occupied
cooperatives, or any of the above containing an occupant group meeting the
occupancy requirements of the adopted Building and Fire Codes, shall be
performed only upon request or complaint to the Code official, or upon
reasonable cause as determined by the Code official.
      1.   The Code official shall inspect the property and create a list of
deficiencies or violations, which shall be provided to the owner no less than
ten (10) business days after the inspection was performed.
      2.   Any deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official shall
be resolved no less than thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the list from
the Code official. If reinspection is necessary, the owner shall be notified no
less than five (5) calendar days before the scheduled reinspection.
   E.   Inspection Of Rental Dwelling Units: Rental dwelling units shall be
fully inspected to ensure compliance with all requirements of this Code.
Inspections shall take place for any one (1) or more of the following purposes:
      1.   Upon establishment of a dwelling unit as a rental dwelling unit and
submittal of a rental dwelling permit application;
      2.   At least once every five (5) years, for renewal of a rental dwelling
permit, along with submittal of a rental dwelling permit application, to
determine if the unit continues to meet the requirements of this Code;
      3.   Upon request by the owner or landlord;
      4.   Upon receipt of a founded complaint; or
      5.   Upon reasonable cause as determined by the Code official.
   F.   Landlord Notification: If a rental dwelling unit or premises is
occupied, the Code official shall first make a reasonable effort to notify the
owner or landlord and request entry; however, occupants may grant access to the
Code official for rental housing inspections without permission from the owner
or landlord.
   G.   Rental Dwelling Permit And Renewal Inspection Process: Upon receipt of
a complete rental dwelling permit application and payment of the rental
dwelling permit fee, the Code official shall schedule an initial inspection and
notify the owner or landlord of the date and time thereof, no more than thirty
(30) calendar days after determination that the application is complete. An
inspection shall be scheduled only if the permit fee has been paid.
      1.   Furnace Check: The owner or landlord shall provide, before the first
inspection or within thirty (30) days of acceptance of the application, proof
that an inspection of the primary heating equipment for each dwelling unit has
been conducted.
         a.   The owner or landlord shall engage the services of a mechanical/
heating contractor to conduct a furnace inspection as part of, or no more than
two (2) years prior to, the initial inspection for new rental dwelling units,
or the initial inspection for rental dwelling permit renewal, for each rental
dwelling under his/her control.
         b.   The owner or landlord shall be responsible for providing
documentation to the Code official that a furnace inspection has been completed
and that the equipment is in good, operable and safe condition.
      2.   Initial Inspection: The Code official shall inspect the premises and
develop a list of deficiencies or violations. The list shall be supplied to the
owner or landlord no more than ten (10) business days after the initial
inspection. If the Code official finds that there are no deficiencies or
violations during the initial inspection, a rental dwelling permit shall be
issued no more than ten (10) business days after the initial inspection. There
is no fee for the initial inspection. Any other fees or penalties due (such as
"no show", transfer, or "no rental dwelling permit" penalties) shall be paid
prior to the date and time of the scheduled initial inspection. The inspection
shall not be conducted if fees and penalties are unpaid.
      3.   First Reinspection: The owner or landlord shall correct any
deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official during the initial
inspection. The first reinspection shall be scheduled no more than thirty (30)
calendar days after the owner or landlord receives the list of deficiencies or
violations. If the Code official finds that the identified deficiencies or
violations have been corrected, a rental dwelling permit shall be issued no
more than ten (10) business days after the first reinspection. If there are
still deficiencies or violations, the Code official shall provide a list
thereof to the owner or landlord no more than ten (10) business days after the
first reinspection. There is no fee for the first reinspection; however, any
other fees or penalties due shall be paid prior to the date and time of the
scheduled first reinspection. The reinspection shall not be conducted if fees
and penalties are unpaid or the furnace check, as required in subsection G1 of
this section, has not been completed, submitted and approved by the Code
official.
      4.   Second And Subsequent Reinspections:
         a.   If necessary, the second or any subsequent reinspection shall be
scheduled no more than fifteen (15) calendar days after the owner or landlord
receives the list of deficiencies or violations. The owner or landlord shall
correct any deficiencies or violations identified by the Code official during
the prior reinspection.
         b.   A fee shall be charged for the second and any subsequent
reinspection. This fee, in addition to any other fees or penalties due, shall
be paid before the second or subsequent reinspection is conducted. The
reinspection shall not be conducted if there are any unpaid fees or penalties.
         c.   If the Code official finds that the identified deficiencies or
violations have been corrected, a rental dwelling permit shall be issued no
more than ten (10) business days after the reinspection.
         d.   If there are still deficiencies or violations, the Code official
shall provide a list to the owner or landlord no more than ten (10) business
days after the second or subsequent reinspection. The next reinspection shall
be scheduled no more than fifteen (15) calendar days after the owner or
landlord receives the list of deficiencies or violations.
      5.   Repeated Deficiencies Or Violations: Unless the owner or landlord
can show good and verifiable cause, any deficiencies or violations that were
identified during an inspection or reinspection must be resolved by the next
reinspection or by the next subsequent reinspection. If said deficiencies or
violations are still unresolved after any combination of two (2) successive
inspections or reinspections, the Code official may deny the rental dwelling
permit.
   H.   Time Extensions: The Code official, for good and verifiable cause, may
extend the time between inspections and reinspections and shall notify the
owner or landlord of the extension and the date and time of the inspection or
reinspection upon expiration of the extension.
   I.   Tenant Complaints: Unless there are significant issues that constitute
a hazard or danger to the occupants or to the health, safety or general
welfare, a tenant must first file a formal complaint to the owner, landlord, or
designated agent. Forms for this purpose will be provided by the Development
Services Department. A copy of the form shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
      1.   The owner or landlord shall have no more than seven (7) days after
receipt of the written complaint to address the complaint.
      2.   If the complaint is not remedied to the tenant's satisfaction within
seven (7) business days, the complainant will notify the Code Enforcement
Division. If the Code official determines that the complaint is founded, the
Code official shall schedule an inspection. If the owner or landlord refuses
entry, the Code official may seek a warrant as stated in subsection B of this
section.
      3.   If violations are found, the owner or landlord shall have fifteen
(15) calendar days to remedy the violations. A fee equal to the cost of a
second or subsequent reinspection shall be charged to the owner or landlord and
paid no more than thirty (30) days after the inspection; however, if further
reinspections are needed to ensure compliance, the requisite fee shall be paid
prior to any reinspections.
      4.   The owner or landlord shall not pursue an action for eviction, nor
shall the owner or landlord cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
required by this Code to be removed, shut off, or discontinued because of, or
in retaliation for, filing a complaint under this subsection.
   J.   Notice Of Violations: Whenever the Code official determines that a
violation of the Housing Code exists, the Code official shall inform the owner
or landlord of the violation(s).
      1.   Right To Appeal: The Code official shall notify the owner or
landlord of their right to appeal, and shall provide an appeal application form
upon request.
      2.   Staying Of Order Under Appeal: Except for emergency orders to vacate
made according to the requirements of this Code, enforcement of any notice and
order of the Code official shall be placed on hold until a determination is
made by the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
   K.   Placarding Procedures For Unfit Properties Or Rental Dwellings Without
Rental Dwelling Permit: Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which is
found to be so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin
infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public, or is a rental dwelling unit that has not been
issued a rental dwelling permit shall be determined to be unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Code official.
      1.   Placarded Dwellings To Be Vacated: Any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or any portion thereof, placarded in accordance with this article
by the Code official, shall be vacated immediately or as ordered by the Code
official.
      2.   Reoccupy Placarded Dwelling: No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit or portion thereof, which has been placarded in accordance with this
article, shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is
secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Code official. The Code
official shall remove such placard whenever the violations upon which the
placarding action was based have been eliminated.
      3.   Removal Of Placard Prohibited: Except for the Code official as
provided above, it shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove a
placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit which has been deemed
unfit for human habitation and placarded in accordance with this section.
      4.   Condemnation Referral: After a reasonable period of time after a
property has been placarded and no remedial action begun, but in no case
greater than six (6) months, the Code official shall inform the proper
authorities to initiate the process for condemnation and demolition of the
building.
   L.   Distribution Of Information: The Code official shall make all rules and
regulations available to the general public. Standard forms and blank notices
shall also be available upon request. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-12: OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL
DWELLING UNITS:
Rental dwelling unit owners or landlords shall be responsible for causing the
dwelling and/or premises to meet the following requirements:
   A.   Maintenance: The rental dwelling unit owner or landlord shall maintain
and repair all dwellings and outbuildings on the premises in accordance with
all requirements of this Code.
   B.   Access By Landlord For Maintenance: Every occupant of a dwelling unit
or rooming unit shall give access to the landlord or his/her representative or
employee, to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of maintenance or other actions
required by the Housing Code and for making corrective actions ordered by the
Code official. The landlord shall provide notice to the occupant not less than
twenty four (24) hours before entry, except in cases of emergency or where
notice or notification is not feasible.
   C.   Grading, Drainage And Landscaping Of Premises: Grading, drainage and
landscaping shall be continuously maintained. This Housing Code shall not
affect the existence or maintenance of stormwater drainage systems.
   D.   Floors In Kitchens And Bathrooms: Every toilet room floor surface,
bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean, dry and
sanitary condition.
   E.   Landlord To Let Clean Units: No landlord shall permit occupancy of any
vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is substantially clean, sanitary
and fit for human occupancy.
   F.   Common Areas Maintenance: Every landlord of a dwelling containing two
(2) or more dwelling units or more than one (1) rooming unit shall be
responsible for maintaining, in a safe and sanitary condition, the shared
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof, unless there is a written
agreement between the landlord and occupant to the contrary.
   G.   Occupancy Control: No owner or operator shall allow the occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to exceed the number of persons allowed
under this and other applicable codes, including the Building and Fire Codes.
   H.   Contact Information: The owner or landlord shall be responsible for
notifying the City of any change of address or other applicable contact
information. If no new contact information is provided, the City will address
correspondence to the last known address on file. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd.
2017 Code)
10-2F-13: OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES FOR MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL
DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Occupant Responsible For Sanitary Condition: Every occupant of a rental
dwelling unit shall maintain the dwelling unit or rooming unit in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition.
      1.   Every floor and floor covering shall be kept substantially clean and
sanitary.
      2.   Every wall and ceiling shall be kept substantially clean and free of
dirt or greasy film.
      3.   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used substantially for
the storage or handling of garbage.
      4.   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for the storage or
handling of dangerous or hazardous materials beyond typical household use.
      5.   No occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall deliberately or
negligently destroy, deface, damage, impair or remove any part or portion of
the premises or knowingly permit any other occupant or person to do so without
consent of the landlord.
   B.   Supplied Facilities; Smoke Detection: The landlord shall have installed
batteries for all required smoke detectors at the time a new occupant moves
into a dwelling unit. Subsequent replacement of batteries required to operate
smoke detection equipment shall be the responsibility of occupants unless
otherwise arranged or agreed upon by the respective occupant and landlord.
Occupants of a rental dwelling unit shall notify the landlord if they become
aware that the smoke detection equipment is not operating properly. Occupants
shall not cause a smoke detector to be removed.
   C.   Cooking In Rooming Units Prohibited: Other than meals cooked in a
microwave oven, no occupant of a rooming unit shall cook meals in a rooming
unit unless an approved kitchen and/or dining room is contained within the
rooming unit.
   D.   Occupancy Control: No occupant of a rental dwelling unit shall allow
the occupancy of any dwelling unit or rooming unit within which he/she resides
to exceed the number of persons allowed under this and other applicable codes,
including the Building and Fire Codes. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-14: HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.
   B.   Purpose And Duties: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall have
the authority to act upon appeal of a decision of the Code official, variances
to the requirements of this Code, extensions of time for the compliance of any
order or notice, and to sustain or modify an order of the notice of violations
authorized in the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and
amended. The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board may also make recommendations
to the City Council for changes to the Housing Code and adopt reasonable
policies.
   C.   Board Membership And Terms Of Office: See section 111 of the
International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended.
   D.   Meeting Schedule: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall meet at
such intervals necessary in order to fulfill its described purposes. The
Housing Advisory and Appeals Board shall address appeals no more than fifteen
(15) business days after the date upon which the Code official received the
completed appeal application, including the appeal fee.
   E.   Rules And Regulations: The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board may adopt
rules and regulations to govern its organizational procedures as it may deem
necessary and which are not in conflict with the Housing Code or other laws.
   F.   Appeal Application:
      1.   Application: Any person aggrieved by a notice of violations or a
denied rental dwelling permit or of any applicable rule or regulation issued
pursuant to the Housing Code, may apply to the Housing Advisory and Appeals
Board for reconsideration of such notice and order, provided that such appeal
application is made no more than ten (10) business days after the date the
notice was received. Only those matters or issues specifically raised in the
appeal application shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
      2.   Appeal Filing Fee: At the time of filing such an application for an
appeal, the appellant shall pay a filing fee in an amount established by
section
10-2F-15 of this article.
      3.   Application Deadline: The right to an administrative hearing and
further adjudication shall be waived for the notice, order, and any portion
thereof if an appeal has not been properly filed within ten (10) business days
after receipt of either the notice of violation or the written notice of a
denied rental permit.
   G.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete appeal application and
filing fee, the Code official shall establish a date for the hearing to be held
within fifteen (15) business days of the date upon which the completed
application was received and shall send a notice of the hearing to the
appellant, as well as the respective landlord and occupant. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-
2004; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2F-15: FEES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Schedule Established: A consolidated fee and penalty schedule shall be
adopted by the City Council by resolution.
   B.   Fee And Penalty Deadlines:
      1.   Rental dwelling permit fees are due at the time of application. No
inspections shall be scheduled if this fee is not paid.
      2.   The fee for renewal of a rental dwelling permit shall be paid for
prior to or upon the expiration of the current permit. No inspections shall be
scheduled if this fee is not paid.
      3.   Rental dwelling transfer late penalties shall be due thirty (30)
calendar days after the Code official sends a notice to the landlord requesting
that transfer information be submitted.
      4.   Reinspection fees shall be paid prior to the next scheduled
inspection or reinspection; if such fees cannot be paid prior to the scheduled
inspection because the Code official finds that an immediate inspection or
reinspection is warranted, such fees shall be due no more than thirty (30)
calendar days after the respective reinspection or complaint inspection.
      5.   "No show" penalties shall be paid prior to the next scheduled
inspection or reinspection; if no further inspection or reinspection is
required, such penalties shall be due thirty (30) calendar days after the
scheduled appointment when the "no show" took place.
      6.   "No rental dwelling permit" penalties shall be due thirty (30)
calendar days after written notification is mailed or personally delivered by
the Code official, unless the owner or landlord has applied for a rental
dwelling permit prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period.
      7.   Appeal fees shall be due at the time the respective appeal
application is filed.
      8.   The Code official may deny or revoke a rental dwelling permit if all
applicable fees and penalties are not paid.
      9.   The City may certify any unpaid balance, interest, and late payment
fees and penalties to the County Auditor as a lien upon the rental property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 04-3, 1-6-2004; amd.
2017 Code)
ARTICLE G. SIGN CODE
SECTION:
10-2G-1: Code Adopted
10-2G-2: Zoning Code
10-2G-3: Sign Erector's License; Fee; Insurance
10-2G-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Sign Code of the City, the 2009 International
Building Code or most current edition, as adopted and amended by the State of
Iowa, as it applies to the construction, erection and maintenance of signs. An
official copy of the 2009 International Building Code, including a certificate
by the City Clerk as to its adoption and effective date thereof, is now on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public
inspection. (Ord. 14-3, 2-4-2014)
10-2G-2: ZONING CODE:
In addition to the permit requirements for signs in the 2009 International
Building Code, referenced in section
10-2G-1 of this article, all signs shall be located, constructed, erected,
operated and maintained in accordance with title 12, chapter 20, "Sign
Regulations", of this Code. (Ord. 14-3, 2-4-2014)
10-2G-3: SIGN ERECTOR'S LICENSE; FEE; INSURANCE:
   A.   Sign Erector's License Required; Fee: No person shall engage or
continue in the business of erecting, maintaining or replacing any sign or
advertising structure or perform any such acts for compensation without first
having obtained a license for such work from the City Clerk. Such sign
erector's license shall be issued upon submission of written application and an
annual license fee therefor. Said annual license fee shall be in an amount set
by resolution of the Council, payable to the City Clerk and shall expire on
June 30 each year.
   B.   Insurance: The applicant shall file with the Clerk evidence of public
liability insurance acceptable to the City, to be in full force and effect for
the period of said license, with minimum limits set by resolution of the
Council for property damage, for a single personal injury or death, and for
multiple injuries or deaths, which insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City, from the same risks as hereinbefore provided for corporate surety
bonds.
   C.   Suspension; Revocation: Any sign erector's license may be suspended or
revoked as follows:
      1.   A sign erector's license may be suspended by the "Chief Building
Official" if:
         a.   The license was issued in error; or
         b.   The license was incorrect; or
         c.   The contractor has failed to comply with the ordinances and
regulations of the City relating to the work for which the license was issued.
      2.   No license may be suspended until after a hearing is held by the
"Chief Building Official". The contractor shall be mailed notice of the date,
time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days in advance. The notice
shall also state the exact ordinances or regulations the contractor is alleged
to have violated or in what way the information stated in the application was
incorrect.
      3.   After the hearing, the "Chief Building Official" may suspend the
license for any period of time up to six (6) months.
      4.   Such suspension shall be subject to review by appeal to the Building
Advisory and Appeals Board, as set forth in article A of this chapter.
      5.   The Chief Building Official may revoke the license of any sign
erector who has had two (2) or more suspensions within a two (2) year period.
If any of the suspensions were appealed according to subsection C4 of this
section, only those suspensions that were upheld by the Building Advisory and
Appeals Board may be counted.
      6.   "Routine maintenance" shall be defined as the repair of an existing
electrical apparatus or equipment of the same size and type for which no
changes in wiring are made. This does not include any new electrical
installation or the expansion or extension of any circuit.
      7.   A person licensed under this section and who has obtained the State
of Iowa sign installation endorsement through the Iowa Electrical Examination
Board may perform routine maintenance on a street or light pole. (Ord. 14-3, 2-
4-2014; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE H. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
10-2H-1: Code Adopted
10-2H-2: Amendments To Code
10-2H-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The most current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code adopted
by the State of Iowa is hereby adopted. A copy of the International Energy
Conservation Code can be obtained by contacting the International Code Council
at 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, VA 22041. A copy of the
International Energy Conservation Code is on file at the Mason City Public
Library and the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 10-09, 5-4-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
10-2H-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the
International Electrical Code; change to read "National Electrical Code".
   B.   Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the
International Fuel Gas Code; change to read "Uniform Plumbing Code".
   C.   Where the International Energy Conservation Code refers to the
International Plumbing Code; change to read "Uniform Plumbing Code". (Ord. 07-
08, 4-3-2007)
ARTICLE I. FIRE CODE
SECTION:
10-2I-1: Code Adopted
10-2I-2: Amendments To Fire Code
10-2I-3: Open Burning
10-2I-4: Special Inspections
10-2I-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City, the 2015 edition, or the
more current edition, of the International Fire Code adopted by the State of
Iowa including appendix chapters as prepared and edited by the International
Code Council, reviewed and/or modified, from time to time, by the Chief
Building Official, and the Fire Chief, which by this reference is duly adopted
as fully and completely as if set out in detail herein. An official copy of the
International Fire Code, as hereby adopted, including a certificate by the City
Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date thereof, is now on file in the
Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public Library for public inspection.
(Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017)
10-2I-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
Section 101.1 Title: (Name of jurisdiction) City of Mason City, Iowa.
Section 108.3 Qualifications: Change to "The Board of Appeals shall consist of
members as defined in section
10-2A-4 of the City Code".
Section 109.4 Violation Penalties: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4
of the City Code".
Section 111.4 Failure To Comply: Change to "As defined in title 1, chapter 4 of
the City Code".
Section 2304 shall be and the same is hereby amended by adding:
The provisions of section 2304 shall not prohibit the dispensing of Class I and
Class II liquids in the open from a fuel dispensing system supplied by an above
ground tank, not to exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons, located at commercial,
industrial, government or manufacturing establishments, and intended for
fueling vehicles used in connection with their business. Such dispensing may be
permitted, provided:
      1.   An inspection of the premises and operations has been made and
approval granted by the authority having jurisdiction.
      2.   The tank is safeguarded against collision, spillage, and overfill,
to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction.
      3.   The tank is listed or approved for such above ground use.
      4.   The tank complies with requirements for emergency relief venting,
and the tank and dispensing system meet the electrical classifications of the
Code.
      5.   The tank storage shall comply with NFPA 30 (2013).
Appendix J and L: Delete in the International Fire Code (2015). (Ord. 17-4, 6-
6-2017)
10-2I-3: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Prohibited; Exceptions: Open burning for the purpose of disposal of
material is prohibited except as follows:
      1. Notification Of Fire Department:
         a.   Application; Fees: Application for a variance must be made in
writing to the Fire Department. If a variance is granted, a permit fee in an
amount set by resolution of the Council shall cover the costs of assuring
compliance. If an on site visit is required for the process of granting a
variance, a first time fee set by resolution of the Council shall be added to
the cost of the permit.
         b.   Lot Size: Unless authorized by the Fire Chief, only single-family
lots of twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet in size or larger shall be
granted a variance of this section.
         c.   Distance: No variance shall be granted unless the site of burning
is two hundred feet (200') or more from any sensitive neighboring structure.
      2.   Material Restrictions: Only leaves, grass clippings, small twigs and
branches produced on the site listed on the permit shall be eligible to be
burned. Burning of rubbish and paper products shall be prohibited. Rubber tires
shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
      3.   Time And Atmospheric Restrictions:
         a.   The Fire Chief shall establish periods for burning of yard waste
for spring and fall. No burning shall be permitted outside of these periods
except with authorization by the Fire Chief.
         b.   Unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief, open burning shall
be only on specific days, between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to sundown. Open
burning shall be prohibited when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous.
      4.   Location On Property: Burning shall not take place within fifty feet
(50') of a structure; within twenty five feet (25') permissible if the pile
size is three feet (3') or less in diameter and two feet (2') or less in
height.
      5.   Containers: No burning shall be done in containers. "Burn barrels",
incinerators, etc., are prohibited.
      6.   Fire Extinguishing Equipment: A garden hose connected to a water
supply, or other approved fire extinguishing equipment must be readily
available at the burning site.
      7.   Attendance: All burning material shall be constantly attended by a
person who shall take responsibility of the burning.
      8.   Discontinuance Of Burning: The Fire Chief, or a designated
representative, shall be authorized to order the burning ceased if smoke
emissions are a problem.
   B.   Exemptions: The following shall be permitted unless prohibited:
      1.   Disaster Rubbish: The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists.
      2.   Trees And Trimmings:
         a.   The open burning of trees and trimmings not originated on the
premises; provided, that the burning site is operated by the City, said burning
site being fenced and access controlled, burning is conducted on a regularly
scheduled basis and is supervised at all times. Burning is conducted only when
weather conditions are favorable with respect to surrounding property, as
announced by the Fire Chief and the burning site is limited to areas at least
one-fourth (1/4) mile from any inhabited building. However, when the open
burning of trees and tree trimmings causes air pollution as defined in Iowa
Code section 455B.131(3), the City Fire Department or the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) may take appropriate action to secure relocation of
the burning operation. Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite trees and tree
trimmings.
         b.   This exemption shall not apply within the area classified as the
PM 10 (inhalable) Particulate Group II area of the City. This Group II area is
described as follows:
            The area in Cerro Gordo County, Iowa, in Lincoln Township including
Sections 13, 24, and 25; in Lime Creek Township including Sections 18, 19, 20,
21, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 35; in Mason Township the West one-half
(W 1/2) of Section 1, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, the North one-half (N 1/2) of
Section 11, the Northwest one-quarter (NW 1/4) of Section 12, the North one-
half (N 1/2) of Section 16, the North one-half (N 1/2) of Section 17 and the
portions of Sections 10 and 15 north and west of the line from U.S. Highway 122
south on Kentucky Avenue to 9th Street S.E. to the section line between
Sections 15 and 16.
      3.   Flare Stacks: The open burning or flaring of waste gases.
      4.   Recreational Fires: Open fires for cooking, heating, camping, and
recreation using liquefied petroleum gas, natural gas, charcoal or clean
untreated wood in excess of one and five-eighths inches (15/8") minimum
dimension (no building materials) as fuel are permitted, provided that they
comply with the adopted Fire Code.
      No recreational fires other than those for the purpose of cooking shall
be permitted after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight or before twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon.
      If smoke emissions from a recreational fire cause a problem, the fire
shall be extinguished by order of the Fire Chief or his designee.
      5.   Ceremonial Fires: Fires for the purpose of celebration by schools,
churches and other organizations may be permitted by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
      6.   Training Fires: Fires set for the purpose of bona fide training by
Fire Department personnel in firefighting methods, provided that the Executive
Director of the IDNR receives notice in writing at least one (1) week before
such action commences. All asphalt roofing and asbestos containing materials
shall be removed prior to the training fire.
      7.   Agricultural Burns: Prescribed burning of weeds and natural prairie
may be permitted by the Fire Chief or his designee.
      8.   Agricultural Land Use: Existing farmsteads that have been annexed
into Mason City and are still zoned agricultural shall be exempt from City
ordinances on open burning except that if in the event smoke emissions were to
cause a problem, the fire shall be extinguished by order of the Fire Chief or
his designee.
   C.   Penalties: Penalties for violations of this section shall be as
permitted in this Code; repeat violators shall be subject to revocation of
their burning permits. (Ord. 17-4, 6-6-2017; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
July 2024
10-2I-4: SPECIAL INSPECTIONS:
   A.   A fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council will be charged to
cover costs of inspections that are conducted outside of the regular fire
inspector’s route and that require reports to other agencies as set out herein;
but not limited to the following: State Fire Marshal, State Department of
Health, Department of Human Services, City Council, etc.
   B.   A fee set by resolution of the Council will be charged for fire
extinguisher classes conducted by the Fire Department.
   C.   Regular fire inspections shall be provided free of charge. Upon the
first visit, the occupant will be given a courtesy letter explaining the
benefits of said inspection and will state that a reinspection will also be
provided after a reasonable date at no cost. The third and any additional
inspections required shall be set by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 17-4, 6-
6-2017; amd. Ord. 24-3, 2-20-2024)
ARTICLE J. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
10-2J-1: Code Adopted
10-2J-2: Amendments To Code
10-2J-1: CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the City, the most
current edition of the International Existing Building Code adopted by the
State of Iowa Building Code Commissioner's Office reviewed and/or modified,
from time to time, by the City Building Advisory and Appeals Board, and the
City's Chief Building Official, which by this reference is duly adopted as
fully and completely as if set out in detail herein. An official copy of the
International Existing Building Code, as hereby adopted, including a
certificate by the City Clerk as to its adoption and the effective date
thereof, is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk and at the City Public
Library for public inspection. (Ord. 17-6, 6-6-2017)
10-2J-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
   A.   Appendix from the International Existing Building Code - delete (will
use as a guide only).
   B.   Resource A Guidelines On Fire Ratings Of Archaic Materials And
Assemblies, International Existing Building Code - delete (will use as a guide
only).
(Ord. 17-6, 6-6-2017)
ARTICLE K. VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION
SECTION:
10-2K-1: Purpose
10-2K-2: Definitions
10-2K-3: Permit Required
10-2K-4: Vacant Building Maintenance Requirements
10-2K-5: Enforcement And Penalties
10-2K-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to identify and register vacant commercial and
industrial buildings that may present a fire hazard, become an attractive
nuisance, detract from private or public efforts to rehabilitate or maintain
surrounding buildings, or present a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of
the public; to set forth the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings and
structures; and to encourage the rehabilitation of vacant buildings. (Ord. 23-
03, 3-7-2023)
10-2K-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage
clearly indicates a different meaning. All other terms defined elsewhere in
this code shall be as defined therein.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage
clearly indicates a different meaning. All other terms defined elsewhere in
this code shall be as defined therein.
ACCESSORY   A subordinate building or structure located on the same lot with an existing
BUILDING OR principal building, which is incidental and subordinate to the principal building.
STRUCTURE:  (Also see "Principal Building" definition.)
            A vacant commercial or industrial building that displays a "For Sale" or "For Lease"
            sign prominently visible to the public, and:
            A.   If for sale, the property is listed for sale on the local multiple listing
            service by a licensed realtor.
            B.   If for lease:
               1.   The property is listed for lease on the local multiple listing service by a
            licensed realtor, which listing is maintained until at least forty percent (40%) of
            the gross floor area is leased; or
ACTIVELY       2.   The owner or manager maintains a "for lease" advertisement in a local
MARKETED:   newspaper of general circulation, at least weekly until at least forty percent (40%)
            of the gross floor area is leased; or
               3.   The owner or manager maintains a "for lease" advertisement at least daily in
            no fewer than two (2) social media sites available to the general public that are
            commonly used in the local market for advertising items and properties for sale or
            lease, that is maintained until at least forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area
            is leased.
            It shall be the responsibility of the owner to demonstrate that the property is
            actively marketed and shall provide proof of continued active marketing.
BOARDING OF The act of securing a building from unauthorized entry by attaching boards or
BOARDED:    similar rigid materials to doors and windows, for the purpose of preventing
            unauthorized entry (boarding), or the result thereof (boarded).
CHIEF       The individual employed by or contracted by the City to enforce the building codes,
BUILDING    or his/her designee(s).
OFFICIAL:
            A building constructed for or intended to be used by one or more property users or
COMMERCIAL  employees engaged in work, for which compensation is intended to be received for
BUILDING:   goods, services, entertainment, or other fungible activities, or a building where
            commercial or personal storage is the principal use.
FORM OF     Installation and display of goods, artifacts, historic photos, items of local
DISPLAY:    interest, or other items arranged in and visible through first floor display
            windows, to avoid the appearance of vacancy.
            A building constructed for or intended to be used for transforming materials or
INDUSTRIAL  substances into new products, such as assembly of component parts, manufacturing of
BUILDING:   products, or blending of materials, and including such ancillary functions such as
            (but not limited to) administration, storage, and showrooms.
            A commercial building that also contains a residential function, where at least
MIXED-USE   thirty (30) percent of the ground floor area is dedicated to commercial functions. A
BUILDING:   mixed-use building shall be considered the same as a commercial building for the
            purposes of this article.
            Any person, in whose name a property is titled, and any person with a recorded
            contract interest in the property, and any person, agent, servicing company, firm,
OWNER:      third party, or financial institution that has an interest in the property as a
            result of an assignment, sale, mortgage, transfer of a mortgage, or similar
            instrument, or having an agreement with any one of the above for the purpose of
            securing and/or managing the property.
PRINCIPAL   A building within which is conducted the principal function of the lot on which the
BUILDING:   building is located.
PROPERLY    A vacant building that is maintained in accordance with the requirements of this
MAINTAINED: article.
            All accessible means of ingress and egress to a vacant structure, including but not
SECURED:    limited to all exterior doorways and windows, are locked, boarded, or otherwise
            obstructed so as to prevent unauthorized entry.
            A building or structure that is unoccupied or unused, or a building that does not
            contain a lawful commercial or industrial function that is open for business or is
            actively operated, with the exception of holidays and seasonal businesses, and also
            meets one or more of the following:
            A.   The building is unsecured or is secured by means other than those used in the
            design of the building.
            B.   The building is declared a dangerous building or otherwise unfit for occupancy,
            as determined by the Chief Building Official.
VACANT:     C.   The building is not in compliance with the housing, building and fire codes
            adopted by the City.
            D.   The building has or contains housing, health and safety, or zoning violations;
            or
            E.   The building is not receiving service by all the public utilities necessary for
            occupancy.
            A building that is being used strictly for storage that otherwise meets the above
            requirements shall be considered to be vacant, unless storage is the principal
            function of the building and premises and if such storage is allowed under Title 12,
            Zoning, of the city code. (Ord. 23-03, 3-7-2023)0
 
10-2K-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Applicability. The owner of any principal building or structure that is
vacant shall apply for a vacant building permit with the Building Inspections
Division of the Development Services Department, within one hundred and twenty
(120) days of the building becoming vacant. Any accessory building or structure
on the same lot with a vacant principal building is also considered to be
vacant, regardless of any use or occupancy of the accessory building or
structure.
   B.   Exemptions. The owner of a vacant building may, in writing on a form
provided by the Development Services Department and prior to the expiration of
the one hundred and twenty (120)-day registration period, request an exemption
from the requirements of this article, provided that the one or more of the
following conditions exists:
      1.   The building is under active construction/renovation and has a valid
building permit, until the expiration of the longest running active building
permit.
      2.   The building has suffered fire damage, flood damage, damage caused
by extreme weather conditions, or weakening of the structural integrity of the
building resulting from an accident or other cause not of the owner's own
making; provided that the owner will initiate renovation or demolition within
one (1) year of the date the damage occurred, and has provided a commitment to
do so in writing.
      3.   The building is actively marketed, as defined in this article; in
which case the building may be exempted for a period of up to twelve (12)
months from the start of vacancy, subject to the following:
         a.   The owner shall present proof of listing the property for sale or
lease to the Chief Building Official, according to the definitional
requirements of "actively marketed" in section 12-2K-2, above. The Chief
Building Official or his/her designee may request proof of continued compliance
with this requirement at any time during the twelve (12) month period and may
rescind the exemption if such proof is not provided.
         b.   If the property is offered for sale, the Development Services
Director may deny this exemption if the listing price is one hundred fifty
percent (150%) or greater than the assessed value of the real estate as
determined by the City Assessor. However, if the owner provides either a
certified appraisal or a licensed realtor's opinion of cost justifying the
listing price, the exemption may be granted.
      4.   The owner of the building provides proof of imminent leasing, sale,
rehabilitation, or otherwise lawful renovation or occupation of the building,
which may occur during or after the ninety (90)-day registration period;
however, to qualify for the exemption, the owner must also show that the lease,
sale, construction, or occupation will occur within one (1) year of becoming
vacant. Proof shall be in the form of an executed lease, real estate purchase
agreement, construction contract, or other legally enforceable agreement or
contract, any of which must remain in force until the sale, occupation, or
project is complete.
      5.   Any commercial or industrial building or structure determined to be
vital for the purpose of economic development by the City Administrator.
      6.   Any vacant building owned by the City of Mason City.
      7.   An owner of a vacant building that does not qualify for an exemption
under the above may request an exemption for a period of up to twelve (12)
months from the provisions of this article by filing a written application with
the Director of Development Services.
The applicant shall present justification for the exemption and shall show
proof that the need for the exemption is not due to action or inaction by the
applicant or by any other party with control of the property. In determining
whether a request for exemption should be granted, the Director shall consider
all of the following:
         a.   The applicant's prior record as it pertains to the city housing
code, building code, nuisance regulations, or other relevant city code
violations;
         b.   the amount of vacant property the applicant currently owns or
controls within the City; and
         c.   the length of time that the building for which the exception is
sought has been vacant.
   C.   Application. The owner of a vacant building shall apply for a vacant
building permit on a form supplied by the Development Services Department. A
complete application shall include the following:
      1.   Name of the Owner and means of contacting the owner during business
and non-business hours.
      2.   Name and contact information for any manager or other party
responsible for the property other than the owner.
      3.   The names and addresses of all known contract and lien holders and
any other party with an ownership interest in the vacant building.
      4.   Proof of insurance: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) in
general liability coverage, and fire and casualty coverage equal to no less
than replacement value as determined by the insurance provider, or a minimum of
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
      5.   A Vacant Building Plan, as outlined below.
   D.   Vacant Building Plan. A plan for maintenance, disposal, or removal of
the vacant building, in accordance with this article, shall accompany the
permit application. The applicant shall select a Vacant Building Plan from one
of the following three categories:
      1.   Demolition. If the vacant commercial or industrial building is to be
demolished, the Vacant Building Plan shall include a proposed time frame for
demolition, which shall not exceed nine (9) months in duration.
      2.   Secured Structure. If the vacant commercial or industrial building
is expected to remain vacant, the Vacant Building Plan shall contain all of the
following:
         a.   A plan for fire alarm and fire protection, if required by the
Fire Marshal.
         b.   A plan of action to remedy any public nuisance existing in the
building or on the property, within thirty (30) days of permit issuance.
         c.   A lighting plan for the exterior of the building and property,
walkways adjacent thereto, parking or loading areas, and nighttime illumination
of areas and walkways of the building and property that may be vulnerable to
vandalism or vagrancy, including a regular maintenance plan for all exterior
lighting and illumination fixtures.
         d.   A plan to secure the building. Boarding or other covering of
windows and doors must comply with Section
10-2K-4.A.1 of this article.
         e.   A plan to maintain the vacant commercial or industrial building
and property in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance Standards set
forth in section
10-2K-4 of this article.
      3.   Rehabilitation. If the owner of the vacant building intends to
return it to lawful occupancy or function, the Vacant Building Plan shall
include a rehabilitation time frame for the building and property, which shall
not exceed twelve (12) months. A valid building permit, or a written waiver
from the Chief Building Official that a permit is not required, shall be
obtained within three (3) months of the issuance of the Vacant Building Permit.
The Chief Building Official may grant an extension of time upon receipt of a
written statement from the owner detailing any unavoidable delays causing the
need for the extension. The rehabilitation shall conform to all applicable laws
and the owner shall obtain all required permits. The owner shall keep the
building secured and in compliance with the Vacant Building Maintenance
Standards as provided in section
10-2K-4 of this article at all times during rehabilitation.
   E.   Fees. The City Council shall pass a resolution stating the amount of
all fees and costs of all penalties.
      1.   Initial Fee. The initial fee is due at the time of initial
registration of the vacant building.
      2.   Renewal Fee. The renewal fee is due one (1) year after issuance of
the initial registration of the vacant building. The Resolution setting fees
shall establish the renewal fee in an amount higher than the initial fee and
shall require that the amount of the renewal fee increase each additional year
a renewal is required, provided that the resolution may determine a maximum fee
after a specified number of years have passed.
      3.   Refund.
         a.   If the vacant building is occupied or otherwise brought into
lawful use within three (3) months after issuance of the permit, eighty (80)
percent of the fees paid for that year shall be refunded to the owner.
         b.   If the vacant building is occupied or otherwise brought into
lawful use more than three (3) months but less than six (6) months after
issuance of the permit, fifty (50) percent of the fees paid for that year shall
be refunded to the owner.
         c.   No refund shall be granted if the vacant building is occupied or
otherwise brought into lawful use six (6) months or more after issuance of the
vacant building permit.
   F.   Requirements
      1.   Length of Registration. A registration permit shall be valid for one
(1) year.
      2.   Renewal.
         a.   If the building remains vacant on the date of expiration of the
permit, the owner shall be granted a thirty (30) day grace period to renew the
permit and pay required fees; however, the renewal year shall commence one day
after expiration of the prior registration.
         b.   The owner shall submit a new Vacant Building Plan at the time of
renewal, unless the owner certifies in writing that there will be no change to
the Vacant Building Plan already on file.
      3.   Consent to Entry. An applicant for a permit or for a renewal shall
consent to the entry of the Chief Building Official, or his/her designee, at
all reasonable hours and upon reasonable notice for the purpose of inspection.
Refusal to consent to entry shall be a violation of this article. In addition
to issuing a municipal infraction citation in the event of refusal, the City
may file a complaint under oath to a court of competent jurisdiction requesting
a warrant, and shall complete the inspection upon issuance of a warrant by the
court.
      4.   Consent to Emergency Inspections or Emergency Repairs. An applicant
for a permit or for a renewal shall consent to the entry of the Chief Building
Official, or his/her designee, if the Chief Building Official has reason to
believe than an emergency exists with respect to the building or structure that
creates, or tends to create, an imminent hazard to health, welfare, or safety
of the public. If the Chief Building Official believes that such an emergency
exists, then the Chief Building Official may enter the building to inspect the
premises, without notifying the responsible party or obtaining a warrant. If
the Chief Building Official finds an emergency situation exists that presents
an imminent hazard to the health, welfare or safety of the general public, then
the official may cause any reasonable action, including the employment of
necessary labor and materials, to perform emergency repairs to alleviate the
hazard. The owner shall pay costs incurred in the performance of emergency
repairs; and if not paid by the owner, the City may place a lien against the
property to recover the costs.
      5.   Cooperation by the Owner or Responsible Person. All owners holding a
permit and responsible persons identified in a permit application shall
cooperate with and facilitate inspections of the premises at reasonable times
pursuant to reasonable notice. Obstructing a duly authorized inspection,
including refusing entry or access to portions of the building subject to the
permit, shall be a violation of this chapter. The owner shall notify the
Building Inspector within thirty (30) business days of any changes to the
contact information of the owner or responsible person.
      6.   Continued Compliance. For the Vacant Building Permit to remain
valid, the building or structure shall continuously comply with the filed
Vacant Building Plan and the Vacant Building Maintenance Requirements of this
article, below. Failure to maintain the building in accordance with this
article shall be a violation of the city code.
   G.   Process
      1.   Inspections.
         a.   Upon receipt of a complete initial application or renewal
application, including payment of required fees, the Development Services
Department shall schedule an inspection by the Chief Building Official. The
Chief Building Official may request the assistance of the Fire Marshal.
         b.   The Chief Building Official shall prepare an inspection report,
noting the condition of the property and any deficiencies from the requirements
of this article. The owner shall receive a copy of the inspection report.
      2.   Vacant Building Permit. Upon a finding by the Chief Building
Official that the vacant building is secure, is not hazardous, and does not
present a public nuisance, the Chief Building Official shall issue a Vacant
Building Permit.
      3.   If the Vacant Building Permit is denied, the Chief Building Official
shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies. The applicant shall
be given a reasonable amount of time to correct deficiencies, which shall in no
case extend beyond thirty (30) days, unless extended by the Chief Building
Official. Failure to secure a valid permit shall be a violation of this
article.
   H.   Appeals. Any determination of the Chief Building Official may be
appealed to the Building Advisory and Appeals Board, in accordance with Section
10-2A-4 of this title.
   I.   Sale or Transfer. The owner may sell or transfer the permit to a new
owner, who shall be subject to the Vacant Building Plan and any other
conditions imposed on the permit. The new owner shall notify the City of the
transfer and provide contact information for the new owner and any new
management or other person responsible for maintaining or operating the
property within 30 days of the transfer. Failure to notify the City of a
transfer as required shall be a violation of the city code. (Ord. 23-03, 3-7-
2023)
10-2K-4: VACANT BUILDING MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maintenance Requirements. All buildings or structures subject to the
application shall be adequately protected from intrusion by trespassers and
pests, and from deterioration by the weather. The building must also comply
with the approved Vacant Building Plan and the following Vacant Building
Maintenance Standards:
      1.   Building Openings. Except for downtown buildings in the Z5, Central
Business zoning district, all doors, windows, areaways, and other openings
shall be weathertight and secured against entry by birds, vermin, and
trespassers.
      2.   Downtown Buildings.
         a.   Any alteration to a vacant building located in the Z5, Central
Business District as zoned in Title 12 of the city code, shall be subject to
the requirements of Section
12-13-6 of the city code.
         b.   For vacant commercial and mixed use buildings on land designated
on the official zoning map in the Z5, Central Business District, windows, doors
with glazing, and other openings located on the first floor and facing a street
shall not be papered, soaped, boarded, or otherwise made opaque. To avoid the
appearance of vacancy, first floor display windows shall have installed a form
of display. Windows located above the first floor, or windows not facing a
street or parking area or visible from a street or parking area, may be boarded
or otherwise made opaque.
         c.   Required boarding or other obstruction of windows and doors on
buildings subject to review by the Historic Preservation Commission shall not
damage historic elements and shall be painted or otherwise finished in
accordance with requirements or conditions imposed by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
      3.   Waste Removal. All waste, debris, rubbish, and garbage shall be
removed from the interior of the building or structure and surrounding
premises, on an ongoing basis.
      4.   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects that could admit moisture, rain, or roof draining,
and shall allow for sufficient drainage to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the interior of the building. Where present, parapets shall be structurally
sound and kept in good repair.
      5.   Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional and
installed in an approved manner, and shall allow discharge in an approved
manner.
      6.   Building Structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and structurally sound. The building shall be maintained in a manner that does
not pose a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
      7.   Structural Members. The structural members shall be free of
deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      8.   Foundation Walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained
structurally sound so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare. The foundation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use
places upon it, and shall be free from open cracks and breaks, free from leaks,
and be secure from entry and infiltration by vermin.
      9.   Exterior Walls. The exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials, such as paint, stain, or similar surface
treatment. Brick, stone, or other materials shall be maintained to be
structurally secure.
      10.   Decorative Features and Appurtenances. The cornices, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, decorative metal façade, wall facings and similar
decorative features and appurtenances shall be safe, anchored, and in good
repair. Exposed metal, wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather coating
materials, such as paint, stain, or similar surface treatment.
      11.   Overhanging Extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar
features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe and sound. Exposed metal,
wood, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay
or rust by periodic applications of weather coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
      12.   Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and
similar features shall be structurally safe and in good repair. Exposed metal,
wood, brick, stone, or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic applications of weather-coating materials.
      13.   Walkways. Public walkways shall be in good repair, shall be safe
for pedestrian travel, and shall be free of snow and ice. Snow and ice removal
shall be completed in accordance with title 5, chapter 1, article G of this
city code.
      14.   Accessory Building/Structures. Accessory buildings or structures
such as garages, sheds, and fences shall be free from safety, health and fire
hazards, and shall be kept in good repair.
      15.   Exterior Premises. The surrounding premises upon which the
structure or building is located shall be clean, safe, sanitary, free from
waste, rubbish, garbage, excessive vegetation, and other nuisances; shall not
be used for exterior storage; and shall not pose a threat to public health,
welfare or safety. (Ord. 23-03, 3-7-2023)
10-2K-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any violation of a provision of this article is a municipal infraction,
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this city code, for which the City may
issue a citation. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
   B.   Abatement of Violations. The issuance of a municipal infraction
citation shall not preclude the City from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or
utilization of the structure or premises. (Ord. 23-03, 3-7-2023)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Jurisdiction
11-1-4: Applicability; Conditions
11-1-5: Criteria For Subdivisions In Undeveloped Areas
11-1-6: Relationship To Other Laws, Titles And Plans
11-1-7: Waiver Or Modification Of Requirements
11-1-8: Fees
11-1-9: Selling Before Approval; Penalties
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS of
Mason City, referred to herein as the "regulations". (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to encourage orderly community development and
provide for the regulation and control of the extension of public improvements,
public services, and utilities, the improvement of land, and the design of
subdivisions, consistent with the City's approved Comprehensive Plan and other
specific community plans.
These regulations support Comprehensive Plan policies for the creation of new
neighborhoods and the revitalization of existing neighborhoods that are
walkable, served by public utilities, and have good access to commercial
services, schools, recreational amenities and open space. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-3: JURISDICTION:
These regulations apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located
within the corporate limits of the City, or within two (2) miles of the
corporate limits of the City, pursuant to section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa.
(Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-4: APPLICABILITY; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Subdivision Required: No land shall be subdivided or lots conveyed
within the corporate limits or the two (2) mile extraterritorial area of the
City, with the exception under section
11-1-5 of this chapter, until the following conditions are satisfied:
      1.   The subdivider or his/her agent shall submit a preliminary plat of
the parcel to the Zoning Division in the Development Services Department.
      2.   The subdivider shall obtain a recommendation to approve, modify or
disapprove the preliminary plat by the commission and approval of the
preliminary plat by the Council.
      3.   The final plat of the parcel is reviewed by the Administrative
Officer and approved by the Council.
      4.   The approved final plat is filed with the County Recorder and County
Auditor.
   B.   Building Permits: No building permit shall be issued for construction
on any lot, parcel or tract where a subdivision, lot split or boundary line
adjustment is required by this title, unless and until a final plat, lot split
or boundary line adjustment has been approved and recorded in accordance with
this title.
   C.   Lot Splits: Lot splits, as defined, require prior approval of the
Administrative Officer as specified in section
11-3-3 of this title.
   D.   Boundary Line Adjustments: Boundary line adjustments between adjoining
parcels require prior approval of the Administrative Officer as specified in
section
11-3-2 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-5: CRITERIA FOR SUBDIVISIONS IN UNDEVELOPED AREAS:
   A.   Premature subdivisions are prohibited within the Z1 District. A
rezoning to another district is required prior to, or concurrent with, any
subdivision.
   B.   No subdivision in an undeveloped area shall be approved unless the
following criteria are met:
      1.   The site is contiguous to an existing neighborhood or can be readily
connected to an existing neighborhood or corridor by a collector street.
      2.   The site is able to be served by public utilities within a
reasonable distance as determined by the City Engineer and Development Review
Committee (see title 12, chapter 7 of this Code).
      3.   A concept plan has been submitted, showing how the proposed
subdivision will fit into a complete planned neighborhood of at least forty
(40) acres in size. The concept plan must be drawn to scale and demonstrate how
the proposed subdivision's transportation and utility network will connect to
the broader area included in the concept plan to provide an interconnected
development that uses land, transportation and public utility resources
efficiently and effectively. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-6: RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, TITLES AND PLANS:
In addition to the requirements of this title, all plats of land must comply
with all other applicable City, County, State and Federal Statutes or
regulations. These regulations are expressly designed to supplement and be
compatible with the City's zoning title, Comprehensive Plan and other City
plans and regulations. Plats may be disapproved on the basis of the above and
other Council approved plans and policies that may be adopted. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-1-7: WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Modification Of Requirements: Upon recommendation of the commission,
the Council may vary, modify or waive the requirements of chapter 4, "Design
Standards And Required Improvements", of this title, provided one (1) of the
following qualifying circumstances are met:
      1.   If the subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the
requirements of this title would result in extraordinary hardship because of
excessive costs due to non-self-inflicted conditions; and if the subdivider can
demonstrate that strict compliance with the requirements of this title would
conflict with the objectives of these subdivision regulations and the Mason
City Comprehensive Plan; or
      2.   If a subdivider can demonstrate that strict compliance with the
requirements of this title would result in subdivision design that would
compromise public health or safety, or could result in the substantial
degradation of natural features.
      3.   Notwithstanding the above, the Council may not approve a waiver that
is in conflict with the requirements of title 12 of this Code, unless a
variance has been approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as prescribed in
title 12 of this Code.
   B.   Criteria For Council Action: The Council may act to vary, modify or
waive a requirement only if it finds that the public safety and interest is
protected and that such variance, modification or waiver will not hinder
development of neighboring properties and that the variance, modification or
waiver will not nullify the intent or purposes of this title or of other titles
of this Code. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-8: FEES:
The Council shall from time to time establish by resolution a schedule of
reasonable fees, sufficient to recover incurred costs, to be charged for the
review of plats under these regulations. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-1-9: SELLING BEFORE APPROVAL; PENALTIES:
   A.   Final Subdivision Approval Required: Land which forms part of a
subdivision requiring Council approval under these regulations shall not be
sold before Council grants final subdivision approval, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval.
   B.   Land Division Approval Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
transfer or sell any division which requires approval under this title without
first having obtained approval by the City. Each such attempt, agreement,
transfer or sale shall be deemed a separate violation.
   C.   Preventive Actions: In addition to the foregoing, the City may
institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent any pending sale or transfer or to prevent any further sale or transfer
in violation of this title.
   D.   Penalties: A violation of any provision of this title shall be
considered a misdemeanor and punished accordingly. Each day that a violation
occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 15-3,
6-2-2015)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Interpretation
11-2-2: Definitions
11-2-1: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word
"shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person" includes
a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation
as well as an individual; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: That person designated by the City Administrator as the
officer responsible for the administration and enforcement of this title.
ALLEY: A way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land or the boundary
of the subdivision.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: An adjustment of lot or parcel lines between owners
of contiguous officially platted lots or parcels where no more than the same
number of lots or parcels, or fewer numbers of lots or parcels, exist after the
adjustment. A boundary line adjustment also includes the removal of internal or
common boundary lines to consolidate two (2) or more lots or parcels having
common ownership into one (1).
BUILDING PERMIT: A document issued under the authority of the City building
official which authorizes the construction of a structure on a lot.
COMMISSION: The Mason City Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The Mason City Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and as
amended from time to time.
COUNCIL: The Council of the City of Mason City, Iowa.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one (1) end connecting to another street, and the
other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEDICATION OF PLAT: A document, submitted for recording with the final plat,
which sets out the legal description of the property platted, contains a signed
and properly acknowledged statement that the plat is made with the free consent
and in accordance with the desires of the owner, dedicates street and other
public property and easements, and may include private restrictions or
covenants.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: The committee authorized to complete concept
review of a plat of subdivision, per title 12, chapter 7 of this Code.
EASEMENT: An authorization by a property owner for another to use a designated
part of the property for a specified purpose.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a street and regarded as the front of
the lot.
IMPROVEMENTS: Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites,
including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving,
sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways and other public works
and appurtenances.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel or tract intended as a unit for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: Any lot which is not a corner lot which abuts two (2)
streets.
LOT SPLIT: The division of a single parcel into two (2) lots, each sufficiently
sized for development.
OWNER: The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or such
representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
PLAT: A map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan for the subdivision
of land is presented, which he submits for approval and intends, in final form,
to record.
PLAT OF SURVEY: The graphical representation of a survey of one (1) or more
parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel
within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor.
PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS OR COVENANTS: Contracts or agreements entered into between
private parties and which constitute a restriction on the use of all private
property within a subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to
provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which
would tend to impair stability of values.
PUBLIC WAY: A right-of-way across or within a block for use by the public.
STREET: Public or private property, not an alley, intended for vehicular
circulation. In appropriate context, the term "street" may refer to the right-
of-way bounded by the property lines of such property or may refer to the
paving installed within such right-of-way.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part of
the City to another and not intended to provide access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A low to moderate capacity street which serves to move
traffic from minor streets to major or arterial streets.
STREET, MAJOR: A street which has or is planned to have continuity to carry
traffic from one section of the City to another.
STREET, MINOR: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person or
entity empowered to act on the owner's behalf.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into three (3) or more parts for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development.
The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of
subdividing or to land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of small
parcels of land to or between the owners of adjacent platted lots, where such
sale or exchange does not create any additional lots, shall not be considered a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions,
including any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the
local government facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision which contains not more than four (4) lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of Municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements,
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property,
and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan,
zoning map, zoning title or these regulations.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The graphical representation of a subdivision of land,
prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for
the County where the land is located.
SUBDIVISION, PREMATURE: Any subdivision that is not served by Municipal
utilities and/or does not comprise all or a portion of an existing or planned
neighborhood, as specified in section
11-1-5 of this title.
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE: A document, signed, sealed and dated by a registered
land surveyor, which contains the legal description of the property and a
statement by the registered land surveyor that the plat was prepared by the
surveyor or under the surveyor's direct personal supervision.
UTILITIES: Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
wastewater, stormwater, electricity, digital communications and telephone and
cable television service. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Scope
11-3-2: Boundary Line Adjustments Review And Approval
11-3-3: Lot Split Review And Approval
11-3-4: Preapplication Conference
11-3-5: Concept Plan
11-3-6: Concept Plan Review
11-3-7: Applicability Of Preliminary And Final Plat Requirements
11-3-8: Preliminary Plat Requirements
11-3-9: Preliminary Plat Review Procedure
11-3-10: Duration And Effect Of Approval
11-3-11: Final Plat Requirements
11-3-12: Final Plat Review Procedures
11-3-13: Installation Of Improvements
11-3-1: SCOPE:
This chapter includes the processes and requirements for all land division
applications within Mason City and the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-2: BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The purpose of this section is to prescribe uniform procedures allowing for
approval of minor changes to the boundaries of parcels between owners of
adjacent parcels of land or to remove one (1) or more common property lines and
combine two (2) or more parcels into one (1). Such adjustments shall be
reviewed administratively, as follows:
   A.   Applications shall be submitted by the landowner on a form as
established by the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the
following:
      1.   In the case of a boundary line adjustment between two (2) parcels
with structural improvements, a boundary survey including all the information
required by chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa. In the case of a boundary line
adjustment consolidating two (2) or more parcels or lots, or a boundary line
adjustment between two (2) unimproved parcels or lots, a site plan drawn to
scale showing the boundaries and dimensions of the two (2) parcels.
      2.   Legal descriptions of the new parcels resulting from the boundary
line adjustment.
      3.   The location of all buildings, utility easements and access
(proposed or existing) for all parcels involved including adjoining property.
      4.   A draft copy of the deed to be recorded with the boundary survey
showing the appropriate conveyance to complete the boundary line adjustment.
   B.   The parcel being conveyed shall be combined with the existing adjoining
parcel onto one (1) deed and recorded with the boundary surveyor site plan.
   C.   The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the application based
upon the boundary survey and other relevant information upon determination that
all resulting parcels meet the requirements of the zoning title and that all
resulting parcels have access to an adjoining public roadway by actual road
frontage or easement.
   D.   If the Administrative Officer finds that the proposed boundary line
adjustment does not comply with all requirements in this section, the boundary
line adjustment shall be denied. Such denial shall be issued in writing and
shall state how the proposed boundary line adjustment does not conform to all
adopted codes and standards. Decisions of denial may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment pursuant to title 12, chapter 5 of this Code. (Ord. 15-3,
6-2-2015)
11-3-3: LOT SPLIT REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
The purpose of this section is to prescribe a process for the division of
parcels into two (2) lots, known as lot splits, when a formal subdivision is
not required. Such divisions shall be reviewed administratively, as follows:
   A.   Applications shall be submitted by the owner on a form as established
by the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   In the case of a lot split of a parcel or lot with structural
improvements, a boundary survey including all the information required by
chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa.
      2.   Legal descriptions of the new parcels resulting from the lot split.
      3.   The location of all buildings, utility easements and access
(proposed or existing) for all parcels involved, including adjoining property.
      4.   A draft copy of the deed to be recorded with the boundary surveyor
site plan, showing the appropriate conveyance to complete the lot split.
   B.   The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the lot split based
upon the boundary survey or site plan and other relevant information. No lot
split shall be approved unless it meets the following criteria:
      1.   The resulting parcels meet the minimum lot size required for the
zoning district in which they are located.
      2.   Structures on the resulting lots will meet the required setbacks and
other bulk standards for the zoning districts in which they are located.
      3.   Both parcels have access to an adjoining public roadway by actual
road frontage or easement.
      4.   Neither this process nor any former lot split process has previously
been used to sever a lot from the parent tract.
   C.   If the Administrative Officer finds that the proposed lot split does
not comply with all requirements defined in this section, the lot split shall
be denied. Such denial shall be issued in writing and shall state how the
proposed boundary line adjustment does not conform to all adopted codes and
standards. Decisions of denial may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to title 12, chapter 5 of this Code. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-4: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
In order to convey critical information regarding the subdivision process, a
preapplication conference is encouraged, but not required, prior to the
submission of an application for a plat of subdivision. The conference shall
include the Administrative Officer, City Engineer, other appropriate City
staff, and utility company representatives where advisable. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to:
   A.   Acquaint the applicant with the subdivision regulations and related
requirements of the City;
   B.   List the requirements that the applicant must comply with prior to the
submission of the preliminary plat;
   C.   Establish the applicable street widths for the subdivision under the
provisions of section
11-4-4 of this title;
   D.   Describe the standard engineering specifications adopted by the City;
   E.   Determine whether the applicant wishes to request waivers of any
subdivision regulations as established in section
11-1-7 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-5: CONCEPT PLAN:
The applicant shall submit a concept plan for review by the Development Review
Committee, prior to the submittal of any plat. The concept plan is intended to
reflect the general intentions of the applicant with regard to layout of lots,
streets and utilities, and to provide a basis for discussion and revision
before substantial engineering costs are incurred. Developers are discouraged
from preparing plat documents until the concept plan has been reviewed by the
Development Review Committee. The concept plan shall include the following
information:
   A.   The proposed layout of streets and utilities, emphasizing connections
to adjacent neighborhoods and corridors;
   B.   Approximate location of lots, location of stormwater facilities, and
open space;
   C.   Generalized land uses proposed, such as residential, commercial or
mixed use;
   D.   General topography, based on existing topographic maps or other
resources (a survey is not required for the concept plan);
   E.   Approximate locations of any buildings or structures located on the
property;
   F.   Surrounding land uses and approximate location of buildings on abutting
properties;
   G.   Sensitive features of the property, including streams, wooded areas,
known or potential wetlands, known archaeological sites, etc.;
   H.   For proposed subdivisions in areas not previously developed, the
concept plan shall be accompanied by a conceptual build out showing how the
proposed subdivision will fit into a complete planned neighborhood of at least
forty (40) acres in area, per section
11-1-5 of this title. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-6: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a concept plan, the Administrative Officer and the Development
Review Committee shall meet with the developer to review the concept plan in
the context of the standards of this chapter, other City Code requirements and
Comprehensive Plan policies. The Administrative Officer will determine if the
proposed subdivision is a major or minor subdivision and shall schedule review
of the concept plan by the Development Review Committee, which review shall
occur within twenty (20) days of receipt of the concept plan. Comments of the
Development Review Committee are intended to provide guidance to the applicant
in preparing the preliminary plat and do not constitute an official decision on
the application. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-7: APPLICABILITY OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Preliminary and final plat requirements are applicable to all major
subdivisions. The owner and developer of a minor subdivision, as defined, may
choose to omit the preliminary plat submission and approval process. (Ord. 15-
3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-8: PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Following the concept plan review, any subdivider requesting preliminary plat
approval shall file the following information with the Administrative Officer
prior to the deadline established by the commission:
   A.   Application form and filing fee, as established by a resolution of the
Council.
   B.   One (1) original and two (2) copies of the preliminary plat drawn at a
scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger, on a sheet
size not exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). The
preliminary plat shall be clearly marked "Preliminary Plat" and shall show the
following:
      1.   Subdivision name, scale, north point and date.
      2.   The name and address of the property owner and the name and address
of the person or firm preparing the plat.
      3.   A key map showing the general location of the subdivision in
relation to surrounding streets and development.
      4.   All adjacent streets and subdivisions and names of the owners of
record of all adjacent unplatted properties.
      5.   Legal description of the property included in the proposed
subdivision.
      6.   Approximate total area of the proposed subdivision.
      7.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and
adjoining property.
      8.   Existing and proposed topography of the site showing contours at
vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2') if the slope of the site is
less than ten percent (10%), and at vertical intervals of not more than five
feet (5') if the slope is ten percent (10%) or greater.
      9.   The general location and areas of any existing watercourses,
wetlands, floodplains, trees, wooded areas, prairie resources or other
environmentally sensitive areas on or within two hundred feet (200') of any
portion of the proposed subdivision. If any portion of the area within the
proposed preliminary plat lies within the City's regulatory floodplain, the
boundaries of the floodplain and location and elevation of established cross
sections shall be placed on the preliminary plat or on an addendum.
      10.   Locations of existing easements including, but not limited to,
utility easements, drainage easements and access easements, lot lines, streets,
public utilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainpipes,
culverts, stormwater detention facilities and any other public improvements on
the property.
      11.   Layout of proposed blocks and lots, including the dimensions of
each, and the lot and block number in numerical order.
      12.   The location, width, grades, dimensions and proposed names of all
proposed streets (public and private) and utility and other easements.
      13.   Proposal for drainage of the land, including proposed storm sewers,
ditches, swales, bio swales, rain gardens, culverts, bridges, stormwater
management facilities and other structures.
      14.   Proposed utilities, including sanitary sewers, water lines, fire
hydrants, gas mains, electric utilities, streetlights and other facilities.
      15.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or public or semipublic purposes.
      16.   Proposed easements, showing locations, dimensions, purposes and
limitations.
      17.   A summary description of any covenants or private restrictions to
be incorporated in the final plat.
      18.   Any other pertinent information.
      19.   The City approval block consisting of the signature of the
Administrative Officer and the date and resolution number approving the
preliminary plat, shall be located on the first page of the plat.
   C.   One (1) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") black line copy of
the preliminary plat as outlined in subsection B of this section.
   D.   One (1) digital copy of the preliminary plat containing the elements as
outlined in subsection B of this section in a format compatible with the City's
geographic information system or other format acceptable to the City.
   E.   One (1) digital copy of the preliminary plat containing the elements as
outlined in subsection B of this section in a format as specified by the
Administrative Officer.
   F.   One (1) digital copy of the legal description of the subdivision in a
format specified by the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-9: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon receipt of a complete preliminary plat application, the
Administrative Officer shall distribute copies of the preliminary plat to the
City Engineer and other affected City departments and public utility companies
for review, and shall schedule the plat for review by the commission. All City
departments tasked with review of the plat shall report their findings as to
the plat's compliance with City standards to the commission prior to its
consideration of the plat. The Administrative Officer shall also provide notice
of the date, time and place of the public hearing before the commission
regarding the preliminary plat application. The notice shall be published in
the City's newspaper of record and be made by U.S. mail at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the hearing to the owners of record of all properties
within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the area included in the preliminary
plat.
   B.   The commission shall review the plat, together with all staff reports,
to determine whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and Comprehensive Plan
of the City. The commission shall, within forty five (45) days following
receipt of the completed application, conduct a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat unless such time period shall be extended by agreement between
the subdivider and the City. After due consideration of the plat, the
commission shall make a recommendation to the Council. The commission may
recommend to approve, to approve subject to modifications or to deny the
preliminary plat. If such recommendation is to approve subject to modifications
or to deny the preliminary plat, the reasons for the decision shall be stated
in the recommendation. Any preliminary plat that is not reviewed by the
commission within forty five (45) days following receipt of the application
shall be forwarded to the Council without the commission's recommendation.
   C.   The Council shall review the recommendation of the commission and shall
review the plat to determine whether the plat conforms to the ordinances and
the Comprehensive Plan of the City. Following such review, the Council may
approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the preliminary plat. The
Council shall set forth in its official records its reasons for denying the
plat or approving the plat subject to modifications. The Council shall take
action on the plat within forty five (45) days following action by the
commission, unless such time period shall be extended by agreement between the
subdivider and the City. If the Council shall fail to take action on the plat
within said forty five (45) days, the plat shall be deemed approved.
   D.   The Administrative Officer shall notify the developer and City Engineer
of the Council's decision. If the preliminary plat is approved, the
Administrative Officer shall provide a copy of the approved preliminary plat
and the resolution approving the preliminary plat to the City Engineer and
developer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-10: DURATION AND EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall be effective for one
(1) year unless, upon written request of the owner and subdivider, the Council
grants an extension of time. Such extension request must be received no fewer
than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the approval. The request
should include the status of the subdivision's improvements, a comprehensive
list of improvements to be completed during the extension, the estimated dollar
cost of the remaining improvements, and justification for the extension. If the
final plat is not filed within one (1) year and no extension is granted by the
Council, all previous actions of the Council with respect to the plat shall be
deemed null and void. Approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the
applicant the following assurances during the period of approval effectiveness:
   A.   The general terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat was
approved will not be changed.
   B.   The subdivider may submit, on or before the expiration date of such
approval, the final plat of all or part of the property contained in the
preliminary plat for approval.
   C.   The approval of the preliminary plat by the Council shall constitute
authorization for the installation of improvements as required by this title,
and as shown on the preliminary plat; provided, no such improvement shall be
constructed or installed until and unless complete plans and specifications for
the construction of such improvements have been approved by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-11: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
Any subdivider requesting final plat approval shall file the following
information with the Administrative Officer prior to the deadline as
established by the commission:
   A.   Application form and filing fee, as established by a resolution of the
Council.
   B.   A copy of the deed, certificate of title, land contract or any other
recorded legal documentation showing verification of ownership of said parcel
being subdivided.
   C.   A surveyor's certificate (original and 1 copy).
   D.   A dedication of plat (original and 1 copy).
   E.   A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds of the lots.
   F.   Evidence that all required improvements have been completed in
accordance with the construction plans as approved and in substantial
compliance with the approved preliminary plat. In lieu of completion of
improvements prior to final plat approval, the subdivider shall post a
performance bond, escrow or any other evidence of financial responsibility
acceptable to the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be
completed within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such
final plat. If the improvements are not completed within the specified time,
the Council may use the bond, escrow or other approved financial instrument or
any necessary portion thereof to complete the same.
   G.   A street tree planting plan approvable by the City and bearing a
signature block for the City Forester.
   H.   One (1) signed original and two (2) black line copies of the final
subdivision plat drawn at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') or larger, on a sheet fifteen inches by eighteen inches (15" x 18") in
size. The final plat shall be clearly marked "Final Plat" and shall show the
following:
      1.   Subdivision name, scale, north arrow and date.
      2.   The name and address of the property owner and the name and address
of the person or firm preparing the plat.
      3.   All adjacent streets and subdivisions.
      4.   The legal description of the property included in the subdivision.
      5.   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries of the subdivided area, the lots, streets, alleys, easements and any
other similar public or private uses.
      6.   All monuments to be of record.
      7.   All distance, bearing, curve and other survey data as required by
chapter 355, Code of Iowa.
      8.   The location, width, dimensions and names of all public streets to
be dedicated for public use and private streets provided for by perpetual
easement.
      9.   Block and lot numbers.
      10.   The location and purpose of any easement and/or private restriction
shown on the plat.
      11.   In the case of a minor subdivision where no preliminary plat was
required or approved, a grading plan showing areas of excavation and
stockpiling, soil erosion control methods which will be practiced, and
quantities involved in the soil erosion control methods.
      12.   If any portion of the area within the proposed final plat lies
within the City's regulatory floodplain, the boundaries of the floodplain and
location and elevation of established cross sections shall be placed on the
final plat or on an addendum.
      13.   If more than one (1) sheet is used, each sheet shall clearly show
the number of the sheet, the total number of the sheets included in the plat,
and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
      14.   The required City signature block executed by the Mayor, and the
date and resolution number approving the final plat shall be 5.4" x 1.5" or
2.2" x 3.7" in size, located in the lower right hand corner of the first page
of the plat. A signature block for the Mayor shall be located on all subsequent
pages. Any exceptions must be approved by the Administrative Officer.
   I.   One (1) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") black line copy of
the final plat as outlined in subsection H of this section.
   J.   One (1) digital copy of the final plat containing the elements as
outlined in subsection
11-3-8B of this chapter in a format compatible with the City's geographic
information system or other format acceptable to the City.
   K.   One (1) digital copy of the final plat containing the elements as
outlined in subsection
11-3-8B of this chapter in a format as specified by the Administrative Officer.
   L.   One (1) digital copy of the legal description of the subdivision in a
format specified by the Administrative Officer.
   M.   One (1) archival copy of the plat meeting the specifications outlined
in subsection
11-3-8B of this chapter in a format and on media acceptable to the City
Engineer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-12: FINAL PLAT REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Upon receipt of a complete final plat application, the Administrative
Officer shall distribute copies of the final plat to the City Engineer and
other affected City departments and public utility companies for review, and
shall schedule the plat for review by the Council. All City departments tasked
with review of the plat shall report their findings as to the plat's compliance
with City standards to the Council prior to its consideration of the plat.
   B.   The Council shall review the final plat and all staff reports to
determine whether said plat is in substantial conformity to the approved
preliminary plat and whether said plat conforms to the ordinances and the
Comprehensive Plan of the City. If the plat is found to be in substantial
conformity to the approved preliminary plat and conforms to the ordinances and
Comprehensive Plan of the City, the Council shall approve the plat by
resolution. The Council shall take action on the plat within sixty (60) days
following the filing of the completed application with the Administrative
Officer, unless such time period is extended by agreement between the
subdivider and the City. If the Council does not take action within sixty (60)
days, the final plat shall be deemed approved. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-3-13: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The Council may require that all public improvements described on the approved
preliminary plat for a major subdivision be installed and dedicated prior to
approval of the final plat. If the Council does not require such installation,
the Council shall require the subdivider to post a performance bond, escrow or
other evidence of financial responsibility equal to one hundred percent (100%)
of the cost of the installation of the improvements, in a form acceptable to
the City, guaranteeing that improvements not completed shall be completed
within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval of such final plat.
If the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the Council
may use the bond, escrow or other approved financial instrument or any
necessary portion thereof to complete the same. The City shall return or
release the instrument of financial responsibility when all of the required
improvements have been installed and approved and accepted by the City
Engineer. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Scope
11-4-2: Blocks
11-4-3: Lots
11-4-4: Streets And Circulation
11-4-1: SCOPE:
   A.   The standards contained in this title shall be considered the minimum
standards necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Design of subdivisions shall comply with the standards of this title,
demonstrate consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, and take into
consideration the natural features of the site and patterns of adjacent
development.
   C.   The subdivider of property shall be responsible for constructing all
public improvements associated with the proposed subdivision according to this
Code, unless exempted from such requirements. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-4-2: BLOCKS:
   A.   Blocks should be limited in size and be laid out in a pattern that
ensures the connectivity of streets, provides for efficient provision of public
and safety services, and establishes efficient and logical routes between
residences and nonresidential destinations and public gathering places.
   B.   To provide multiple travel routes within and between neighborhoods,
block faces along local and collector streets should range between three
hundred feet (300') and six hundred feet (600') in length. Longer block faces
may be allowed in cases of large lot commercial, industrial, or rural
residential development, or where topography, water features, or existing
development prevents shorter block lengths, although midblock pedestrian
connections may be required. Block faces are measured from centerline to
centerline.
   C.   Block faces in residential subdivisions should have a width sufficient
to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots. One (1) tier of lots may be permitted for
blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads or waterways.
   D.   Block faces should be at least six hundred feet (600') in length along
arterial streets to limit the number of intersections and maintain the capacity
of the street. The City may approve shorter block faces in high density
commercial areas or other areas with high pedestrian counts. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-
2015)
11-4-3: LOTS:
   A.   The size and shape of all lots shall comply with all requirements of
the zoning title. Lots must be of sufficient size to accommodate an adequate
buildable area and area for required setbacks, off street parking and service
facilities required by the type of use and development anticipated.
   B.   Lots with multiple street frontages must be large enough to accommodate
appropriate setbacks and adequate vehicular sight clearance on all street
frontages.
   C.   All lots shall abut a public street or upon an approved private street.
Each lot shall contain at least the minimum frontage required by the zoning
district in which the property is located, or if no minimum lot width is
required, at least fifty feet (50') in width.
   D.   Lots fronting on or having direct access to arterial streets shall be
avoided. Where unavoidable, lots shall be so arranged as to minimize the number
of access points.
   E.   Double frontage lots may be permitted only where lots abut an arterial
street or major street and a minor street, and provided that such lots shall
front only on a minor street.
   F.   All side lot lines shall be at approximate right angles to straight
street lines or approximately radial to curved street lines, except where a
variation will provide a better street and lot layout. For the purpose of this
subsection, "approximate right angles" means angles between eighty degrees
(80°) and one hundred degrees (100°).
   G.   At least fifty percent (50%) of blocks shall be oriented having one (1)
axis no greater than fifteen degrees (15°) of geographical east/west. The east/
west lengths of said blocks shall be longer than the north/south lengths of
those blocks. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
11-4-4: STREETS AND CIRCULATION:
   A.   Connectivity Of Streets, Sidewalks, And Trails: Subdivisions shall
provide for continuation and extension of arterial, collector and local
streets, sidewalks and trails in order to ensure connectivity between
neighborhoods, multiple travel routes resulting in the diffusion and
distribution of traffic, efficient routes for public and emergency services,
and to provide direct and continuous vehicular and pedestrian travel routes to
neighborhood destinations. Streets shall be located in accordance with the
following standards:
      1.   Arterial and collector streets and trails must be located and
extended in general accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and the City's
master trails plan.
      2.   All streets, sidewalks, and trails should connect to other streets,
sidewalks, and trails within the development, and to the property line to
provide for their extension to adjacent properties wherever possible and
practical.
      3.   The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and
orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to meet the needs of the
present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern and
allow that pattern to continue through adjacent properties; and to respect
natural features and topography.
      4.   Use of cul-de-sacs and other roadways with a single point of access
is discouraged. Cul-de-sacs should be utilized to avoid disturbance to
environmentally sensitive areas, respond to access limitations along adjacent
principal arterial streets, or where other unusual features prevent the
extension of the street to the property line or the interconnection to other
streets within or abutting the subdivision.
   B.   Street Design Standards:
      1.   Relation To Existing Streets And Natural Features: Any collector or
arterial street shall continue the alignment and width of any such street on
any abutting area when continuation is necessary for convenient movement of
traffic, effective fire protection, and efficient provision of utilities.
      2.   Alignment: Streets shall align with existing streets. Street jogs
with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') are
prohibited except where topographic or other physical conditions justify a
variation from the standard.
      3.   Local And Minor Collector Streets: Local and minor streets shall be
designed to discourage through traffic from outside the immediate neighborhood
while safely connecting to major collector or arterial streets.
      4.   Half Streets: No half streets shall be permitted. Streets designed
to create a border for the tract shall be platted as whole streets according to
their use and classification.
      5.   Dead End Streets: Dead end streets are prohibited except where a
street is planned to continue past the subdivider's property. A dead end street
shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length and shall terminate in a
temporary circular right-of-way with a minimum radius of forty feet (40').
      6.   Relation To Floodplains: All new streets and roads, public and
private, serving subdivisions intended for residential development shall be
designed at an elevation of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation,
except that the Council may waive this requirement in cases where topographic
or special conditions exist.
      7.   Street Types: Table 1, "Standards For Street Design", of this
section provides a summary of various street types. The information in this
table is intended to provide guidance for the design of the street network
within a subdivision. The standards may be varied based on the recommendations
of the City Engineer. When designing a subdivision, street types should be
chosen based on the intended function of the street and anticipated level of
traffic.
   TABLE 1
   STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
                                Pavement
Type AADT Est. Units Served ROW Width From   Sidewalks Conditions/Comments
                                Back Of Curb
                                            Pavement
Type           AADT Est. Units   ROW        Width From Sidewalks  Conditions/
                         Served             Back Of               Comments
                                            Curb
                                                                  Add width
Principal      10,000 -  n/a     80' - 100' 49'        Both sides for parking
arterial       20,000                                             lanes, bike
                                                                  lanes
                                                                  Add width
Minor arterial 5,000 -   n/a     80'        45'        Both sides for parking
               13,000                                             lanes, bike
                                                                  lanes
                                                                  Add width
Major          3,500 -   n/a     66'        31'        Both sides for parking
collector      8,000                                              lanes, bike
                                                                  lanes
                                                                  Add width
Minor          1,500 -   n/a     66'        31'        Both sides for parking
collector      3,500                                              lanes, bike
                                                                  lanes
Local                                                             Accommodates
nonresidential 0 - 1,500 n/a     66'        31'        Both sides parking both
street                                                            sides
                                                                  Parking on
Local                                                             both sides =
residential    0 - 1,500 n/a     60'        27' - 31'  Both sides 31'
street                                                            Parking 1
                                                                  side = 27'
Loop or        150 - 350 30 max. 50'        25' - 27'  1 side     Parking 1
eyebrow street                                                    side
                                                                  Accommodates
                                            27', 45'R             parking both
Cul-de-sac     120 - 150 20 max. 60'        turnaround 1 side     sides
                                                                  Maximum
                                                                  length: 600'
Commercial     n/a       n/a     20'                   n/a        No parking
alley
Residential    n/a       n/a     16' - 20'             n/a        No parking
alley
 
      8.   Dedication: All platted streets within the City shall be dedicated
to the City for public use, except as approved by the Council. Requests for
private streets will be considered; provided, that connectivity to adjacent
properties is not needed and the responsibilities for maintenance, snow
removal, garbage service, and street sweeping are clearly established.
      9.   Maintenance And Services: If private streets are approved, the
subdivider must submit a legally binding instrument setting forth the
procedures to be followed for maintaining private streets and providing garbage
service, snow removal, street sweeping, and for financing these services. Such
costs shall be shared by all owners of property located within the subdivision,
or designated portion thereof, through the use of an owners' association or
other entity satisfactory to the City. Said instrument shall provide that if
said services are not provided as required therein, the City shall have the
right to perform said services, and the cost thereof shall be a lien and charge
against all of the owners of lots so designated in the subdivision.
      10.   Street Names: Streets which are or will become extensions of
existing streets shall be given the same name as existing streets. New street
names shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. All street
names shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
   C.   Improvements Required: The subdivider shall grade and improve the
entire street or alley right-of-way and provide suitable paving, including curb
and gutter on all streets. All streets and alleys shall be of such width and
shall be so designed and constructed as to meet the standards of the City, and
shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
      1.   Sidewalks shall be installed adjacent to all lots within the platted
area and between such lots and all entrances to the subdivision. Sidewalks
adjacent to or within outlots reserved for future right-of-way shall be
installed prior to the time the outlot is dedicated as a street. Any owner of a
developed lot who purchases all or part of an adjacent undeveloped lot shall
install sidewalks on the undeveloped lot within ninety (90) days of purchase.
      2.   The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
dedication and improvement of a multipurpose trail in lieu of a sidewalk in
order to meet the needs of the platted area and other areas. In such event, the
City shall pay the subdivider the difference in cost between constructing the
sidewalk and constructing the trail. The trail, upon final approval and
acceptance by the City, shall become the property of the City.
      3.   The City may require, as a condition for approval of the plat,
dedication and improvement of a street having a width greater than necessary to
meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to meet street requirements
of both the platted area and other areas. In such event, the City shall pay the
subdivider the difference in cost of improving the wider street and the street
of a width adequate to meet the needs of the platted area alone. The streets,
upon final approval and acceptance by the City, shall become the property of
the City. (Ord. 15-3, 6-2-2015)
TITLE 12
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Purpose
12-1-3: Interpretation Of Standards
12-1-4: Relation To Comprehensive Plan
12-1-5: Annexed Territory
12-1-6: Zoning Permits
12-1-7: Standard Requirements
12-1-8: Forms And Functions Not Provided For Within Zoning Districts
12-1-9: Zoning Map
12-1-10: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
12-1-11: Severability
12-1-12: Amendment
12-1-13: Violations
12-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-2: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to regulate the forms and functions of all
structures, lands, and waters, to regulate lot coverage, population
distribution and density, and the size and location of all structures in
accordance with the Mason City Comprehensive Plan. Furthermore, this title is
set forth to protect the health, safety and general welfare of Mason City as
required by the Federal Standard State Enabling Act of 1926. (Ord. 10-003, 1-
19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
Whenever the requirements of this title are in any way in conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive, or that imposing the highest
standards, shall govern. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-4: RELATION TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
It is the policy of Mason City that the enforcement, amendment and
administration of this title be accomplished with due consideration of the
recommendations contained in the Mason City Comprehensive Plan as developed and
amended from time to time by recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and approval by the City Council. The City Council recognizes the
Mason City Comprehensive Plan as the policy to regulate land use and
development in accordance with the policies and purpose set forth herein. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-5: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All land annexed to the City subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance
shall be zoned Z1, Agriculture District. (Ord. 24-6, passed 4-2-2024)
12-1-6: ZONING PERMITS:
   A.   No structure shall hereafter be erected, reconstructed, structurally
altered, enlarged, added to or removed, nor shall an excavation for any
structure be commenced unless a zoning permit has been issued by the
Administrative Officer.
   B.   All zoning permits issued under this Chapter shall expire and be null
and void twelve (12) months after issuance unless work has commenced under the
permit prior to the deadline. An application for a zoning permit shall be filed
with the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by a drawing or plat
showing sufficient information as the Administrative Officer requires for the
enforcement of this chapter.
   C.   The City Council shall establish fees for the zoning permit by
resolution. (Ord. 24-6, passed 4-2-2024)
12-1-7: STANDARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Except as herein provided, no structure shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used, for
any purpose or in any manner that is not in conformity with this title.
   B.   Except as herein provided, no structure or premises shall hereafter be
used or occupied and no building permit shall be granted that does not conform
to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd.
2017 Code)
   C.   No yard or lot existing in the time of passage of this title shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the
minimum requirements established by this title.
   D.   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, restrictions,
covenants, relating to the form and function of land or imposed on lands within
the City by private declaration or agreement, but where the provisions of this
title are more restrictive than any such easement, restriction, or covenant, or
the provision of any private agreement, the provisions of this title shall
prevail. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-8: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS NOT PROVIDED FOR WITHIN ZONING DISTRICTS:
Whenever, in any zoning district, a form or function is neither specifically
permitted nor denied within section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, the form or function shall be considered
prohibited. In such cases, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Council, on their own initiative or upon request, may conduct a study to
determine if the form or function is acceptable and if so, what zoning district
would be most appropriate and the determination as to conditions and standards
relating to development of the form or function. The Planning and Zoning
Commission, City Council or property owner, upon receipt of the staff study
shall, if appropriate, initiate an amendment to the zoning regulations to
provide for the particular form or function under consideration or shall find
that the form or function is not compatible for development within the City.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-1-9: ZONING MAP:
   A.   The boundaries of the zoning districts are indicated upon the official
zoning map of Mason City, which is made a part of this title by reference
hereto. The official zoning map and all the notations, references and other
matters shown thereon is hereby declared to be a part of this title, and
amendments to the map shall be in accordance with the process and requirements
of chapter 4 of this title. The official zoning map shall be on file in the
Office of the City Clerk and shall bear the signature of the Mayor attested to
by the City Clerk.
   B.   If, in accordance with the provisions of this title, changes are made
in zoning district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning
map, the ordinance number and date of said change shall be recorded on the
official zoning map.
   C.   Zoning district boundaries shall generally follow parcel lines, lot
lines, street right-of-way centerlines, railroad right-of-way centerlines, the
center of streams, City limits, and other preexisting elements, when practical.
   D.   The Administrative Official shall have the power to interpret the
location of zoning district boundaries where the location of such lines is not
clearly discernible from the official zoning map. Upon making such a
determination, the official zoning map shall be corrected so that the
boundaries in question are clearly discernible.
   E.   In the case of a lot of record under one (1) ownership that is divided
by a zoning district boundary, each portion of the lot shall be governed by the
zoning district applied thereto. Alternatively, the entire parcel may be used
as permitted by the regulations applicable to the most restrictive
classification. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-1-10: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All previously enacted zoning ordinances are hereby repealed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-
19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-11: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, clause, word or
provision of this title be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the title as a whole or
any other part thereof other than the part so declared as to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-1-12: AMENDMENT:
This zoning ordinance of Mason City may be amended by the City Council in the
manner provided by statute or as provided herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff.
7-1-2010)
12-1-13: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, move, construct, reconstruct,
extend, enlarge, convert or otherwise alter any structure, land or waterway in
violation of any of the provisions of this title. A violation of this title
shall be a Municipal civil infraction and subject to penalty according to title
1, chapter 4, article A of this Code.
   B.   In case of any violation, the City Council, the Administrative Officer,
the board, the commission or any property owner who would specifically be
damaged by such violation may institute legally permitted and appropriate
action or proceedings to enjoin a violation of this title. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
12-2-1: General Provisions
12-2-2: Definitions Of Words And Terms
12-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   The most recent print or online edition of the "Merriam Webster
Dictionary" is the recognized reference for words and terms not defined herein.
   B.   The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction:
      1.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      2.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future the present.
      3.   The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
      4.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
      5.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
      6.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in such definition.
      7.   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest
one-hundredth of a foot (0.01').
      8.   Whenever a calculation is made based upon the provisions herein, if
a fraction of a number results, the more restrictive rounding to a whole number
shall apply.
      9.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed
or arranged to be used or occupied".
      10.   The word "use" can be interchanged with the word "function"
throughout this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
ABANDONMENT: The cessation of a function for a period of six (6) months or
more. There is a rebuttable presumption that an owner has intended to abandon a
nonconforming use of land or structures where there has been no active use for
six (6) months or more.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building located on the same lot with an
existing principal building which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal building. (See also definition of principal building.)
ACCESSORY DWELLING: A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with
and clearly subordinate to a primary dwelling unit, whether a part of the same
building as the primary dwelling unit, or located within a detached accessory
building on the same lot. A mobile home or a recreational vehicle may not be
used as an accessory dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2706.png]
ACCESSORY FUNCTION: A function that is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal function on the same lot or parcel.
ACCESSORY SURFACE PARKING: A surface parking lot on a parcel that is adjacent
to or nearby, but separate from, the parcel containing the form or function
served by the parking lot.
ACTIVE SOLAR EQUIPMENT: Ground or building mounted solar cell panels and their
associated hardware and equipment required to generate and store electricity or
heat water, primarily for use on site.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The person or official designated by the Director of
Development Services as the officer responsible for the administration or
enforcement of this title.
ADULT USE: An establishment consisting of, including, or having the
characteristics of any or all of the following: adult bookstore, sex shop,
video viewing booths, adult motion picture theater, adult cabaret. Refer to
title 13 of this Code for additional information.
AGRIBUSINESS: An establishment primarily engaged in supplying agricultural
services, crop services, farm labor and management services.
AGRITOURISM: Agricultural operations that include activities that may not be
directly related to the principal agricultural use. Such activities need not be
subordinate to the agricultural operations in terms of revenue, but shall be
subordinate in terms of overall land use. Activities must fall within one or
more of the following categories: on-site processing, storage, sampling and
tasting of crops or farm products not principally produced on the farm; retail
sales of crops or farm products not principally produced on the farm; retail
sales of non-farm products related to the farm or what is produced on the farm;
education, cultural recreation programming; event hosting as long as such
events are clearly subordinate to the farming operation.
ALLEY: A service roadway providing a secondary means of access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2381.jpg]
 
ARTISAN/CRAFTSMAN SHOP: A small scale building or operation involving the on
site production of goods primarily by hand or custom manufacturing using hand
tools or mechanical equipment commonly associated with residential or
commercial uses.
AUDITORIUM: A building that consists of a theater, lecture hall or concert hall
where an audience sits.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Overnight accommodations, typically located within a
residential form, offering no more than six (6) sleeping rooms, that usually
(but not always) offers a morning meal, is operated by the property owner or
on-site resident manager, and where all of the sleeping rooms are dedicated to
overnight guests except for those occupied by the owner/resident manager and
his/her family. This definition includes short-term lodging in a bed and
breakfast, arranged between owners and guests via a third party using a means
of remote communication and transaction (e.g., via the internet or smart phone
application).
BERM: A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2379.jpg]
 
BLOCK: A unit of land bounded by a street or by a combination of streets and
public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other lines of
demarcation.
BOARD: The Zoning Board of Adjustment, an officially constituted body
established in title 2, chapter 3 of this Code, whose principal duties are to
hear appeals and, where appropriate, grant variances from the strict
application of a zoning ordinance and authorize conditional and special uses.
BOX, LARGE: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor
area of thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet or greater.
BOX, MEDIUM: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor
area between five thousand one (5,001) and thirty four thousand nine hundred
ninety nine (34,999) square feet.
BOX, SMALL: A freestanding building with a commercial function with a floor
area not exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet.
BROWNFIELD: An area documented as contaminated (by means of an ASTM E1903-97
Phase II Environmental Assessment or a Local Voluntary Cleanup Program) or
defined as a brownfield by the City of Mason City, the State of Iowa or a
Federal government agency.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed with walls or supports and having a roof, built,
erected and framed of one or a combinations of materials for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind.
BUILDING DISPOSITION: The location of the building relative to the boundaries
of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each
zoning district.
BUILDING HEIGHT: Shall be measured, based upon the requirements of each zoning
district, in the number of stories, excluding attics and basements, or in feet,
measured from the average surrounding grade at the foundation to the deck line
of a flat roof or to the highest point of any other type of roof.
CALIPER: The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk at average adult chest
height.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human or animal
remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums
and mortuaries, if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of
such cemetery for which perpetual care and maintenance is provided.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of Mason City, Iowa.
CIVIC: Buildings and facilities for government and other not for profit
organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, health care,
or for a function approved by a government agency.
CIVIC SUPPORT: Buildings and facilities in support of the health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
CLINIC: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is for
medical or dental study and/or treatment, and in which the services of
professionals in the medical, veterinary or dental fields of practice are
provided.
COLLEGE: An educational institution accredited by the State of Iowa or by the
agency with jurisdiction to grant college accreditation, to award associate,
bachelor or higher degrees.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission.
COMMITTEE: The Mason City Development Review Committee.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS DEFINITIONS:
Antenna: A structure or device, which is part of a wireless telecommunications
facility, used for collecting or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including,
but not limited to, directional antennas such as panels and dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas such as whip antennas, and similar devices.
Collocation: The mounting or installation of wireless transmission equipment on
a tower or other eligible support structure that is designed to accommodate
equipment from more than one (1) wireless telecommunications provider.
Existing Support Structure: A structure, other than a tower as defined in this
chapter, that supports one (1) or more antennas for wireless
telecommunications. Examples include (but are not limited to) water towers,
existing buildings, church steeples, smokestacks or cooling towers, and utility
structures and poles.
Tower: As applied to wireless telecommunications facilities, any ground or roof
mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof built for the sole or
primary purpose of mounting an antenna, transmitter, or similar apparatus above
grade for wireless telecommunications.
Wireless Telecommunication Services: Wireless telecommunication services,
including those licensed or authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission, such as transmission and reception of analog, digital, microwave
and broadband signals and similar services.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: An area of land designated for small plot gardening or local
food production.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A document or series of documents adopted by the City
Council of Mason City, Iowa, setting forth policies for the future of the City.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2383.jpg]
 
Comprehensive Plan Document
CONCEPT PLAN: A layout of a proposed subdivision, a site or development plan,
or other development scheme of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification.
CONTRACTOR SHOPS: A small scale building for the purpose of conducting building
and grounds construction, maintenance and repair related services, typically
containing areas for office, material, equipment and vehicle storage.
CONVENTION CENTER: An exhibition hall or conference center that is designed to
hold large public gatherings, public or private meetings or to display
exhibits.
CORNER OFFICE: A mixed use freestanding building with over fifty percent (50%)
of the ground floor, not exceeding one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet, serving an office function for the primary purpose of serving
neighborhood residents within a one- fourth (1/4) mile radius, with the
remainder of the building occupied by a function permitted in the district,
typically sited on a corner lot.
CORNER STORE: A mixed use freestanding building with over fifty percent (50%)
of the ground floor, not exceeding one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet, serving a retail function for the primary purpose of serving neighborhood
residents within a one- fourth (1/4) mile radius, with the remainder of the
building occupied by a function permitted in the district, typically sited on a
corner lot.
CREMATORIUM: A mortuary where corpses are cremated.
CROSS DOCKING FACILITY: A building within which raw, partial components or
finished products from a supplier or manufacturer are distributed directly to a
next-level manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or end consumer, with marginal
to no handling or storage time. A cross docking facility consists of inbound
and outbound truck docks, with minimal storage.
DAYCARE: An establishment, licensed by the State of Iowa, which is intended to
provide for the care, supervision and protection of children.
DECK: An outdoor platform constructed above grade, attached to or within five
feet (5') of a principal building. A deck may have a roof, but other than mesh
screens, it must be open on all sides except the adjacent building wall.
DEVELOPMENT: Altering the landscape in any number of ways such as:
   A.   Changing landforms from a natural or seminatural state for a purpose
such as agriculture or housing;
   B.   Subdividing real estate into blocks and lots, typically for the purpose
of constructing buildings; or
   C.   Significantly altering a building and/or its surrounding property or
changing its purpose, for example, by converting an unused factory complex into
residential condominiums.
DORMITORY: A building used as group living quarters for a student body or
religious order as an accessory use to a college, university, boarding school,
convent, monastery or similar institutional use.
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that offers merchandise, service
or entertainment to persons in motor vehicles.
DUPLEX/TWO-FLAT: A building containing two (2) one-family dwelling units
separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from the basement to
roof (duplex) or between floors (two-flat).
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a residential building or residential
portion of a building that are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by
one family, and which includes cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities
reserved for the occupants thereof.
FACADE: Any face of a building, especially the principal face, which fronts
upon a street, or drive, or parking lot. The principal face, or principal
facade, shall be that face incorporating the primary entrance. If a primary
entrance faces a parking lot, that face shall be considered a facade. A
building face fronting on an alley shall not be considered a facade.
FAIRGROUNDS: Public or privately owned land used for public fairs, events,
concerts and public gatherings.
FAMILY: Either of the following:
   A.   A domestic family unit, which is one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
   B.   The functional equivalent of the domestic family unit, consisting of
persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent
and distinct domestic character, and is the functional equivalent of a domestic
family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond that constitutes the
functional equivalent of the bonds that render the domestic family a cohesive
unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be
cooking together and otherwise operating as a single housekeeping unit. This
definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association, lodge, combine, federation, or group, coterie, or organization
that is not a religious order, nor shall it include a group of individuals
whose association is temporary or resort-seasonal in character.
FAMILY HOME: A community based residential home that is licensed as a
residential care facility under chapter 135C of the Iowa Code, or a child
foster care facility under Iowa Code chapter 237, to provide room and board,
personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment
exclusively for not more than eight (8) persons with a developmental disability
or brain injury, including any necessary support personnel. A family home does
not include an individual foster care family home licensed under Iowa Code
chapter 237.
FARM: An area comprising ten (10) or more acres, which is used for the growing
of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits and grain, and their
storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm
poultry and farm animals, such as horses, cattle, sheep and swine.
FARM DWELLING: A dwelling for a family that owns or rents an adjacent or nearby
farm, which may or may not be on the same parcel as the farm it serves.
FARM, SMALL: A farm as defined in this section, except that it consists of less
than ten (10) acres.
FENCE: A freestanding structure comprised of posts, rails, and panels, that is
designed to restrict movement across a boundary, provide a screen or visual
barrier, or provide outdoor privacy, and is comprised of durable building
materials such as wood, rigid polymers, and steel.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: A public or private organization that provides fire protection
for a certain jurisdiction, which typically is a municipality, county or fire
protection district. A Fire Department usually contains one or more fire
stations within its boundaries and may be staffed by career firefighters,
volunteers or combination thereof.
FORM: The design, configuration or layout of a structure that in appearance is
indicative of or reflects a particular function. A structure does not
necessarily have to contain the function indicated by its form (provided that
the function contained within the structure is permitted in the zoning
district); for example, a structure may be designed in a form that indicates a
single-family residential function, but may instead contain an office or other
nonresidential function.
FREESTANDING HOUSE: A one-family dwelling unit, unattached to any other
dwelling unit, which is considered the principal building.
FRONTAGE: Any side of a lot or building that fronts upon a vehicular way, such
as a public street, approved private street, access drive or parking lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2385.jpg]
 
   A.   Frontage, Principal: That side of a lot or parcel that is adjacent to
the street upon which the property is addressed, or from which the principal
function on the lot has its primary access, or the principal frontage
established upon a recorded deed or plat of subdivision.
   B.   Frontage, Secondary: On a corner lot or double frontage lot, that
frontage that is not the principal frontage. If a double frontage lot has a
third frontage, that frontage shall be considered a secondary frontage.
FUNCTION: The predominant purpose, use, occupation, or operation for which land
or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings
are occupied or maintained.
FUNERAL HOME: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial
and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial
or cremation.
GAS/CONVENIENCE: A gasoline station and/or convenience store planned, operated
and maintained for the purpose of selling gas and convenience items where the
principal building does not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine (9) holes for playing
the game of golf that may include a clubhouse, pro shop and practice
facilities.
GRAIN STORAGE: A facility, such as a bin or silo, for the temporary storage of
grain.
GREENHOUSE: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other
transparent or translucent material in which the temperature and humidity can
be regulated for the cultivation of plants.
GREENWAY: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions that might also
provide for use by bicycles and pedestrians.
GREYFIELD: Vacant, underutilized, or disused area previously functioning as a
parking lot, shopping center or large format retailer.
GROUP DWELLING: A group home for the sheltered care of persons with special
needs that, in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide some
combination of personal care, social or counseling services and transportation.
This definition does not include a family home.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation carried out by a member of the immediate family
residing on the premises that is accessory to the principal residential
function of the dwelling and that does not change the residential form of the
principal building.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing primary health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness,
disease, injury and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including,
as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices and
staff residences.
HOTEL: A facility of sixteen (16) sleeping rooms or more providing
accommodations to the general public, which may include additional facilities
and services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, swimming pools, entertainment
and personal services.
INDOOR RECREATION: Recreational activities (such as bowling, roller skating,
paintball, etc.) that are housed indoors.
INDUSTRY, OPEN: Development consisting of large, relatively self- contained and
isolated facilities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation from the
processing, manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution of materials and
products is moderately high or higher, as determined by the Administrative
Officer.
INDUSTRY, RESTRICTED: Development consisting of facilities whose manufacturing,
assembly, storage and distribution activities do not create appreciable
nuisances or hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard and nuisance free
environment. It is intended that the permitted forms and functions be
compatible and not detrimental to adjacent properties.
INFILL: New development on land that had been previously developed, including
existing lots within existing neighborhoods, brownfields and greyfields.
INN: A dwelling or building other than a bed and breakfast with no more than
fifteen (15) sleeping rooms providing accommodations to the general public,
which may include a restaurant. This definition shall include accommodations
held out to the general public arranged between owners and guests via a third
party using a means of remote communication and transaction (e.g., via the
internet or smart phone application).
INTERIOR CLIMATE CONTROLLED SELF STORAGE: A non-habitable self-storage function
that contains individual compartmentalized stalls or lockers primarily accessed
from the interior of the building, that are used for the storage of customer’s
goods or wares, primarily excess personal property.
JUNKYARD: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, auto and motor vehicle wrecking yards, house
wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and yards for use of salvaged house wrecking
and structural steel materials and equipment.
KENNEL: Any building or portion thereof where more than two (2) dogs, cats, or
other household domestic animals are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for,
in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LAW ENFORCEMENT: A public or private organization that provides law enforcement
or police protection for a certain jurisdiction, which typically is a
municipality or county. The department may contain one (1) or more departments
and may be staffed by career law enforcement officers, volunteers and
professional staff or a combination thereof.
LIBRARY: A place in which literary and other media materials, such as books,
periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets and multimedia, are kept for reference or
lending.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: For the purposes of this title, a design professional
licensed to practice architecture, landscape architecture, engineering or land
surveying by the Iowa State Board of Registration Professional Licensing
Agency.
LIVE/WORK BUILDING: A building comprised of mixed use units consisting of
residential, commercial, office or artisanal functions. Nonresidential
functions may be located anywhere in the unit. It is intended that the building
be occupied by a business operator who lives in the same building that contains
the nonresidential function.
LIVESTOCK: Any animal customarily kept by humans for the purpose of providing
food, fiber or work, including, but not limited to, cattle and other bovines,
horses, mules, donkeys and other equines, goats and other caprines, sheep and
other ovines and swine, hogs and other porcines (except oriental potbellied
pigs as permitted in title 8, chapter 4 of this Code), but excluding bees.
Keeping of bees, chickens and other poultry, and rabbits on residential
properties within the City is regulated in title 8, chapter 4 of this Code.
LOT: A parcel of land at least sufficient in size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for function, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open space requirements as are herein required. A lot shall have frontage
on a public street, or an approved private street, and may consist of:
   A.   A single lot of record.
   B.   A combination of complete lots of record, outlots of record or portions
of lots of record.
   C.   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided, that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this title.
LOT, CORNER: A lot with frontage upon two (2) intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot covered by all the building area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2387.jpg]
 
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or
approximately parallel streets or places.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2389.jpg]
 
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot
or from a public right-of-way or approved private street easement, railroad
right-of-way or any other public space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2391.jpg]
 
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line along the princi pal frontage of a lot or parcel
separating it from a street right-of-way, approved private street easement, or
an outlot designated or intended for future street purposes. On a corner lot,
the front lot line shall be along the principal frontage of the lot. On a
double frontage lot, the lot lines adjacent to both parallel or approximately
parallel streets shall be considered to be front lot lines for the purpose of
determining setbacks.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten
feet (10') in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line. On a double frontage lot, the rear lot line
shall be along the street other than and opposite from the street upon which
the principal frontage abuts; however, for the purposes of determining
setbacks, the rear lot line shall be treated as if it were a front lot line.
LOT LINE, SECONDARY FRONT: On a corner lot, the lot line abutting a street
right-of-way, approved private street easement, or an outlot designated or
intended for future street purposes, that is not on the principal frontage. If
a double frontage lot has a third frontage, the lot line along the third
frontage shall be considered a secondary front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A lot line other than a front, secondary front or rear lot
line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, and where the map of
which has been recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Cerro Gordo
County, or a lot or parcel of land not so platted or subdivided, for which a
deed or registered land survey has been recorded in the office of the county
recorder of Cerro Gordo County..
LOT TIERS: The transverse division of a lot into increments for the purpose of
locating off street parking, trash containers, vehicle storage, and loading
facilities. Lots shall be divided into three (3) tiers that are based upon
parking placement and loading functions found within a lot.
   A.   The first tier shall be the entire width of the lot and measured from
the front lot line or secondary front lot line to the facade of the principal
building that is most parallel to the front lot line or secondary front lot
line.
   B.   The second tier shall be measured from the line of the principal
building's facade to a distance of twenty feet (20').
   C.   The third tier shall be the remaining distance from the second tier to
the rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.jpg]
 
LOT WIDTH: The length of the principal frontage line of a lot.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block that is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or
lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MANSION APARTMENT: A multi-story residential building comprised of up to a
maximum of eight (8) separate apartment units and designed or converted in the
style of a large freestanding house or mansion.
MINI-WAREHOUSE SELF STORAGE: A non-habitable self-storage function that
contains individual compartmentalized stalls or lockers with all or most of the
entrances directly accessed from the outside of the building, that are used for
the storage of customer’s goods or wares, primarily excess personal property.
MIXED USE BLOCK BUILDING: A multi-story building that is placed at or close to
the front lot line supporting multiple functions, one of which may include
structured parking.
MOBILE HOME: A detached transportable building designed to be used as a one-
family residential dwelling with all of the following characteristics:
   A.   Certified in a factory and fabricated to the standards outlined in the
Iowa Code;
   B.   Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels; and
   C.   Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete,
including the major appliances, and ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports
and connection to the utilities, and removal of the towing apparatus and
enclosing of the chassis by an opaque skirt or screen.
MOVIE THEATER: A building where indoor movies are shown with incidental food
and beverage service.
MULTIPLE-FLAT: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL BUILDING DEVELOPMENT: A development or project in which more
than one (1) principal building is situated on a zoning lot. The multiple
principal building development shall be under the control of one owner or group
of owners and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral
unit, although development may be phased.
MUSEUM: A building for collecting and displaying objects having scientific,
historical or artistic value.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or
function that does not conform to the form and function regulations of the
zoning district in which it is situated.
OFFICE BUILDING: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry, or government or like activity; it may
include subsidiary services for office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee
shop, newspaper stand and childcare facilities.
OFFICE SHOWROOM: A multi-use building with a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of
the building occupied by office and wholesale display and retail sales
functions, with artisanal, technology, research and development, light
assembly, warehousing and distribution functions occupying the remaining space.
OPEN AIR MARKET: A public marketplace conducted outdoors where food and
merchandise are sold.
OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING AREA: A seating area with tables and chairs located
outdoors on private property that provides seating to a contiguous restaurant.
This seating may be in addition to indoor seating or it may be the only seating
available for the restaurant.
OUTDOOR RECREATION: Land and appurtenant buildings, other than public parks and
public facilities, dedicated to outdoor recreational and leisure activities,
including but not limited to: field and court sports, golf courses and mini-
golf, motorized and non-motorized vehicle courses and tracks, outdoor
presentations of musical acts, theater and motion pictures, and similar
functions. Outdoor recreation forms and functions shall conform to the noise
limitations in title 8, chapter 6 of this code.
PARKING BAY: The parking space and aisle adjacent to said parking space.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A structure (or part thereof) that is designed specifically
to be used for automobile parking and where there are a number of floors or
levels on which parking takes place.
PEDESTRIAN SHED: An average one-fourth (1/4) mile radius or one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320'), which is about the distance of a five (5) minute
walk at a leisurely pace as measured from the boundary of the lot where a
corner store or corner office is located.
PERMITTED: Complies with the zoning ordinance and is permitted and processed
administratively by right.
PERSONAL HOBBY BUILDING: All or a portion of a non-habitable building used for
the non-commercial storage of personal property, passenger vehicles, and
recreational vehicles, but not including hazardous materials, and for the
pursuit of a non-commercial personal interest or activity during leisure time
by the owner or lessee, or the owner’s/lessee’s family or invited guests.
PORCH, OPEN: A one story, covered entrance to a building, with a separate roof,
which is open on at least two (2) sides but may be glazed or screened; if
glazed the percentage of window area to wall area may be no more than fifty
percent (50%). An open porch may not be heated or air conditioned.
PRESCHOOL: A facility licensed by the State of Iowa which is intended to
provide for the education, care, supervision and protection of children.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A nonaccessory building in which the principal function of
the lot on which it is located is conducted.
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE: The main point of access for pedestrians into a building.
PRINCIPAL FUNCTION: The predominant function to which the premises are devoted
and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY: A building and grounds dedicated to police, fire,
ambulance, dispatch, or other safety, protective, and emergency services
provided to the public.
PUBLIC WORKS GARAGE: A public building used exclusively for City, County, or
State maintenance vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (Commonly Referred To As An RV): A vehicle designed for
travel, recreation and vacation use. This definition includes, but is not
limited to:
   A.   Motor home: A self-propelled vehicle with a dwelling constructed as an
integral part of the vehicle.
   B.   Pickup coach: A structure designed to be mounted on a vehicle.
   C.   Travel/camping trailer: A portable structure that is designed to be
towed on the highway by a vehicle and designed or used as a dwelling.
   D.   Boats and personal watercraft.
   E.   Small motorized vehicles, such as snowmobiles, dirt bikes, all-terrain
vehicles, golf carts, and similar vehicles designed for recreational or utility
off road use.
   F.   Any trailer designed for conveyance of any of the above. One (1) or
more recreational vehicles mounted on a single trailer shall be considered
collectively as one (1) RV for the purposes of this title.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, LARGE: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies,
rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held
with seven hundred fifty one (751) or more seats in the largest assembly space.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, MEDIUM: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies,
rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held
with four hundred one (401) to seven hundred fifty (750) seats in the largest
assembly space.
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY, SMALL: A building or place in which worship, ceremonies,
rituals and education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held
with up to four hundred (400) seats in the largest assembly space.
RESIDENCE LODGING: Overnight accommodations within a residential form other
than a bed and breakfast, inn, or hotel, that is usually (but not always)
located within a residential neighborhood, and operated by the property owner
or on-site resident manager. This definition includes short-term lodging in a
residence arranged between owners and guests via a third party using a means of
remote communication and transaction (e.g., via the internet or smart phone
application).
RESTAURANT: A building where food and drink are prepared, served or consumed
within the principal building, outdoors on the same premises, or via take-out
or drive-through services. A restaurant may include consumption of alcoholic
beverages in accordance with licensing rules and restrictions, but only when
food is also served.
ROADSIDE STAND (Yard, Garage, Roadside, Or Similar): Land used or occupied for
the purpose of buying or selling produce or other items grown or produced on
site.
SCHOOL:
   K - 8: A school that meets the State of Iowa requirements for K - 8
education.
   9 - 12: A school that meets the State of Iowa requirements for 9 - 12
education.
SEASONAL SALES/DISPLAY: An outdoor sale or display of merchandise that is
temporarily displayed for a period not to exceed four (4) months.
SELF-STORAGE: A private facility with a floor area of fifty-five thousand
(55,000) square feet or less, whose principal function is to allow for indoor
storage of residential and household items and other various and sundry items,
not including hazardous materials, and which may include outdoor storage of
vehicles and other large items.
SETBACK: The minimum required distance between any structure and lot line of
the lot on which it is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2395.jpg]
 
SHOPPING MALL: A building or set of buildings that contain retail units, with
interconnecting walkways that may or may not be indoors, enabling visitors to
easily walk from unit to unit.
SHOPPING STRIP: A building consisting of multiple tenants, where the tenant
spaces are typically less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet.
SIDE YARD/ZERO LOT LINE HOUSE: A building that is built at the property line on
one (1) side of the lot.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY: Multiple tenant building that houses one (1) or two (2)
people in individual rooms or the single room dwelling itself.
SITE OR DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A drawing to scale, usually (but not always) prepared
by a licensed professional, that shows size and location of all existing and
proposed buildings, all adjacent streets and highways, the size of all
entrances and exits from the land and a legal description of the land. For some
form and functions, a landscape development plan must be included.
STOOP: A raised open platform, including stairs if necessary, which may or may
not have a sheltering roof, that provides access to the entry of a building.
STORAGE, OUTDOOR: Exterior depository, stockpiling, or safekeeping of
materials, products, vehicles, trailers and the like. Materials that are stored
beneath a structure that includes a roof, but no side walls shall be deemed
outdoor storage; or outdoor storage may involve fencing or screening without a
roof. The following shall not be considered outdoor storage:
   A.   Transient parking of vehicles on parking lots, where such parking does
not exceed seventy two (72) hours.
   B.   Any product representation or signage.
   C.   Vending machines accessory to allowed forms or functions.
   D.   Sales and display of new or used vehicles as part of a vehicle sales/
rental function.
   E.   Parking or storage of recreational vehicles on lots with a residential
function, subject to section
12-8-6 of this title.
   F.   Parking or storage of commercial vehicles on lots with a residential
function, subject to section
12-8-6 of this title.
   G.   The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise for a
period of less than seventy two (72) hours.
STORY: A habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised
basement.
STREET: Any vehicularway that is:
   A.   An existing State, County, or Municipal roadway;
   B.   Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; or
   C.   Approved by other official action.
STREET, PRIVATE: A street designed for access to adjacent parcels that is not
dedicated to the public as right-of-way, and that is owned and maintained by
the adjacent owners that benefit from the private street, either jointly or via
an association created for the purpose of such maintenance.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials assembled to give support or shelter that
requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, that is safe, stable
and includes, among other things, buildings, towers, signs, fences and silos;
but not including poles and wires constructed for transmission of utilities.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the ground level to the highest
point of a structure, or attached antenna or similar device.
SURFACE PARKING: An off street, ground level, impervious open area that
provides temporary storage for motor vehicles.
SWALE: Low lying or depressed land area commonly wet or moist which can
function as an intermittent drainageway.
TAVERN: A commercial enterprise whose primary activity is the sale of alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises. Taverns include bars, lounges,
nightclubs, private clubs, bottle (BYOB) clubs, and similar facilities serving
alcoholic liquor.
TOWNHOUSE: A one-family dwelling unit in a row of at least three (3) such units
in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is
located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by
one (1) or more vertical common fire resistant walls.
VARIANCE: A departure from any provision of the zoning ordinance except for a
variance to allow a specific form or function not permitted within a zoning
district.
VEHICLE REPAIR: Repairing of vehicles within a building or portion thereof,
including cars, trucks, motorcycles, scooters and small engines. Vehicle repair
operations shall include areas for the temporary storage of vehicles awaiting
repair.
VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: A function located upon a privately owned and
operated facility for the purpose of displaying, selling, leasing or renting
vehicles (new or used, including recreational vehicles) in operable condition
and where service and repair work (if provided) is accessory to the principal
function.
WAREHOUSING: An industrial building for storage of goods related to a business.
WASTE TRANSFER: Techniques used primarily to reduce weight, volume and
packaging which include, but are not limited to:
Collection Center: A limited industry facility for collecting secondary
materials, usually from the public, and reselling to brokers, processing
centers or manufacturers. Collection centers may or may not buy material; can
be permanent or mobile; do no processing of materials for resale.
Composting: The controlled decay of organic matter, producing a nutrient rich
mulch or organic soil, is utilized for yard debris, thus removing part of the
waste going to landfills and incinerators.
Incineration: A process technology which provides the benefit of reducing the
amount (particularly by volume) of wastes; the residues of which must then be
managed and disposed of properly.
Landfill, Sanitary: An engineering project for refuse disposal in which the
waste is dumped in accordance with a preconceived plan, compacted and covered.
Processing Center: A facility that buys secondary material, usually from
brokers, collection centers and various postconsumer waste facilities, to use
for the remanufacturing of products.
Recycling: The process by which materials otherwise destined for disposal are
retrieved and remanufactured into new products.
Transfer Station: An intermediate facility where collected refuse or material
collected for recycling is deposited for transfer to the final processing or
disposal site.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT: A sewage disposal system which is constructed, installed,
maintained, operated and owned by a municipality or taxing district established
for that purpose.
WATER TREATMENT: A water supply system which is constructed, installed,
maintained, operated and owned by a municipality or taxing district established
for that purpose.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS DEFINITIONS:
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion System (Commercial WECS): A wind energy
conversion system that is intended to produce electricity for sale to a rate
regulated or nonregulated utility, or for use off site.
Dispersed Wind Energy Conversion System (Dispersed WECS): A wind energy
conversion system that has a rated capacity greater than fifty kilowatts (50
kW), which is incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel
or on an abutting parcel under the same ownership as the parcel developed with
the dispersed WECS, and which is intended to produce electricity primarily for
use on-site. Such system may be connected to the electrical grid when a parcel
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company. Excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199,
chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
Height, Total System: The height above grade of the system, including the
generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors.
Height, Tower: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind turbine generator and attached blades or rotors.
Small Wind Energy Conversion System (Small WECS): A wind energy conversion
system that has a rated capacity of up to fifty kilowatts (50 kW), which is
incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel. A system is
considered a small wind energy system only if it supplies electrical power
solely for on site use, except that when a parcel on which the system is
installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess
electrical power generated and not presently needed for on site use may be used
by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the
Iowa Administrative Code.
Tower: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates
the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the
base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guywires and accessory
equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., configured as
necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy,
e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
Wind Turbine Generator: The component of a wind energy conversion system that
transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy.
YARD: An open space on a lot that is unobstructed by any portion of a structure
from twenty four inches (24") above the ground upward, except any permitted
encroachments or as otherwise provided in this title. The measurement of a yard
shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and
the nearest point of a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot measured between
the front line of the lot and the nearest point of a building.
   A.   Yard, Principal Front: On a corner lot, the yard adjacent to the
principal frontage. On a double frontage lot, the yards adjacent to both
parallel or approximately parallel streets shall be considered to be principal
front yards for the purpose of determining setbacks.
   B.   Yard, Secondary Front: On a corner lot, a yard along the frontage of
the lot that is not the principal frontage. If a double frontage lot has a
third frontage, that frontage shall be considered a secondary front yard for
the purpose of determining setbacks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2657.png]
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest point of the principal
building. On a double frontage lot, the yard furthest from and opposite the
front yard shall be a rear yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2659.png]
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the nearest point of the building and the side line
of the lot and extending from the front yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2661.png]
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; Ord. 13-22,
7-2-2013; Ord. 13-25, 7-16-2013; Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014; 2017 Code; Ord. 18-9, 10-
2-2018; Ord. 19-1, 3-5-2019; Ord. 19-2, 3-5-2019; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord.
21-5, 6-1-2021; Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
SECTION:
12-3-1: Intent
12-3-2: Duties
12-3-3: Appeals
12-3-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the Administrative Officer, and that
such questions shall be presented to the board only on appeal from the decision
of the Administrative Officer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd.
2017 Code)
12-3-2: DUTIES:
The Administrative Officer shall enforce the provisions of this title and shall
have the following powers and duties in connection therewith:
   A.   To interpret the terms and requirements of this title if the terms
appear to be unclear or ambiguous.
   B.   Upon request or in the case of an administrative appeal, to provide a
written justification for any interpretation.
   C.   To issue all permits and certificates required by this title.
   D.   To cause any building, structure, land, place or premises to be
inspected and examined and to order in writing the abatement or remedying of
any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this title.
   E.   To act as advisor to the board and commission and to carry out and
enforce any decisions or determinations of the board and commission. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-3-3: APPEALS:
The interpretations or decisions of the Administrative Officer may be appealed
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to chapter 5 of this title. (2017
Code)
CHAPTER 4
TEXT AMENDMENTS AND REZONING
SECTION:
12-4-1: Text Amendments And Rezoning Requests
12-4-2: Procedure
12-4-3: Initiation Of Amendments And Rezoning Requests
12-4-1: TEXT AMENDMENTS AND REZONING REQUESTS:
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this title may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed; provided, that no
such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at
which citizens and parties with interest shall have an opportunity to be heard.
Any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall also be in compliance and
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Natural
Resources, State of Iowa, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-4-2: PROCEDURE:
Unless initiated by City staff, the commission, or the Council, an application
for a text amendment or rezoning shall be given first consideration within
sixty (60) days from the date of its official and complete submission unless
extended by the City Council or a time waiver is granted by the applicant. If
applicable, processing of the application through required State or Federal
agencies shall extend the review and decision making period. Additional
procedural requirements are as follows:
   A.   Requests: Requests for a text amendment or rezoning shall be filed with
the Administrative Officer on an official application form. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee as provided by City Council resolution. The
application shall also be accompanied by detailed written and graphic materials
fully explaining the proposed change, and, in the case of a rezoning, the
development of all forms and functions allowed within the proposed district and
their potential impact on surrounding property and the community. The request
shall be considered officially submitted when all the informational
requirements have been reviewed and are determined to be complete. The request
for a text amendment or rezoning shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular commission meeting.
   B.   Proof Of Ownership Or Authorization: Except for rezoning petitions
initiated by City staff, the commission, or the Council, the applicant shall
supply proof of ownership of the property for which the rezoning is requested,
and, if the applicant is not the owner, supply written authorization from the
owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with the requested rezoning.
   C.   Conditional Rezoning: Prior to any public hearing, the applicant for
rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions or restrictions on the uses, forms
or functions permitted upon the land in question, subject to all of the
following:
      1.   All such conditions or restrictions must be voluntarily proposed by
the applicant in writing as part of the rezoning application, or in writing
prior to closing of the public hearing before the commission.
      2.   All such conditions or restrictions must conform to this title and
all applicable requirements of this Code.
      3.   Conditions or restrictions may not be proposed and may not be
changed after the public hearing before the commission has been closed. If the
applicant wishes to change the conditions or restrictions after the commission
has closed the public hearing, such changes must be voluntarily proposed in
writing and shall require reconsideration by the commission at a new public
hearing.
      4.   After the public hearing is closed, the commission may recommend
approval without the conditions or recommend approval subject to the conditions
or restrictions as submitted by the applicant; but the commission may not alter
the conditions as submitted. Conversely, the commission may recommend denial of
the rezoning.
      5.   The City Council may approve the rezoning without the conditions, or
may approve the rezoning subject to the conditions or restrictions as submitted
by the applicant, but the Council may not alter the conditions as submitted.
Conversely, the Council may deny the rezoning.
   D.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of the application, the Administrative
Officer shall set a public hearing following proper hearing notification. The
commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and
recommendations to the City Council. Notice of said hearing shall consist of a
legal property description and description of the request, and shall be
published in the official newspaper at least seven (7) days but no more than
twenty (20) days prior to the hearing and written notice of said hearing shall
be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of the subject property. Public notice signs will be
posted on the subject property.
   E.   Failure Not Invalidation: Failure of a property owner to receive said
notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings as set forth within this
title.
   F.   Technical Reports: The Administrative Officer shall instruct the
appropriate staff persons to prepare technical reports where appropriate, and
provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on the action to the
City Council.
   G.   Adverse Effects: The commission and City Council shall consider
possible adverse effects of the proposed text amendment or rezoning. Its
judgment shall be based upon (but not limited to) the following factors:
      1.   The proposed action has been considered in relation to the specific
policies and provisions of and has been found to be consistent with the
official Mason City Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   The proposed action is or will be compatible with present and future
land uses of the area.
      3.   The proposed action conforms to all performance standards contained
herein.
      4.   The proposed action will not tend to or actually depreciate the area
in which it is proposed.
      5.   The proposed action can be accommodated with existing public
services and will not overburden the City's service capacity.
      6.   The proposed action is in conformance with the City's utility
extension policies or is contiguous to existing development of a similar
zoning.
   H.   Additional Information Requested: The commission and City staff shall
have the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning operational factors or to retain expert testimony with the consent
and at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors, said
information to be declared necessary to establish performance conditions in
relation to all pertinent sections of this title. Failure on the part of the
applicant to supply all necessary supportive information may be grounds for
denial of the request.
   I.   Appearance To Answer Questions: The applicant or a representative
thereof shall appear before the commission in order to answer questions
concerning the request.
   J.   Approval, Denial Or Changes: The commission shall recommend approval or
denial of the request. In the case of a text amendment, the commission may
recommend changes to the requested amendment.
   K.   Report And Recommendation Received: The City Council shall not act upon
a text amendment or rezoning until they have received a report and
recommendation from the commission or until sixty (60) days after the first
regular commission meeting at which the request was considered.
   L.   Placement On Agenda: Upon receiving the report and recommendation of
the commission, the Administrative Officer shall place the report and
recommendation on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. Such
reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent
written record of the City Council meeting.
   M.   Public Hearing And Consideration: It shall be the duty of the City
Council to hold a public hearing and give first consideration to the request
within sixty (60) days after the receipt of the commission recommendation,
unless the applicant agrees to an extension in writing to a date certain.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper at least
seven (7) days but no more than twenty (20) days prior to hearing.
   N.   Council Decision:
      1.   The City Council shall consider the commission's recommendation in
coming to a final decision. However, prior to making a final decision, the
Council shall refer the application back to the commission for further study
and recommendation should any of the following occur:
         a.   The City Council finds that specific inconsistencies exist in the
review process that may have prevented full consideration of relevant issues.
         b.   New information comes to light that the commission did not have
at the time it made its recommendation that may have resulted in a different
recommendation.
         c.   In the case of a text amendment, the Council may approve minor
deviations from the text recommended by the commission, but shall refer major
changes back to the commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on
the changes before making a recommendation to the City Council.
         d.   The City Council shall provide the commission with a written
statement detailing the specific reasons for referral. This procedure shall be
followed only one time on a singular action.
      2.   Approval of a proposed text amendment or rezoning shall require a
majority vote of the City Council. However, in rezoning cases, if the owners of
twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed
rezoning area or the property owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the
property that is located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior
boundaries of the property for which the rezoning is proposed, inclusive of
public property and right-of-way, object to the rezoning in writing, the
rezoning shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at least
three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City Council.
   O.   Denial; Reconsideration: Whenever an application for a text amendment
or rezoning has been considered and denied by the City Council, a similar
application and proposal for the text amendment or rezoning, affecting
generally the same property, shall not be considered again by the commission or
City Council for at least six (6) months from the date of its denial, unless a
decision to reconsider such matter is made by the City Council.
   P.   Effective: The text amendment or rezoning shall not become effective
until such time as the City Council approves an ordinance reflecting said text
amendment or rezoning and after said ordinance is published in the official
newspaper. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-4-3: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS AND REZONING REQUESTS:
   A.   The City staff, City Council or commission may, upon their own motion,
initiate a request for a text amendment or rezoning.
   B.   Any person(s) owning real estate or having documented interest therein,
within the City, may initiate a request for a text amendment or rezoning as to
affect the same real estate. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 1
SECTION:
12-5-1: Powers And Duties
12-5-2: Appeals
12-5-3: Special Exceptions
12-5-4: Variances
12-5-5: Conditional Uses
12-5-6: Board Decision; Appeals
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 2, chapter 3 of this Code.
12-5-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
   A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an Administrative
Official in the enforcement of this title.
   B.   To interpret the provisions of this title in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   To grant a special exception in those cases specified in section
12-5-3 of this chapter.
   D.   To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this
title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will result
in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this title shall be observed
and substantial justice done.
   E.   To grant a conditional use permit and impose conditions upon such
permits, so that actual or potential impacts to surrounding property are
mitigated or eliminated. (2017 Code)
12-5-2: APPEALS:
   A.   Hearing And Decision: The board shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Administrative Officer in the enforcement of this title. Appeals to the board
may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Administrative Officer. Such
appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days of receipt of the Administrative
Officer's order or determination by filing with the Development Services
Department, and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal on a form
provided by the Development Services Department specifying the grounds of the
appeal, and by paying a fee as provided for by City Council resolution.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Administrative Officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of appeal has been
filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board
or by a court of record on application of notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
   C.   Decision:
      1.   The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Administrative Officer.
      2.   Any alternate member who begins hearing a case is required to finish
the case, even if the regular member in whose place the alternate member is
serving becomes available. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-5-3: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Hearing And Decision Of Requests: The board shall hear and decide
requests for special exceptions to the requirements of this title only under
the following circumstances:
      1.   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure or a
structure containing a nonconforming use that has been damaged or destroyed by
any means to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement
cost at the time prior to the damage or destruction, where the Board finds some
compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming building or
use.
      2.   To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises
in any location by a Public Service Corporation for public utility purposes
that the board deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience or
welfare.
      3.   To allow an exception to the setback requirements of any district
where the strict application of the setback requirements would result in
peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties upon the owner of such property
as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; provided, that relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good.
      4.   To allow an exception to the maximum lot width or lot depth
requirements for a lot of record in an edgeyard disposition in the Z2 Sub Urban
District, provided that no special exception may be granted for a lot width
greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet or a lot depth greater than two
hundred (200) feet. A request for a greater increase in lot width or lot depth
for a lot of record in the Z2 District, or for a variation from the lot width
or lot depth standards for a lot of record in any other district, shall only be
considered by the board as a variance.
   B.   Application:
      1.   An application for a special exception shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer on a form provided by the Development Services
Department. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data
deemed by the City to be necessary to adequately describe the special exception
request, a fee as provided for by City Council resolution, and shall include a
statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed special exception will conform to the standards set forth in the
following subsections.
      2.   Upon receipt in proper form of the application, fee and statement,
the board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the proposed special
exception. Notice of the hearing will be published in an official newspaper of
the City at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty (20) days prior to the
hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days
prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the
subject property. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or
distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1) public notice sign
will be posted on the subject property.
   C.   Standards: In order to grant a special exception as permitted above,
the board shall find that the following tests are satisfied:
      1.   In the case of an exception to the setback requirements, the need
for the special exception results from exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or
shape of a specific piece of property of record, or by reason of exceptional
topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of a specific parcel or property.
      2.   That the specific proposed exception will not be detrimental to or
endanger public health, safety, comfort or general welfare.
      3.   That the specific proposed exception will not be injurious to the
use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity and will not
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
      4.   That establishment of the specific proposed exception will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the property is
located.
      5.   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities are being provided.
      6.   That, except for the specific special exception being proposed, the
structure subject to the special exception shall in all other respects conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
      7.   Approval of the special exception will not substantially impair the
general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Concurring Vote Of Members: The concurring vote of three (3) members of
the board shall be necessary to decide in favor of the special exception. Any
alternate member who begins hearing a case is required to finish the case, even
if the regular member in whose place the alternate member is serving becomes
available.
   E.   Conditions And Restrictions: Prior to granting any special exception,
the board may impose conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the construction or
reconstruction as requested, to the extent deemed necessary for the protection
of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and
requirements specified in this section. (2017 Code; amd. Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020;
Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-5-4: VARIANCES:
   A.   Application: An application for a variance shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer on a form provided by the Administrative Officer. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data deemed by the City
to be necessary to adequately describe the variance request, a fee as provided
for by City Council resolution, and shall include a statement in writing by the
applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed variance will conform
to the standards set forth in the following subsections.
   B.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Upon receipt in proper form of the
application, fee and statement, the board shall hold at least one (1) public
hearing on the proposed variance. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
an official newspaper of the City at least seven (7) days but no more than
twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be
mailed at least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred
fifty feet (350') of the subject property. Supplemental or additional notices
may be published or distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1)
public notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
   C.   Difficulties And Hardship: The board shall have the authority to
authorize a variance where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property of record, or by reason of exceptional
topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or
condition of a specific piece of property, the strict application of any
provision of this title would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties and particular hardship upon the owner of the subject property as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience to the owner, provided relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive
Plan as established by the regulations and provisions contained in this title.
   D.   Literal Enforcement: The board shall have the authority to authorize a
variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done.
   E.   Determinations: In considering all proposed variances to this title,
the board shall, before making any finding in the specific case, first
determine that the proposed variance will not constitute any change in the
zoning map, will not authorize a use, form or function not specifically allowed
within the zoning district and will not impair an adequate supply of light and
air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase congestion in public
streets, or increase the public danger of fire and safety, or unreasonably
diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or
in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of
the City.
   F.   Standards: In order to grant a variance to the strict application of
any provision of this title, the board shall find that all of the following
tests are satisfied:
      1.   The proposed variance will not threaten neighborhood integrity, nor
have a substantially adverse effect on the use or value of other properties in
the area adjacent to the subject property.
      2.   The proposed variance will be in harmony with the general purpose
and spirit of this title.
      3.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used
only as strictly allowed in the district where the property is located.
      4.   The owner's situation is unique or peculiar to the property in
question, and the situation is not shared with other landowners in the area nor
due to general conditions in the neighborhood.
      5.   The hardship is not of the landowner's or applicant's own making or
that of a predecessor in title.
   G.   Vote To Decide: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board
shall be necessary to decide in favor of the variance. Any alternate member who
begins hearing a case is required to finish the case, even if the regular
member in whose place the alternate member is serving becomes available.
   H.   Denial; Reapplication: If the variance application is denied,
applicants may not reapply for the same variance to the board before six (6)
months have passed from the date of the first application.
   I.   Appropriate Conditions And Safeguards: In permitting a variance, the
board may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards including, but not
limited to, planting screens, fencing, construction commencement and completion
deadlines, lighting, operations controls, improved traffic circulation
requirements, highway access restrictions, increased minimum yard requirements,
parking requirements, or any other requirement that the board deems appropriate
under the circumstances. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-5-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
Any landowner or his designated agent may file an application to use land for a
conditional use provided for in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title in the zoning district in which the land is
located. Any application shall be subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Filing Application; Documents; Fee: An application for a conditional
use shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on a form provided by the
Development Services Department. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans and data deemed by the City to be necessary to adequately describe the
proposed conditional use, a fee as provided for by City Council resolution and
shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence
showing that the proposed conditional use will conform to the standards set
forth in the following subsections.
   B.   Public Hearing; Notice: Upon receipt in proper form of the application,
fee and statement, the board shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the
proposed conditional use. Notice of the hearing shall be published in an
official newspaper of the City at least seven (7) days but no more than twenty
(20) days prior to hearing. Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days prior to all owners of land within three hundred fifty feet
(350') of the subject property. Supplemental or additional notices may be
published or distributed as the board may prescribe. At least one (1) public
notice sign will be posted on the subject property.
   C.   Finding And Determination: For each application for conditional use,
the board shall determine its findings and render a decision upon the issuance
of a conditional use permit, including the stipulations of additional
conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they
are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. Whenever an
application is denied, it cannot be resubmitted for one (1) year thereafter.
   D.   Standards: No conditional use shall be recommended by the board unless
the board shall find:
      1.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use
will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, convenience,
comfort or general welfare;
      2.   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood;
      3.   The establishment of the use will not impede the normal orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in
the zoning district;
      4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
      5.   Measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   E.   Conditions And Restrictions: Prior to granting any conditional use, the
board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as are
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this section. In
all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the board shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-5-6: BOARD DECISION; APPEALS:
   A.   Any decision of the board shall be filed in the Development Services
Department within two (2) business days after the meeting.
   B.   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the board may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the Development
Services Department. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
12-6-1: General
12-6-2: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
12-6-3: Nonconforming Structures
12-6-4: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
12-6-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures Or Of Structures And Premises In
Combination
12-6-6: Required Repairs
12-6-7: Unauthorized Nonconformities
12-6-1: GENERAL:
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, the term "use" shall have the same
meaning as "function", as the latter is defined in chapter 2 of this title.
   B.   Within the districts established by this title, there exist lots,
structures, uses of land and structures and characteristics of use that were
lawful prior to adoption or amendment of this title but are prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments. It
is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue until
they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon or extended nor
be used as grounds for adding other structures or forms, functions or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district, except for existing single-family
detached residential dwellings in commercial or industrial districts as
outlined in this title.
   C.   Nonconformities are declared by this title to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming structure, a
nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or
enlarged after the passage of this title by attachment on a building or
premises or additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by
the addition of other uses of a nature that would generally be prohibited in
the district involved, except for existing single- family detached residential
dwellings in commercial or industrial districts as outlined in this title.
   D.   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
for which a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction
has been diligently commenced. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd.
2017 Code)
12-6-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, where a lot has
less area or width than required by the district and was a lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, a single-family dwelling
and customary accessory buildings may be constructed on the lot, provided all
other requirements of this title are met. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-
2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-6-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title that could not be built under the terms hereof by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yard, its location on the lot or
other requirements concerning the structure, the structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in such a
way that increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may
be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
   B.   Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a
structure be damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of the damage or destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title.
   C.   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
located after it is moved. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-6-4: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
The lawful use of land, where the use involves no individual structure with a
replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which becomes
nonconforming under the terms of this title as adopted or amended, may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel that was not occupied by the use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this title.
   C.   If any such nonconforming use of land is abandoned for any reason for a
period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of the land shall
conform to the district regulations for the district in which the land is
located.
   D.   No additional structure shall be erected in connection with the
nonconforming use of land. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-6-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION:
If the lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of
greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or of such a structure and
premises in combination, becomes nonconforming under the terms of this title as
adopted or amended, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Changing Of Use: No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted
by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which
it is located.
      1.   Exception: A single-family detached residential dwelling located in
the Z4, Z5, Z6 or Z7-1, Z7-3 and Z7-4 Districts may be enlarged up to twenty
five percent (25%) of the aggregate floor area of the current structure so long
as the enlargement meets the minimum bulk regulations and off street parking
and loading requirements are met and no additional dwelling units result from
the enlargement.
      2.   Exceptions shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrative
Officer.
   B.   Use Extended: Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any
parts of a building that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this title. No such use shall be extended
to occupy any land outside such building.
   C.   Change Of Classification: If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of
a similar nature within the same or a more restricted classification. Whenever
a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive
use.
   D.   Use Abandoned: In the event that a nonconforming use of a structure, or
structure and land in combination, is abandoned for a period of one (1) year,
the use shall thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which
it is located. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   E.   Reconstruction After Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   Any structure devoted to use made nonconforming by this title that
has been damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or
destruction, exclusive of the foundations, shall not be reconstructed and used
as before the damage or destruction occurred.
      2.   Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant
a special exception to permit the reconstruction of a structure that has been
damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of its replacement cost at the time prior to the damage or destruction, subject
to the standards and requirements of section
12-5-3 of this title.
      3.   If the structure is damaged or destroyed to an extent of fifty
percent (50%) or less of its replacement cost at the time of damage or
destruction above the foundation, it may be reconstructed and used as before,
provided it be done within six (6) months of such happening, and be built of
like or similar materials. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
   F.   Removal Or Destruction: When nonconforming use status applies to a
structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. "Destruction" for the
purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty
percent (50%) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-6-6: REQUIRED REPAIRS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-6-7: UNAUTHORIZED NONCONFORMITIES:
Any use of land, use of structure, or any structure in existence at the time of
adoption of this title that was not an authorized nonconformity under previous
zoning ordinances, shall not be authorized to continue its nonconforming status
pursuant to this title or amendments thereto. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-
1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 7
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION:
12-7-1: Development Review Committee
12-7-2: Exceptions To Development Review
12-7-3: Development Review Procedure
12-7-4: Concept Plan Review
12-7-5: Major Site Plan Review
12-7-6: Major Site Plan Submittal Requirements
12-7-7: Compliance Approval
12-7-8: Site And Architectural Design Guidelines
12-7-9: Site Plan Modifications
12-7-10: Lapse Of Approval
12-7-11: Building And Other Permits
12-7-12: Inspections During Development
12-7-13: Variances, Special Exceptions, Rezoning And Plats Of Subdivision
12-7-1: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
All applications for site plans, preliminary plats, final plats, conditional
use permits, variances and rezonings shall be subject to review by the
Development Review Committee (DRC).
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the DRC is to provide a staff and technical
review to certify that site development plans comply with the requirements of
this title and all other applicable laws and ordinances.
   B.   Composition: The DRC shall consist of the following members, each of
whom may designate a qualified alternate: (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
      1.   City staff:
         a.   Director of Development Services.
         b.   Planning and Zoning Manager.
         c.   Chief Building Official.
         d.   City Engineer.
         e.   Director of Operations and Maintenance.
         f.   Fire Marshal.
         g.   Chief of Police. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   The DRC may also include a representative from each of the following
agencies or utilities, who shall be invited to the DRC meeting and may attend
to provide input on any project that affects that agency or utility:
         a.   The local electrical and natural gas utility.
         b.   The local telephone utility.
         c.   The local cable and broadband telecommunication company.
         d.   The Iowa Department of Transportation. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
   C.   DRC Review Required: Except as exempted below, no application shall be
deemed complete nor shall any site plan, preliminary plat, final plat not
subject to preliminary plat approval or conditional use permit be granted and
no building permit shall be issued until the application is reviewed by the
DRC, is determined to comply with the requirements of this title and any other
applicable laws or ordinances, and has been certified as to compliance by the
Administrative Officer. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-2: EXCEPTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
The following are exempted from the development review process:
   A.   Single- and two-family dwelling units and their accessory buildings in
any zoning district.
   B.   A project involving interior construction that does not increase the
footprint or square footage of an existing building; however, if the
construction is for a change in use or would result in greater parking,
landscaping or other requirements of this title, DRC review is required. (Ord.
13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-3: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURE:
Any site plan not exempted by section
12-7-2 of this chapter shall be reviewed according to the following process:
   A.   Concept Plan: Prior to application for any permit to allow
establishment and/or construction of any form or function subject to this
chapter, the developer shall submit a concept plan for review by the DRC, as
outlined in section
12-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
      1.   The concept plan review allows the developer to ask questions,
determine potential issues and incorporate ordinance requirements into the site
plan design. The suggestions or direction of the DRC or any representation of
the developer at the concept plan review shall not be considered to be binding
upon either the City or the developer, unless the concept plan is accepted as a
minor site plan.
      2.   After discussion of the concept, the DRC shall determine if the
project is a minor site plan or a major site plan, according to subsection B or
C of this section, and shall provide the applicant with information on the
process going forward and a tentative review schedule.
      3.   For any form or function designated within a zoning district as P1,
P2 or C, the required site plan shall be submitted to the DRC for concept plan
review prior to submittal for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable. If the DRC determines that the
concept requires major site plan review, major site plan review process shall
occur prior to review by the applicable bodies. The applicant shall incorporate
all City Code and other applicable requirements into the site plan submitted
for review by the other reviewing bodies.
   B.   Minor Site Plan:
      1.   The DRC shall determine that a plan is a minor site plan if one (1)
or more of the following conditions exist:
         a.   Construction of a building with a total gross floor area of eight
hundred (800) square feet or less, or a building addition that adds no more
than ten percent (10%) total gross floor area to an existing building or is
eight hundred (800) square feet in total gross floor area, whichever is less.
         b.   The application is for a form or function that does not have an
exterior effect on the site.
         c.   The project is otherwise determined by the DRC to be a simple
site plan with minimal or no discernible impact on surrounding property.
      2.   The DRC may accept the concept plan as the minor site plan;
provided, that the plan provides sufficient detail to determine if compliance
can be attained.
      3.   Minor site plans may proceed directly to compliance approval after
the concept plan review is complete; however, if the form or function requires
additional review according to its designation as P1, P2 or C, review by the
required bodies shall be completed prior to review for compliance approval.
      4.   Minor site plan applications shall pay a reduced development review
fee (as provided for by City Council resolution) prior to review for compliance
approval.
   C.   Major Site Plan: The major site plan review shall establish that all
requirements of this Code have been met, and that the site plan can be
successfully implemented related to City requirements, public and private
utilities and the requirements of any other applicable agency. A complete site
plan, meeting the requirements of sections
12-7-5 and
12-7-6 of this chapter, shall be submitted along with the required application
form and fees.
   D.   Compliance Approval: Final compliance approval shall be conducted by
the Administrative Officer, who shall determine that all City and development
requirements, as identified or required by the DRC and any other applicable
reviewing body, have been incorporated into the final site plan. Upon
determination of compliance, the Administrative Officer shall stamp the site
plan as being in compliance; if necessary, the Administrative Officer shall
notify the applicant that the building permit process may commence. (Ord. 13-
12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-4: CONCEPT PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Required Information: The following information shall be required for
concept plan review by the DRC: (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
      1.   Narrative description of the application including reason for the
request, unique features of the application (if any), tentative time line of
the request, and any other relevant factors that describe or clarify the
proposed development and the site plan. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
      2.   A concept plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the site,
existing and proposed buildings, setbacks, access to streets, parking area and
general site and topographic conditions in sufficient detail to illustrate the
project and show how the requirements of this title are or will be met.
   B.   Meetings: After determination that the narrative and concept plan
contain sufficient information for review, the Administrative Officer will
place the concept plan on the agenda for the next available DRC meeting.
Concept plan review will allow the applicant to discuss the request and be
notified of issues identified by the DRC. After concept plan review by the DRC,
the applicant will be notified if the concept will be considered a minor site
plan or a major site plan, and shall be given appropriate direction and
application materials (if required), including a tentative time line for the
specific application. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-5: MAJOR SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Application And Fee: Where required, an application for major site plan
review shall be filed with the Administrative Officer on an official
application form and shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for by City
Council resolution. The site plan shall be considered as officially submitted
only when the Administrative Officer has determined compliance with all
information and fee requirements. Upon making this determination, the
Administrative Officer shall place the major site plan on the agenda for the
next available DRC meeting.
   B.   DRC Review: The DRC shall review the major site plan and determine if
it complies with all of the requirements of this title and any other applicable
law or ordinance. After review, the DRC shall make one (1) of the following
determinations:
      1.   Compliance: The major site plan is in compliance with all
requirements of this title and all other applicable laws and ordinances, and
may be sent to the Administrative Officer for compliance approval, unless the
form or function requires additional review as outlined in subsection C of this
section.
      2.   Conditional Compliance: The major site plan is substantially in
compliance with all requirements of this title and all other applicable laws
and ordinances, but minor changes must be made to achieve full compliance. The
applicant shall then make the required revisions to the major site plan as
directed by the DRC and submit the revised plan to the Administrative Officer.
The Administrative Officer may grant compliance approval upon determination
that all minor changes as directed by the DRC have been made to the major site
plan, unless the form or function requires additional review as outlined in
subsection C of this section. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
      3.   Table: The DRC may determine that the major site plan does not
comply with the requirements of this title and other applicable laws and
ordinances. The applicant shall be notified of the changes necessary to the
major site plan so that compliance may be achieved, and shall be instructed to
resubmit the plans to the Administrative Officer for review at a future DRC
meeting.
   C.   Forms And Functions Requiring Additional Review: Forms and functions
listed as P1, P2 or C shall, in addition to major site plan review, be reviewed
as follows:
      1.   Major site plans for P1 and P2 forms and functions shall be placed
on the agenda of the first possible Planning and Zoning Commission meeting
after the DRC has determined that the plan is otherwise in compliance; or, if
the DRC had made a determination of conditional compliance, after the
Administrative Officer has determined that the plan is in compliance. P2 major
site plans shall also be placed on the first possible City Council agenda
following commission consideration.
      2.   Major site plans for C forms and functions shall be placed on the
agenda of the first possible Zoning Board of Adjustment meeting after the DRC
has determined that the plan is otherwise in compliance; or, if the DRC had
made a determination of conditional compliance, after the Administrative
Officer has determined that the plan is in compliance.
      3.   The reviewing bodies may, as part of the review process, impose
conditions upon the site plan or upon the operation of the form or function. If
the Administrative Officer determines that these conditions will result in a
significant change to the major site plan, the Administrative Officer may
require the major site plan to be returned to the DRC for additional review.
      4.   Upon determination by the Administrative Officer that the
requirements of the DRC and the reviewing bodies have been met, he/she may
consider the plan for compliance approval. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-6: MAJOR SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Preparation: All major site plans shall be drawn to a discernible and
measurable scale. Depending on the complexity of the site plan, the
Administrative Officer, the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may
require the site plan to be prepared by a licensed surveyor, professional civil
engineer, licensed landscape architect or other design professional.
   B.   Information: All major site plans shall include the required elements
listed in subsection D of this section. Depending on the application, the
Administrative Officer, the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may also
require one (1) or more of the elements listed in subsection E of this section
to be shown on or included with the site plan.
   C.   Waiver: The Administrative Officer may waive certain submittal
requirements when they are clearly not applicable.
   D.   Required Major Site Plan Elements: All major site plans shall include
the following, unless waived by the Administrative Officer according to
subsection C of this section:
      1.   Name and address of developer and owner.
      2.   Name and address of architect/designer.
      3.   Date of plan preparation.
      4.   Dates and description of all revisions.
      5.   Name of project or development.
      6.   Scale of plan (engineering scale only, at 1 inch equals 50 feet or
less).
      7.   North point indication.
      8.   Lot dimension and area.
      9.   Required and proposed setbacks, including Building Code setbacks, if
applicable.
      10.   Location, setback and dimension of all buildings on the lot,
including both existing and proposed structures.
      11.   Type of proposed building construction.
      12.   Proposed occupancy of all buildings.
      13.   Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed parking
spaces, including handicap spaces.
      14.   Location, number, and dimensions of existing and proposed loading
spaces.
      15.   Curb cuts, driveways (including driveway width at property line).
      16.   Vehicular circulation. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
      17.   Sidewalks, walkways and trails, and routes of on site pedestrian
circulation.
      18.   Location and type of all proposed lighting, including details of
individual fixtures and height of pole mounted lights.
      19.   Provisions for storage and disposal of waste, garbage and
recyclables, including plans for trash receptacle enclosures where required.
      20.   Location of existing and proposed utility connections, including
water, sewer and fire lines. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Additional Major Site Plan Requirements: The Administrative Officer,
the DRC or any other applicable reviewing body may additionally require one (1)
or more of the following elements to be shown on or included with the site
plan:
      1.   Site Plan Elements:
         a.   Location of all adjacent buildings, wells and/or septic systems
located within one hundred feet (100') of the exterior boundaries of the
property in question.
         b.   Location of recreational and service areas.
         c.   Location of rooftop equipment and proposed screening.
      2.   Grading/Stormwater Drainage Plan:
         a.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals.
         b.   Proposed grade elevations, two foot (2') maximum intervals.
         c.   Drainage plan including configuration of drainage areas and
calculations.
         d.   Storm sewer, catch basins, invert elevations, type of castings
and type of materials.
         e.   Spot elevations.
         f.   Proposed driveway grades.
         g.   Surface water ponding and treatment areas.
         h.   Erosion control measures.
         i.   Wetland boundaries.
   F.   Landscape Plan:
      1.   Planting Plan: A plan meeting the requirements of subsection
12-16-5C of this title shall be submitted. The plan shall show how the minimum
planting requirements of section
12-16-5 and table 1 of this title are met. The plan shall include proposed site
grading, if applicable, and shall include the following elements:
         a.   Planting schedule (table) containing:
            (1)   Symbols.
            (2)   Quantities.
            (3)   Common names.
            (4)   Botanical names.
            (5)   Sizes of plant material.
            (6)   Root specification (bare root, balled and burlapped, potted,
etc.).
            (7)   Special planting instructions.
         b.   Location, type and size of all existing significant trees to be
removed or preserved.
         c.   Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown
diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
         d.   Typical sections in details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes,
tot lots, picnic areas, berms and the like.
         e.   Other existing or proposed conditions that could be expected to
affect landscaping.
      2.   Other Plans And Information:
         a.   Legal description of property under consideration.
         b.   Proof of ownership of the land for which a site plan approval has
been requested.
         c.   Architectural elevations of all principal and accessory buildings
(type, color, and materials used in all external surfaces).
         d.   "Typical" floor plan and "typical" room plan.
         e.   Extent of and any proposed modifications to land within the
Floodplain Overlay Districts as described and regulated in chapter 18 of this
title.
         f.   Type, location and size (area and height) of all signs to be
erected upon the property in question.
         g.   Restrictive covenants. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
         h.   Photometric plan showing light distribution on the property and
up to ten feet (10') beyond the property lines. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd.
2017 Code)
         i.   Traffic study.
         j.   Snow storage and removal plan.
         k.   Other plans, studies or elements determined necessary by the
Administrative Officer, DRC or other reviewing body to make a decision upon the
application in order to ensure that applicable laws and ordinances are met and
the public health, safety and welfare are protected. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-7: COMPLIANCE APPROVAL:
   A.   Upon DRC determination that a plan is a minor site plan, or upon DRC
determination of compliance or conditional compliance for a major site plan as
outlined in subsection
12-7-5B of this chapter, the applicant shall provide a final site plan for
compliance approval to the Administrative Officer. The final site plan shall
serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of the manner in
which the subject site is to be developed. It shall incorporate all prior
required plan revisions resulting from the development review process.
   B.   The Administrative Officer shall review the final site plan and shall
determine that all requirements of this title, any other applicable laws and
ordinances and any specific requirements or conditions of the DRC and other
applicable reviewing bodies have been met. Upon such determination, the
Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant, the Chief Building Official
and the Zoning Administrator that the plan is in compliance. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-
2013)
   C.   Two (2) copies of the final site plan shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer for review and certification for compliance. Each copy
shall be signed by the Administrative Officer and stamped with the approval
date. One (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant, who shall retain it on
the job site during construction to ensure that the site is developed according
to the approved plan. The final copy shall be retained in the project file.
Electronic copies shall be distributed to applicable departments and agencies.
   D.   The Administrative Officer may deny or delay compliance approval if
there are delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, unpaid
fines related to housing, zoning or nuisances, or City utility fees due upon
the parcel of land to which the site plan application relates. Compliance
approval may be granted upon proof of payment, provided all other requirements
are met. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. 2017 Code)
12-7-8: SITE AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The following site and architectural guidelines shall be used to design all
site plans subject to review under this chapter.
   A.   Building Location And Orientation: Principal entrances should be
oriented to the project's primary street or to an active pedestrian or public
zone within the site. When the development has two (2) primary streets, the
site plan shall determine orientation.
Parking lots should not be the dominant feature along any street.
Developments should maximize the amount of parking located on the side or rear
of buildings and should locate buildings near their primary fronting streets.
   B.   Pedestrian Access: Public sidewalks, meeting minimum City standards,
should be constructed along all street frontages.
Developments should provide a continuous walkway connection from the public
sidewalk or right-of-way to the customer entrances of all principal buildings
on the site. Developments adjacent to multiuse trails should provide a direct
connection from the trail to the development's internal pedestrian circulation
system.
Multi-building developments should provide clear and safe walkways that connect
all buildings on the site unless the buildings are not intended for routine
pedestrian access.
Where the required walkways cross drives, parking aisles, or other
vehicularways, the crosswalks should be distinguished from driving surfaces by
the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials that are different than
the primary paving material. Painted concrete is not acceptable in this
application.
   C.   Vehicular Access: Site plans should minimize the number of access
points to adjacent streets. Access from arterial streets should be controlled
and will typically be limited to one (1) point of access per six hundred (600)
linear feet, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.
Main driveways and drive aisles should provide a continuous system that
connects to the main site entrance(s).
When possible, shared service and delivery access should be provided between
adjacent parcels and buildings.
   D.   Making Connections: Pedestrian connections to adjacent developments
should be provided. If adjacent properties are undeveloped, the site plan
should indicate how future connections will be provided.
Bike racks should be conveniently located in conjunction with new employment,
shopping, residential and public developments where accessibility via street or
trail is possible and usage anticipated.
   E.   Building Facades: Primary facades greater than one hundred feet (100')
in length should incorporate projections, recesses, articulation or variation
in design, materials and color in the wall plane to provide visual interest and
sense of scale.
All building facades oriented to a street should be subject to all requirements
for primary facade design.
Other rear and side facades may use a simplified expression of the materials
and design used on the primary facades.
In commercial, office and mixed use buildings, the primary ground floor facades
should be distinguished from the floors above by horizontal banding, an
intermediate cornice line, a change in building materials or fenestration, an
awning or arcade or other material means.
   F.   Roofs: Visible roof materials should be high quality and durable, such
as architectural grade asphalt shingles, architectural metals, clay or concrete
tile, copper, natural or synthetic slate, or similar materials.
Roof mounted equipment should be screened from street level view with materials
that are architecturally compatible with the primary building facades or by the
roof structure itself.
   G.   Building/Construction Materials: Exterior building materials should be
high quality, durable materials such as brick; native or manufactured stone;
integrally colored, burnished, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units;
architectural metals; quality metals such as copper; high quality prestressed
concrete systems; and drainable (water managed) EIFS.
   H.   Sustainability: Sustainable building materials and methods should be
considered and used when feasible to save production resources and reduce
impacts to the environment.
Renewable energy solutions, such as solar, wind and geothermal, should be
considered and used when feasible to reduce long term energy costs and fossil
fuel dependence.
Bioretention solutions, such as permeable paving materials, rain gardens,
bioswales and vegetative roofs, should be considered and used when feasible to
manage stormwater on site. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-9: SITE PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Minor Changes:
      1.   Any variations from Ordinance requirements shall be subject to the
established review and hearing procedures for special exception or variance
approval.
      2.   Any variances from ordinance requirements shall be subject to the
established review and hearing procedures for variance approval.
      3.   A copy of the plans approved under this chapter shall be
appropriately certified by the Administrative Officer and placed on file with
the approved site plans.
   B.   Major Changes: Plan changes not qualifying as minor shall be classified
as major. An amended site plan involving major changes shall be applied for and
administered in a manner similar to that required for a new site plan. (Ord.
13-12, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-7-10: LAPSE OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified by the Administrative Officer, Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council as applicable, the compliance approval shall
become null and void one (1) year after the date of such approval, unless the
property owner or applicant has substantially started the construction of any
building, structure, addition or alteration, or has properly and legally
commenced the use requested as part of the approved plan. The property owner or
applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension in
accordance with this chapter.
   B.   An application to extend the approval of a site plan for up to an
additional one (1) year shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer not
less than thirty (30) days before the expiration of said approval. Such an
application shall state the facts of the request, showing a good faith attempt
to utilize the compliance approval, and it shall state the additional time
being requested to begin the proposed construction. The request shall be heard
and decided by the Administrative Officer prior to the lapse of approval of the
original request. A request pertaining to a major project involving a longer
period of time than one (1) year or a second request for a time extension shall
be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation and to
the City Council for a decision.
   C.   In making a determination on whether an applicant has made a good faith
attempt to utilize the compliance approval, the Administrative Officer,
commission or the City Council, as applicable, shall consider such factors as
the type, design, and size of the proposed construction, any applicable
restrictions on financing, or special and/or unique circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant which have caused the delay. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-11: BUILDING AND OTHER PERMITS:
No building or other permits shall be issued until the Administrative Officer
certifies that the final site plan is in compliance and a properly executed
performance agreement has been received, if required. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-12: INSPECTIONS DURING DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Following compliance approval, the Administrative Officer shall
periodically, until the completion of the development, review all permits
issued and construction undertaken and compare actual development with the
approved final site plan.
   B.   If the Administrative Officer finds that development is not proceeding
in accordance with the approved plan, he/she shall immediately notify the
property owner.
   C.   Within ten (10) days of such notice, the Administrative Officer shall
either revoke the compliance approval or shall take such steps as it shall be
deemed necessary to compel compliance with the applicable laws and ordinances;
or shall require the landowner or applicant to seek a modification of the site
plan in accordance with section
12-7-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013)
12-7-13: VARIANCES, REZONING AND PLATS OF SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Variances, Special Exceptions And Rezoning: The DRC shall review
variances, special exception, and rezoning requests only when requested as part
of a development site plan review as required by this chapter. The DRC may
provide comments or recommendations to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the
Planning and Zoning Commission, as applicable, but may not assume the powers of
the respective bodies nor allow any development in conflict with decisions made
by those bodies or by the City Council.
   B.   Plats Of Subdivision: DRC review of plats of subdivision shall be
limited to a determination that all lots, easements, rights-of-way, etc., are
in compliance with the requirements of this title and other applicable laws and
ordinances.
      1. Preliminary Plats Of Subdivision: The DRC shall review concept plans
for preliminary plats of subdivision, as provided in section 11-3-6 of this
Code. Upon DRC determination that the plat is in compliance, the Administrative
Officer shall notify the Planning and Zoning Commission of compliance approval.
      2.   Final Plats: A final plat that conforms to an approved preliminary
plat is not subject to compliance review. Final plats of subdivision that did
not require prior approval of a preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the DRC
prior to submittal of the final plat to the City Council. Upon DRC
determination that the plat is in compliance, the Administrative Officer shall
notify the City Council of compliance approval. (Ord. 13-12, 4-2-2013; amd.
2017 Code; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
 
CHAPTER 8
ZONING DISTRICTS; GENERAL
SECTION:
12-8-1: Zoning District Descriptions
12-8-2: Permitted And Conditional Uses In Z Districts
12-8-3: Zoning Form And Function Table
12-8-4: Building Disposition
12-8-5: General Parking Provisions
12-8-6: Specific Parking Requirements
12-8-1: ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS:
The following table provides descriptions of the character of each Z District
(zoning district):
   TABLE 1
   ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
   A.   Z1 Agricultural District: Z1 Agricultural District primarily consists
of agricultural land with related residential and scattered wetlands,
woodlands, on and off street trails and 2-lane highways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2397.gif]
 
 
1. General character:        Primarily agricultural uses - 10 acre minimum lot
                              size
2. Building placement:       Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height:  2 stories with independent standards for
                              subordinate farm structures
4. Type of civic space:      Community parks, greenways and golf courses
 
   B.   Z2 Sub-Urban District: Z2 Sub-Urban District primarily consists of
detached, single family residential, open lawns, occasional corner store and/or
corner office, neighborhood and community parks, greenways, on and off street
trails, interconnected streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2399.gif]
 
 
1. General character:        Lower density development on a 3 - 5 units/acre
                              scale
2. Building placement:       Variable setbacks with encroachment standards for
                              porches
3. Typical building height:  2 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space:      Community and neighborhood parks, both passive
                              and active
 
   C.   Z3 General Urban District: Z3 General Urban District consists of a mix
of houses, townhomes, small, multiple-flat residential, small retail buildings,
corner stores, home offices, neighborhood parks, playgrounds, miniparks, small
surface parking lots and interconnected streets with sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2401.gif]
 
 
1. General character:        Mix of urban housing types
2. Building placement:       Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height:  3 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space:      Pocket parks, neighborhood scale playground
 
   D.   Z4 Multi-Use District: Z4 Multi-Use District consists of a mixture of
retail, office, lodging and multi-family residential uses in a mixture of
building types, sizes and assemblages with interconnected, landscaped surface
parking lots and sidewalks, community greens, plazas, greenways, interconnected
streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2403.gif]
 
 
1. General character:        Mixture of retail, commercial and medium density
                              residential at a 5 - 10 units/acre scale
2. Building placement:       Variable setbacks
3. Typical building height:  4 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space:      Urban scale
 
   E.   Z5 Central Business District: Z5 Central Business District consists of
multi-story, mixed and single use commercial block buildings, townhouses,
multiple-flat residential, lodging and civic buildings; predominantly attached
buildings, parking garages, town squares, plazas, pocket parks and an
interconnected street grid.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2405.gif]
 
 
1. General character:        Multi-story, mixed use buildings
2. Building placement:       Zero lot line at building front
3. Typical building height:  2 stories minimum, 10 stories maximum
4. Type of civic space:      Pocket parks, greenways
 
   F.   Z6 Industrial District: The purpose of the Z6 Industrial District is to
promote the management and preservation of existing industrial facilities
within Mason City as well as the development and management of new ecologically
responsible, sustainable employment centers with interconnected streets and
sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2407.gif]
 
 
1. Classifications:          Z6-O: Open Industry
                              Z6-R: Restricted Industry
2. General character:        Mix of utilitarian, industrial buildings
3. Building placement:       Large and variable setbacks
4. Typical building height:  Variable up to 75 feet in height
5. Type of civic space:      None
 
   G.   Z7 Specific Use District: Z7 Specific Use District consists of
specific, single uses including college campuses, hospitals and medical centers
that primarily function independently from other districts. There are multiple
Z7 Districts, reflecting different forms and functions.
 
1. General character:        Varies
2. Building placement:       Varies
3. Typical building height:  Varies up to 6 stories
4. Type of civic space:      Varies
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-2: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN Z DISTRICTS:
The zoning form and function table (section
12-8-3, table 2 of this chapter) establishes the permitted and conditional
forms and functions allowed in the Z Districts. If not specifically permitted
or conditional, the form or function is prohibited in that Z District. New
development associated with the allowed uses will be subject to the following
review and approval process:
   A.   P - Permitted subject to administrative site plan compliance approval.
This use is a permitted use within the appropriate zoning district. An
applicant or developer should consult each zoning district to determine setback
and building placement standards as well as chapters 16, "Zoning Standards",
and 7, "Development Review Process", of this title.
   B.   P1 - Permitted subject to commission site plan compliance approval with
notification to neighbors and public hearing. As part of this process, the
applicant or developer will be required to meet the conditions and standards of
chapter 7, "Development Review Process", of this title. An applicant or
developer should consult each zoning district to determine setback and building
placement standards as well as chapter 16, "Zoning Standards", of this title.
      1.   All owners of property within a three hundred fifty foot (350')
radius shall be sent notice of the hearing by first class mail at least ten
(10) days prior to the commission's hearing and at least one (1) public notice
sign will be posted on the subject property.
      2.   Landowners will be given notice of the time and place of the
commission's public hearing.
   C.   P2 - Permitted subject to commission and City Council site plan
approval with notification to neighbors and commission public hearing. As a
part of this process, the applicant or developer will be required to meet the
conditions and standards of chapter 7, "Development Review Process", of this
title. An applicant or developer should consult each zoning district to
determine setback and building placement standards as well as with chapter 16,
"Zoning Standards", of this title.
      1.   All owners of property within a three hundred fifty foot (350')
radius shall be sent notice of the hearing by first class mail at least ten
(10) days prior to the commission's hearing and at least one (1) public notice
sign will be posted on the subject property.
      2.   Landowners will be given notice of the time and place of the
commission's public hearing.
   D.   C - Conditional use, subject to board approval. Any landowner or his
designated agent may file an application for a conditional use as provided for
in this title in the zoning district in which the land is located. All
applications must follow the provisions of chapter 5, "Zoning Board Of
Adjustment", of this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-8-3: ZONING FORM AND FUNCTION TABLE:
TABLE 2
ZONING FORM AND FUNCTION TABLE
P         = Permitted
P*        = Open industry functions are permitted only in the Z6-O District
P1        = Permitted subject to Planning and Zoning Commission site plan
            approval, with notification to neighbors
            In the Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District, allowed only as a
P**, P1** = conditional use. See subsection
            12-12-7B
P2        = Permitted subject to Planning and Zoning Commission and City
            Council site plan approval with notification to neighbors
C         = Conditional subject to Zoning Board of Adjustment approval
C*        = Z6-R Districts only
            Conditional use only in the Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay
C**       = District; see subsection
            12-12-7B. Not permitted in the remainder of the Z4 District
            See section
Z7*       = 12-15-5, Table 1A of this title for permitted and conditional forms
            and functions in the Z7 Specific Use Districts
 
          Agricultural Sub-  General Multi- Use Central  Industrial Specific
Districts              Urban Urban              Business            Use
          Z1           Z2    Z3      Z4         Z5       Z6         Z7*
               Agricultural Sub-  General Multi- Central  Industrial Specific
Districts                   Urban Urban   Use    Business            Use
               Z1           Z2    Z3      Z4     Z5       Z6         Z7*
A.
Residential/
mixed use:
 Accessory    P            P     P
  dwelling
 Duplex/two                P     P       P
  flat
 Family home  P            P     P       P
 Farm         P            P             P               P
  dwelling
 Freestanding P            P     P
  house
 Group                           P1      P      P1
  dwelling
 Live/work                       P       P      P        C*
  building
 Mansion                         P       P      P1
  apartment
  Mixed use
 block                                   P      P
  building
 Multiple                        P1      P      P
  flats
 SRO                             C              P1
  Side yard/
 zero lot                  P     P       P
  line house
 Town house                P     P       P      P
B. Lodging:
 Bed and      P            P     P       P      P
  breakfast
 Dormitory                               P1     P1
 Hotel                                   P      P
 Inn          C                  C       P      P
 Residence    P            P     P       P
  lodging
C. Office/
miscellaneous:
 Corner                    P1    P       P      P
  office
  Personal
 hobby                                   P               P
  building
 Office                                  P      P        P
  building
D. Commercial/
retail/
service:
 Adult use                               C               P
 Box, large                              P
 Box, medium                             P      P1
 Box, small                      P1      P               P
 Corner store P            P1    P       P      P        P
  Multiple
 principal                               P1              P1
  building
  development
 Open air                                P      P
  market
 Restaurant   P1           C     C       P      P        P
 Roadside     P
  stand
 Self storage                            C               P
 Shopping                                P1     P2
  mall
 Shopping                                P1
  strip
 Taverns or                              P      P
  similar
E. Civic:
 Auditorium                              P1     P1
 Convention                              P2     P2
  center
 Golf course  P            P1                            P
 Indoor                                  P      P        P
  recreation
 Library                   P2    P2      P2     P2
 Movie                                   P      P
  theater
 Museum       C            C     P1      P1     P
 Outdoor      C            C     C       P1              P1
  recreation
  Public parks
 and related  P            P     P       P      P        P
  facilities
  Religious
 assembly,                 C             P1              C
  large
  Religious
 assembly,                 C     C       P      P1       C
  medium
  Religious
 assembly,    C            P1    P       P      P
  small
F. Civic
support:
 Cemetery     P            P
 Clinic                          P1      P      P
 Crematorium  P                          P      C        P
 Fairgrounds  P
 Funeral home              C     P1      P      P
 Hospital                                P1     P1
 Parking                                 P2     P2
  structure
  Public
 safety       P2           P2    P2      P2     P2       P2
  facility
 Public works P2                         P2              P2
  garage
G. Education:
 College      C                          P1     P1
 Daycare      P            P     P       P      P        P
 K - 8                     P1    P1      P      P
 9 - 12/high               C     C       P1     P1
  school
 Preschool                 P1    P       P      P
 Trade school                    P1      P      P        P
H. Automotive:
 Gas/         C                  P1      P      P1       P
  convenience
 Vehicle      C                  C       P      P1       P
  repair
 Vehicle      C                          P               P
  sales/rental
I.
Agriculture:
 Community    P            P     P       P      P        P
  garden
 Farm         P            P             P               P
 Grain        P                                          P
  storage
 Greenhouse   P            C             P               P
 Kennel       P                          P1              P
 Livestock    P                                          P
 Small farm                C
 Stable       P
J. Industrial:
 Agribusiness P1                                         P
  Artisan/
 craftsman                               P      P        P
  shop
 Contractor   P1                         P               P
  shops
  Cross
 docking                                 C**             P
  facility
 Industry,                                               P*
  open
 Industry,                                               P
  restricted
 Office-                                 P               P
  showroom
 Warehousing                                             P
 Waste                                                   C
  transfer
 Wastewater   P2                                         P2
  treatment
 Water        P2                                         P2
  treatment
K. Accessory
uses:
  Accessory
 parking                                 P1     P1
  structure
  Accessory
 surface                         C       P      C        P
  parking (off
  site)
 Active solar P            P     P       P      P        P
  equipment
 Agritourism  C
  Dispersed
 wind         C            C     C       C      C        C
  equipment
 Drive-                          P1      P      P1       P
  through
 Home         P            P     P       P      P
  occupations
  Outdoor
 customer     P1           P1    P1      P      P        P
  dining area
 Outdoor      P                          P1**            P
  storage
  Seasonal
 sales/       P                          P**    P        P
  display
 Small wind   P            P     P       P      P        P
  equipment
 
(Ord. 19-9, 6-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord. 21-5, 6-1-2021; Ord.
22-3, 3-1-2022; Ord. 22-13, 11-15-2022)
12-8-4: BUILDING DISPOSITION:
   TABLE 3
   BUILDING DISPOSITION
   A.   Edge Yard: Types - freestanding house, mansion apartment, duplex/two-
flat, multiple-flat, freestanding commercial/retail/service building, office,
lodging, civic, civic support, educational, automotive, agricultural and
industrial.
A building that generally occupies the interior of its lot with setbacks on all
sides. For residential applications, the front yard is intended to be visually
continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. For nonresidential building
types, the first tier (front lot) is comprised of landscaping and pedestrian
pavements and, in some cases, limited accessory parking, while portions of the
second tier (middle lot) and third tier (back lot) can be used for accessory
surface parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2409.gif]
 
   B.   Side Yard: Types - side yard/zero lot line house, duplex/two- flat,
corner store or corner office, inn and hotel.
A building that occupies one (1) side of the lot with the setback to the other
side. A shallow frontage setback defines a more urban condition. If the
adjacent building is similar with a blank side wall, the yard can be quite
private. If a side yard house abuts and shares an unpierced party wall with a
neighboring side yard house, the type is known as a duplex. Energy costs are
reduced by sharing a party wall in this disposition. For nonresidential
building types, portions of the second tier and all of the third tier (back
lot) can be used for accessory surface parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2411.gif]
 
   C.   Split Yard: Types - duplex/two-flat, townhouse, commercial/retail/
service and office buildings.
A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot from side to side leaving
the front and rear of the lot as open yard. This is a more urban yard type, as
it provides an open, landscaped frontage along the thoroughfare. For
residential applications, the front yard is intended to be visually continuous
with the yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard can be secured for privacy
by combinations of plantings, fences and accessory structures. For commercial
applications, it provides a greener, landscaped frontage with opportunities for
outdoor patio seating and dining, and accessory surface parking within the
third tier.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2413.gif]
 
   D.   Rear Yard: Types - townhouse, live/work building, multiple- flat, mixed
use block building, commercial/retail/service, office and civic buildings.
A building that occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the
sole yard; however, traditional downtown buildings may occupy the entire lot.
This is a very urban type as the continuous facade steadily defines the public
thoroughfare. The front facade may be articulated for functional purposes such
as recess entries or window bays. In its residential form, the rear of the
building includes a garage (attached or detached) as in the row house. For its
commercial form, the third tier can be used for accessory surface parking.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2415.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-5: GENERAL PARKING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided as outlined in
table 4 of this section for all new development, or for all changes in function
or major improvement or expansion that results in an increase in occupant load
or gross floor area resulting in additional required parking. (Ord. 13-13, 4-2-
2013)
   TABLE 4
   REQUIRED PARKING TABLE
Function Districts
         Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7
Function     Districts
             Z1         Z2       Z3         Z4        Z5  Z6         Z7
Residential  2/dwelling 1.5/     1/dwelling 1.5/      n/a n/a
                        dwelling            dwelling
Lodging      1/room     1/room   1/room     1/room    n/a n/a
Office1      n/a        2/1,000  2/1,000    4/1,000   n/a 4/1,000
                        sq. ft.  sq. ft.    sq. ft.       sq. ft.
Retail1      2/1,000    2/1,000  2/1,000    4/1,000   n/a 4/1,000
             sq. ft.    sq. ft.  sq. ft.    sq. ft.       sq. ft.
Civic        To be determined via development review (see chapter 7
             of this title)
                                                          Minimum 1
                                                          per 2
                                                          employees
                                                          of largest
             To be determined via development review (see shift plus To be
Other        chapter 7 of this title)                     1/2,000    determined
                                                          sq. ft.
                                                          maximum
                                                          for
                                                          principal
                                                          building
Parking
setbacks:
 Principal             30 ft.   10 ft.     10 ft.    n/a 10 ft.
  front yard
 Secondary             10 ft.   10 ft.     10 ft.    n/a 30 ft.
  front yard
 Side yard             10 ft.   10 ft.     10 ft.    n/a 15 ft.
 Rear yard             10 ft.   10 ft.     10 ft./15 n/a 25 ft./50
                                            ft.2          ft.2
 
Notes:
   1.    For office and retail functions, parking requirements are expressed as
maximums.
   2.    The larger dimension shall be applied for nonresidential uses abutting
residential uses.
(Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Shared Parking: Minimum or maximum effective parking in a development
with two (2) or more distinct forms or functions shall be determined utilizing
the appropriate shared parking factor in table 5 of this section.
      TABLE 5
      SHARED PARKING FACTOR
 
Function Combination Residential Lodging Office Retail
Residential          1           1.1     1.4    1.2
Lodging              1.1         1       1.7    1.3
Office               1.4         1.7     1      1.2
Retail               1.2         1.3     1.2    1
 
Shared Parking Calculation Example:
A 20,000 square foot mixed use building in the Z4 District has 10,000 square
feet of office on the upper floor and 10,000 square feet of retail at street
level. Follow the steps below to determine the amount of parking and subsequent
efficiency resulting from sharing.
Step 1: Locate site's district and function from table 4, "Required Parking
Table", of this section.
      TABLE 4
      REQUIRED PARKING TABLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2533.gif]
 
SITE: Z4 District with: 10,000 square feet of office and 10,000 square feet of
retail.
Step 2: Calculate maximum parking for each function.
10,000/1,000 = 10. 10 x 4 = 40 spaces max. for office function.
10,000/1,000 = 10. 10 x 4 = 40 spaces max. for retail function.
40 + 40 = 80 spaces max. office and retail combined.
Step 3: Determine sharing factor by locating site's function(s) from table 5,
"Shared Parking Factor", of this section.
   TABLE 5
   SHARED PARKING FACTOR
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2535.gif]
 
Step 4: Calculate effective maximum parking.
80 spaces/1.2(sharing factor multiplier) = 66.6 shared parking spaces
(80 - 66.6 = 13.4 spaces saved due to sharing)
   C.   Bicycles: For multi-family residential and all nonresidential forms and
functions, bicycle racks or other form of bicycle storage shall be provided to
accommodate at least one (1) bicycle for every twenty (20) parking spaces
provided, up to a maximum of ten (10) bicycles.
   D.   Parking Surface: All parking shall be on an improved surface designed
for the purpose of off street parking. The proposed surface shall be approved
by the Administrative Officer, or by the Development Review Committee following
the process outlined in chapter 7 of this title, as applicable. Parking on
grass or lawn is not allowed unless it is on reinforced turf designed for
parking and approved by the Administrative Officer.
   E.   Access: Parking stalls shall be accessed via internal drives and
traffic aisles. Public right-of-way shall not be used for maneuvering into or
out of off street parking spaces. This requirement shall not apply to downtown
streets where public parking spaces are designated, or to alleys.
   F.   Landscaping: Off street parking areas shall meet the landscaping
standards in section
12-16-5 of this title.
   G.   Deviation: During the site development plan compliance review process,
the Development Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission or City
Council, as applicable, may authorize a deviation of up to ten percent (10%)
from the total minimum or maximum number of parking stalls required for the
development. A denial of a request for a deviation under this section may be
appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to chapter 5 of this
title. Any deviation in excess of ten percent (10%) shall require approval of a
variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
   H.   Off Street Parking Dimensions:
      1. Motorcycle and scooter parking spaces, if provided: Width, four foot
(4') minimum; length, eight foot (8') minimum.
      2. Vehicle parking space width: Nine foot (9') minimum.
      3. Vehicle parking space length: Eighteen foot (18') minimum to twenty
foot (20') maximum.
      4. Width of two-way drive aisle serving any parking space: Twenty four
foot (24') minimum to twenty six foot (26') maximum.
      5. Width of one-way drive aisle serving greater than sixty degree (60°)
parking spaces: Twenty four foot (24') minimum to twenty five foot (25')
maximum.
      6. Width of one-way drive aisle serving less than sixty degree (60°)
parking spaces: 15.5 foot minimum to 16.5 foot maximum. (Ord. 13-13, 4-2-2013;
amd. 2017 Code)
12-8-6: SPECIFIC PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A. Use Of Vehicles For Other Than Transport: Except for temporary
construction trailers, approved outdoor mobile vendors and mobile services
operated by public service agencies (i.e., bookmobile, bloodmobiles, etc.) as
allowed by the City, and trailers parked in a designated and improved loading
area, no vehicle may be used for office, business, industrial manufacturing,
testing, or storage of items.
   B. Use Of Vehicles For Residential Purposes: A vehicle may not be used for
temporary or permanent residential purposes; however, a recreational vehicle as
defined in chapter 2 of this title may be used for short term camping,
provided:
      1. The vehicle is located upon a designated campground allowed under this
title, or is located upon property sanctioned for temporary camping related to
an event allowed under this Code or otherwise approved by the City Council; or
      2. The vehicle is parked for up to five (5) continuous days, with the
permission of the property owner, upon a residential driveway leading to a
garage, carport or parking space serving a dwelling, or within a residential
side or rear yard at least five feet (5') from an adjoining residential lot
line. The use of generators or other potential noise producing equipment shall
be subject to the maximum sound levels for residential receiving land uses in
title 8, chapter 6 of this Code.
   C. Recreational Vehicle Storage On Residential Lots: Storage of recreational
vehicles on any lot with a residential function less than five (5) acres in
area shall be subject to the following:
      1. For the purposes of this subsection, "storage" shall mean the seasonal
and long term storage of recreational vehicles, when not in use. This
subsection does not apply to recreational vehicles on residential property
being prepared for use, routine maintenance, or short term parking for less
than seventy two (72) hours.
      2. All recreational vehicles shall display current registration or
license plates as required by law.
      3. A recreational vehicle shall be stored indoors or, if stored outdoors,
shall be stored as follows:
         a. If within the first tier, upon an established, continuous hard
surfaced driveway leading from the street to a garage, carport or parking space
serving a dwelling; or
         b. Within the second or third tier of the lot; provided, that the
vehicle shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any adjoining
property line.
   D. Parking Or Storage Of Commercial Vehicles:
      1. Z2 Sub-Urban, Z3 General Urban And Z7-1 And Z7-3 Specific Use
Districts:
         a. No more than one (1) commercial vehicle with a wheelbase not
exceeding twenty four feet (24') in length may be parked or stored upon a lot
containing a residential function.
         b. Exception: A vehicle that exceeds the above limitation may be
parked or stored upon a lot containing a residential function if it is located
wholly indoors or is located in the third tier of the lot; provided, that the
vehicle is located at least five feet (5') from any adjoining property line and
does not exceed thirty five feet (35') in total length.
         c. Parking or storage must be on a hard surface that is designed for
the weight of the vehicle.
         d. These requirements shall not apply to a commercial vehicle parked
for loading, unloading or rendering service.
      2. Z4 Multi-Use, Z5 Central Business, Z7-2 And Z7-4 Specific Use
Districts:
         a. Up to three (3) commercial vehicles such as delivery and service
trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of fourteen thousand (14,000)
pounds or less may be parked without screening if such vehicles relate to the
principal function.
         b. Parking of more than three (3) vehicles of fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds or less GVWR or any number of vehicles over fourteen thousand
(14,000) pounds GVWR shall be parked or stored so that they shall not be
visible from adjoining streets or sidewalks (e.g., parked inside or behind a
building). Parking of vehicles as regulated in this subsection in an area that
is visible to adjoining streets or sidewalks shall require screening according
to subsection
12-16-5K of this title.
      3. Z6 Industrial District: There shall be no limit to the number of
commercial vehicles parked on a lot. Screening shall not be required, unless
vehicles are stored in an outdoor storage area, which shall be screened
according to subsection
12-16-5K of this title.
      4. Paving: All parking and vehicle storage areas shall be permanently
paved with materials that support the gross weights of the intended vehicles.
   E. Private Vehicle Sales: Except for an approved vehicle sales/rental
function, any parking lot or parking space serving a nonresidential function
shall not be used for displaying vehicles for sale, unless the vehicle is owned
by the person or entity that owns the property upon which the parking lot is
located. (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 9
Z1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-9-1: Purpose
12-9-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-9-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-9-4: Accessory Buildings
12-9-5: Preexisting Standards
12-9-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-9-7: Forms And Functions
12-9-8: Development Standards
12-9-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Z1 Agricultural District is to provide
areas in which agriculture and related uses are supported and natural
ecosystems, woodlands, wetlands, prairies, etc., are preserved to prevent soil
erosion, protect water quality and support biodiversity and natural habitats.
   B.   Premature Development Restricted: In order to avoid leapfrog
development or large tract fragmentation, premature subdivision standards and
area development concept plans ("ghost platting") will be required for all
developments within the Z1 Zoning District. See section
11-1-5 of this Code for premature subdivision standards and ghost platting
requirements. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
   A.   Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed according to chapter 7
of this title to show compliance with all development standards identified
herein.
   B.   No more than two (2) single-family dwelling units shall be allowed per
zoning lot. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. In all cases, all new development and redevelopment
within Mason City shall require compliance review according to chapter 7 of
this title. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative total area of more than four
thousand (4,000) square feet measured at the exterior dimensions of the ground
floor. The following shall not be considered as part of the cumulative
accessory building calculation:
   A.   Farm operation buildings.
   B.   Structures or buildings such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or
maintenance sheds measuring no more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
(Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-9-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z1
Zoning District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record
or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in the Z1 Zoning District. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-9-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   New Subdivision: Refer to section
11-1-5, "Criteria For Subdivisions In Undeveloped Areas", of this Code.
   B.   Accessory Dwellings:
      1.   Limited to one (1) accessory dwelling per lot;
      2.   If freestanding or within a detached accessory building, located in
the third tier of the lot;
      3.   Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than eight
hundred (800) gross square feet in total area;
      4.   Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same
materials as the primary dwelling; and
      5.   Either freestanding, located within a detached garage, or located
within the principal structure, provided that there is direct access between
the accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling unit.
   C.   Bed And Breakfast: Bed and breakfasts in the Z1 District shall be
comprised of a converted freestanding house, provided the conversion meets
applicable Building Codes. Customer parking shall be located in the second or
third tier.
   D.   Restaurant: Restaurants in the Z1 District shall be comprised of a
converted freestanding house or farm structure, provided the conversion meets
applicable Building Codes. Customer parking shall be located in the second or
third tier. Parking shall be provided for a retail function per section
12-8-5, table 4 of this title and landscaped per section
12-16-5 of this title.
   E.   Small Religious Assembly: Small religious assembly in the Z1 District
shall meet the following standards:
      1.   Limited to congregational assembly, small meeting and Sunday school
with supportive storage, kitchen and office functions;
      2.   Weekday, full time educational functions are prohibited;
      3.   Parking shall be located in the side yard area of the second tier
and all of the third tier;
      4.   Parking shall be limited to a maximum of one parking space per two
(2) seats plus three (3) staff parking spaces;
      5.   Parking shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from all
applicable property lines; and
      6.   Parking lots shall be landscaped per section
12-16-5 of this title.
   F.   Agritourism: Agritourism forms and functions shall meet the following
standards:
      1.   No Interference: New agritourism forms and functions shall be
located, designed and operated so as not to interfere with normal agricultural
practices on and off site.
      2.   Rural Theme: Agritourism shall incorporate a rural theme in terms of
building style and design. New agritourism uses involving new structures shall
complement or enhance rather than detract from the rural environment.
      3.   Compliance: Agritourism activities shall comply with all relevant
local, State and Federal requirements related to public health, building/
construction standards, safety, health and welfare.
      4.   Building Scale: Allowed non-agricultural agritourism uses and
activities located on land with an agricultural or residential form or function
shall be consistent with the size, scale and intensity of the existing
agricultural form or function of the property and the existing buildings on the
site. Nonagricultural forms or functions shall not be located outside the
general area already developed for buildings and residential forms or
functions.
      5.   Parking: Vehicular access and customer parking shall be provided on
site so that vehicles are not required to back onto public roads. Parking lots
shall be constructed in conformance with section
12-8-5 of this title and landscaped per section
12-16-5 of this title. Impervious surfaces shall be minimized to the greatest
extent possible. Use of pervious paving in parking areas is encouraged. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 19-2, 3-5-2019; Ord. 22-3, 3-1-
2022)
12-9-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, table 2, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1,
1-7-2014)
12-9-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Primarily agricultural with related residential and scattered wetlands,
woodlands, on and off street trails and two-lane highways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2539.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. Principal building                                         2 stories maximum
2. Accessory building                                         2 stories maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories,     
excluding attics and raised basements
4. Subordinate farm structures shall be permitted at a height  
not to exceed 75 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2541.jpg]
 
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Permitted
2. Side yard  Not permitted
3. Split yard Not permitted
4. Rear yard  Not permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot size     10 acre minimum
2. Lot coverage n/a
3. Lot width    300 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
 
1. Principal front setback                                   50 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback                                   50 foot minimum
3. Side setback                                              50 foot minimum
4. Rear setback                                              100 foot minimum
5. An open porch or a deck shall be allowed to encroach a
maximum of 10 feet within the required principal front yard,  
secondary front yard, or rear yard setback
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2546.jpg]
 
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
   E.   Setbacks; Accessory Building:
 
1. Front setback                      20 feet plus principal building setback
                                      minimum
2. Side setback                       25 foot or 50 foot minimum at secondary
                                      frontage
3. Rear setback                       25 foot minimum
4. A subordinate farm structure shall  
be set back a minimum of 75 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2548.jpg]
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
   F.   Parking Provisions: (See section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
 
1. Residential 2 per dwelling
2. Lodging     1 per room
3. Office      n/a
4. Retail      2 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic       To be determined by DRC
6. Other       To be determined by DRC
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020)
CHAPTER 10
Z2 SUB-URBAN DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-10-1: Purpose
12-10-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-10-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-10-4: Accessory Buildings
12-10-5: Preexisting Standards
12-10-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-10-7: Forms And Functions
12-10-8: Development Standards
12-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z2 Sub-Urban District is to provide space for a limited
range of primarily residential lot sizes, limited neighborhood commercial uses
and public park spaces in areas planned as walkable neighborhoods that are or
soon will be served by a full range of public services.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2550.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale
showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
No more than one (1) principal building shall be allowed per zoning lot. (Ord.
10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed
according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development
standards identified herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-10-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Location: Accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard. A
detached accessory garage may be located in a side yard if all other accessory
building setbacks and bulk requirements are met.
   B.   Cumulative Area:
      1.   On zoning lots of up to two (2) acres in area, accessory buildings
shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard but in any
case, up to six hundred (600) square feet (cumulative) shall be allowed as a
minimum. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative area of more than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet measured at the exterior
dimensions of the ground floor.
      2.   On zoning lots greater than two (2) acres, cumulative total area
shall not exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet measured at the
exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
      3.   On any lot, a maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than
eighty (80) square feet each, such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or
maintenance sheds, shall not be considered as part of the overall accessory
building square foot calculation.
      4.   Exception: Agricultural buildings serving a farm on a lot of ten
(10) acres or more shall not be counted towards the cumulative area
requirement, but shall conform to all other accessory building requirements.
   C.   Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and
building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z2 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot.
   D.   Conditional Use Permit: An application for a conditional use permit as
set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title may be submitted to request an increase in accessory
building size, but in no case shall the total building area occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 11-09, 8-16-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-10-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record
or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-10-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   Infill And Conversion:
      1.   Introduction of new duplex, side yard/zero lot line house and two-
flat building types, including conversion of an existing freestanding home to
two (2) or more dwelling units shall be limited to corner lots and shall
require compliance review according to chapter 7 of this title.
      2.   Placement of a corner store form and function shall be limited to
one (1) corner store per one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (pedestrian shed) as
measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map.
      3.   Placement of a corner office form and function shall be limited to
one (1) corner office per one-fourth (1/4) mile radius (pedestrian shed) as
measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map.
   B.   New Development Or Subdivision:
      1.   For new development or subdivisions less than or equal to five (5)
acres in size, side yard or split yard building dispositions may constitute one
hundred percent (100%) of the lots.
      2.   For new development or subdivisions greater than five (5) acres in
size, side yard or split yard building dispositions shall not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the total lots.
   C.   Residential Driveways:
      1.   Residential driveways serving front and side loading attached and
detached garages accessed from the street shall be no wider than twenty six
feet (26') at the property line and located in the first and second tier except
when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located in the third tier.
      2.   Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages accessed
from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the property
line.
      3.   One (1) driveway maximum shall be allowed per zoning lot; however,
one (1) additional driveway may be approved by the City Engineer.
   D.   Accessory Dwellings: Accessory dwellings in the Z2 District shall meet
the following standards in addition to required building codes:
      1.   Limited to one (1) accessory dwelling per lot;
      2.   If freestanding or within a detached accessory building, located in
the third tier of the lot;
      3.   Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than eight
hundred (800) gross square feet in total area;
      4.   Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same
materials as the primary dwelling; and
      5.   Either freestanding, located within a detached garage, or located
within the principal structure, provided that there is direct access between
the accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling unit. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022)
12-10-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-10-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Primarily detached, single-family residential, open lawns, corner store,
neighborhood and community parks, greenways, on and off street trails,
interconnected streets and multilane thoroughfares with sidewalks.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2552.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. Principal building                                        2 stories maximum
2. Accessory building                                        2 stories maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories,    
excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished
floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving
an assembly function, except for a first floor commercial     
function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum
of 25 feet
5. The height of any accessory building shall not exceed the  
height of the principal building
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2541.jpg]
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Permitted
2. Side yard  Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard  Not permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot width    a. 125 foot maximum to 50 foot minimum for edge yard type
                b. 25 foot minimum side yard and split yard type
2. Lot coverage 35 percent maximum
3. Lot depth    150 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
 
1. Principal front setback            35 foot maximum, 25 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback            15 foot minimum
                                      a. Edge yard 6 foot minimum
3. Side setback                       b. Side yard 0 foot minimum (split yard
                                      and 1 side of side yard building
                                      dispositions only)
4. Rear setback                       25 foot minimum
5. Or the predominant setback on lots  
fronting on the same block
6. An open porch or a deck shall be
allowed to encroach a maximum of 10
feet within the required principal     
front yard, secondary front yard, or
rear yard setback
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2546.jpg]
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
   E.   Setbacks; Accessory Building:
 
1. Front setback                      20 feet plus principal building setback
                                      minimum
2. Side setback                       5 foot minimum, 25 foot minimum at
                                      secondary front setback
3. Rear setback                       5 foot minimum
4. Or the predominant setback on lots  
fronting on the same block
5. Detached garages may be placed in
the side yard per subsection
12-10-4A of this chapter; all other    
detached accessory buildings must be
placed wholly in the rear yard
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2556.jpg]
SETBACKS; ACCESORY BUILDING
   F.   Parking/Trash Placement: (See also section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential                                          1.5 per dwelling
2. Lodging                                              1 per bedroom
3. Office                                               2 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail                                               2 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic                                                To be determined by DRC
6. Other                                                To be determined by DRC
7. Parking spaces for a corner store or a corner office  
shall be provided within the third tier
8. Parking is allowed in the second and third tiers      
9. Parking for one- or two-family residential functions
is allowed in the first tier only upon an improved       
driveway providing access to a garage, carport or
parking space serving the dwelling
10. Trash containers shall be stored only within the     
third tier
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2558.jpg]
 
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020)
CHAPTER 11
Z3 GENERAL URBAN DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-11-1: Purpose
12-11-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-11-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-11-4: Accessory Buildings
12-11-5: Preexisting Standards
12-11-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-11-7: Forms And Functions
12-11-8: Development Standards
12-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z3 General Urban District is to provide a range of
residential lot sizes to support a mix of residential building types at medium
densities with corner offices, corner stores, parks and playgrounds organized
in walkable neighborhoods interconnected by landscaped streets and sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2560.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-11-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale
showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed
according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development
standards identified herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-11-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Location: Accessory buildings shall be located in and not occupy more
than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. A detached accessory garage may be
located in a side yard if all other accessory building setbacks and bulk
requirements are met.
   B.   Cumulative Area:
      1.   On zoning lots of up to two (2) acres in area, accessory buildings
shall not exceed a cumulative area of more than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet measured at the exterior dimensions of the ground floor,
but in any case, up to six hundred (600) square feet shall be allowed as a
minimum.
      2.   On zoning lots greater than two (2) acres, a cumulative total area
shall not exceed two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet measured at the
exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
      3.   On any lot, a maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than
eighty (80) square feet each, such as garden sheds, playhouses, or storage or
maintenance sheds, shall not be considered as part of the overall accessory
building square foot calculation.
   C.   Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and
building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z3 District shall be
compatible with those of the principal building on the lot.
   D.   Conditional Use Permit: An application for a conditional use permit as
set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title may be submitted to request an increase in accessory
building size, but in no case shall the total building area occupy more than
thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 11-09, 8-16-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-11-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record
or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-11-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   Infill:
      1.   Where mansion apartments and/or multiple-flats are introduced, their
massing and overall design shall be compatible with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
      2.   Up to two (2) corner stores within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius
(pedestrian shed) as measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map of
neighboring residences may be located in the Z3 District. The corner stores
shall be located on corner lots clustered around a single roadway intersection
or adjacent to one another on the same block.
      3.   Up to two (2) corner offices within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius
(single pedestrian shed) as measured on a scaled, aerial photograph or plat map
of neighboring residences may be located in the Z3 District. The corner offices
shall be located on corner lots clustered around a single roadway intersection
or adjacent to one another on the same block.
   B.   Residential Driveways: Residential driveways serving front and side
loading attached and detached garages accessed from the street shall be no
wider than twenty six feet (26') at the property line and located in the first
and second tier except when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located
in the third tier. Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages
accessed from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the
property line. One (1) driveway maximum allowed per zoning lot unless approved
by the City Engineer.
   C.   Parking:
      1.   Any deviation from the required parking standards for the Z3
District shall require a variance. In instances where parking is to be
determined, the Administrative Officer or the Administrative Review Body shall
determine an adequate amount based upon the request by the applicant,
information provided by the applicant related to the parking impact of the
proposed function, the ITE manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers)
standards, or other applicable resources.
      2.   Surface parking to support a permitted use is allowed on an adjacent
lot or a separate lot in close proximity to the permitted use, if a conditional
use permit is approved by the board.
   D.   Facade: The principal facades of a building in the Z3 District shall
face the street and be built parallel to the street or the tangent of a curved
street, unless the primary access to the building is from an internal drive or
parking lot. If the principal facade of any building in the Z3 District does
not face a street, any side of the building facing a street shall be a finished
facade with fenestration and architectural details similar in style and quality
to the principal facade.
   E.   Accessory Dwellings: Accessory dwellings in the Z3 District shall meet
the following standards in addition to required building codes:
      1.   An accessory dwelling may only be accessory to a freestanding house
on the same lot.
      2   Limited to one (1) accessory dwelling per primary dwelling;
      3.   If freestanding or within a detached accessory building, located in
the third tier of the lot;
      4.   Contain at least four hundred (400) and no greater than eight
hundred (800) gross square feet in total area;
      5.   Be designed in a compatible style and constructed of the same
materials as the primary dwelling; and
      6.   Either freestanding located within a detached garage, or located
within the principal structure, provided that there is direct access between
the accessory dwelling and the primary dwelling unit.
   F.   Small Box: Small box commercial/retail/service forms and functions in
the Z3 District shall be limited to a maximum size of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gross square feet on the ground floor. Parking shall be provided per
section
12-8-5, table 4 of this title. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided per
section
12-16-5 of this title.
   G.   Restaurant: Restaurant forms and functions in the Z3 District shall be
limited to two thousand five hundred (2,500) gross square feet on the ground
floor only. A minimum of four (4) and a maximum of ten (10) parking spaces
shall be provided. On street parking may account for up to two (2) of the
required parking spaces. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided per section
12-16-5 of this title.
   H.   Automotive Gas/Convenience: Automotive gas/convenience forms and
functions in the Z3 District shall be limited to two thousand five hundred
(2,500) gross square feet, be located on a corner lot, and provide a minimum of
two (2) and a maximum of six (6) parking spaces. Parking lot landscaping shall
be provided per section
12-16-5 of this title.
   I.   Drive-Through: Drive-through functions in the Z3 District shall meet
the following standards:
      1.   Shall be limited to corner lots with an edge yard building
disposition;
      2.   The drive-through window shall be located in the second or third
tier at the rear or street side of the principal building;
      3.   Traffic circulation and impact data shall meet the requirements of
the City Engineer; and
      4.   The application shall receive a positive recommendation from the
City Engineer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 22-
3, 3-1-2022)
12-11-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-11-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mix of houses, townhouses, small multiple-flat residential, small retail
buildings, corner store and office, home offices, neighborhood parks,
playgrounds, miniparks, small surface parking lots and interconnected streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2562.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. Principal building                                        3 stories maximum
2. Accessory building                                        2 stories maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories,    
excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished
floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving
an assembly function, except for a first floor commercial     
function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum
of 25 feet
5. The height of any accessory building shall not exceed the  
height of the principal building
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2564.jpg]
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Permitted
2. Side yard  Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard  Permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot width    a. 25 foot minimum, all dispositions except edge yard
                b. 300 foot maximum to 40 foot minimum for edge yard
2. Lot coverage 60 percent maximum
3. Lot depth    400 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
1. Principal front setback            10 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback            15 foot minimum
                                      a. 10 foot total, 3 foot minimum, 1 side
                                      for edge yard disposition
                                      b. 0 foot minimum on 1 side, 6 foot
3. Side setback                       minimum on opposite side, side yard
                                      disposition
                                      c. 0 foot minimum, split yard and rear
                                      yard dispositions
4. Rear setback                       25 foot minimum
5. Or the predominant setback on lots  
fronting on the same block
6. An open porch or a deck shall be
allowed to encroach a maximum of 10
feet within the required principal     
front yard, secondary front yard, or
rear yard setback
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2567.jpg]
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
   E.   Setbacks; Accessory Building:
 
1. Front setback                      20 feet plus principal building setback
                                      minimum
                                      5 foot minimum; 25 foot minimum at
2. Side setback                       secondary front setback on corner or
                                      double frontage lots
3. Rear setback                       5 foot minimum
4. Or the predominant setback on lots  
fronting on the same block
5. Detached garages may be placed in
the side yard per section
12-11-4 of this chapter; all other     
detached accessory buildings must be
placed wholly in the rear yard
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2569.jpg]
 
   F.   Parking/Trash Placement: (See also section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential                                          1 per dwelling
2. Lodging                                              1 per room
3. Office                                               2 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail                                               2 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic                                                To be determined by DRC
6. Other                                                To be determined by DRC
7. Parking spaces shall be provided within the third     
tier
8. Parking spaces may also be provided within 1/3 of     
the second tier as shown in the diagram
9. Parking for one- or two-family residential functions
is allowed in the first tier upon an improved driveway   
providing access to a garage, carport or parking space
serving the dwelling
10. Trash containers shall be stored only within the     
third tier
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2571.jpg]
 
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020)
CHAPTER 12
Z4 MULTI-USE DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-12-1: Purpose
12-12-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-12-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-12-4: Accessory Buildings
12-12-5: Preexisting Standards
12-12-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-12-7: Z4 Overlay Districts
12-12-8: Forms And Functions
12-12-9: Development Standards
12-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z4 Multi-Use District is to provide space for a mixture of
retail, personal and business service, office, lodging, automotive service,
civic and medium to high density residential uses necessary to support the
needs of the overall community and planned in a walkable arrangement with
parks, interconnected and landscaped sidewalks, streets and parking facilities.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2403.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-12-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale
showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-12-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the Board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed
according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development
standards identified herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-12-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Cumulative Area:
      1.   Accessory buildings shall not exceed a cumulative total area of more
than thirty five percent (35%) of the principal building's footprint measured
at the exterior dimensions of the ground floor.
      2.   A maximum of two (2) buildings measuring no more than eighty (80)
square feet each, such as storage or maintenance sheds, shall not be considered
as part of the overall accessory building square foot calculation.
      3.   Exception: Agricultural buildings serving a farm shall not be
counted towards the cumulative area requirement, but shall conform to all other
accessory structure requirements.
   B.   Architectural Style And Building Materials: The architectural style and
building materials of all accessory buildings within the Z4 District shall be
consistent with those of the principal building on the lot.
   C.   Trash Enclosures: Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined
in section
12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-12-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z4
District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or
structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within the Z4 District. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in the Z4 District. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-12-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   Infill: Where mansion apartments and/or multiple-flats are introduced,
their massing and overall design shall be compatible with the character of the
immediate neighborhood.
   B.   Residential Driveways: Residential driveways serving front and side
loading attached and detached garages accessed from the street shall be no
wider than twenty six feet (26') at the property line and located in the first
and second tier except when the lot is located on a corner, it may be located
in the third tier. Residential driveways serving attached and detached garages
accessed from an alley shall be no wider than twenty two feet (22') at the
property line. One (1) driveway maximum allowed per zoning lot unless approved
by City Engineer.
   C.   Parking:
      1.   Any deviation from the required parking standards for the Z4
District shall require a variance. In instances where parking is to be
determined, the Administrative Officer or the Administrative Review Body shall
determine an adequate amount based upon the request by the applicant,
information provided by the applicant related to the parking impact of the
proposed function, the ITE manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers)
standards, or other applicable resource.
      2.   Surface parking (allowed as a permitted accessory use in Z4) to
support a permitted use is allowed on an adjacent lot or a separate lot in
close proximity to the permitted use.
      3.   Parking spaces may be located within the first tier, subject to the
following: A parking lot within the first tier shall contain no more than two
(2) rows of parking spaces served by a single access aisle that is parallel or
tangent to the street and shall have a depth of no more than sixty feet (60').
This requirement shall not apply to a parking lot in the first tier that
extends into the second tier or beyond.
   4.   See section
12-12-7 for parking requirements within the Z4 Overlay Districts.
   D.   Facade: The principal facades of a building in the Z4 District shall
face the street and be built parallel to the street or the tangent of a curved
street, unless the primary access to the building is from an internal drive or
parking lot. If the principal facade of any building in the Z4 District does
not face a street, any side of the building facing a street shall be a finished
facade with fenestration and architectural details similar in style and quality
to the principal facade.
   E.   Location Of Residential Development: Residential functions shall be
located at least six hundred sixty feet (660') from major arterials unless they
are a component of a mixed use development.
   F.   Duplex, Two-Flat, Side Yard/Zero Lot Line: Duplex, side yard/zero lot
line and two-flat building types in the Z4 District shall meet the following
standards:
      1.   Located at least five hundred feet (500') from a major arterial
roadway, unless they are a component of a mixed use development;
      2.   Component of a mixed, or multi-use neighborhood development of at
least five (5) acres;
      3.   Shall share the block with each other and/or other residential
building types; and
      4.   Other than corner store, corner office and bed and breakfast, shall
not be located on the same block with other form and functions as described in
section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title.
   G.   Seasonal Sales/Display: Seasonal sales/display in the Z4 District shall
meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of a temporary nature;
      2.   Restricted to a portion of surface parking lots;
      3.   Not block traffic visibility triangles at street intersections or
parking lot driveways;
      4.   Operate during typical business hours;
      5.   All sales materials and related display apparatus shall be removed
from the premises when sales/display period ends; and
      6.   Subject to sign regulations per chapter 20 of this title.
   H.   Vehicle Sales And Rental: Vehicle sales and rental in the Z4 District
shall be allowed only on lots of at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet
and shall be the only function on the lot; however, a vehicle sales and rental
business may also include vehicle repair.
   I.   Self Storage:
      1.   All access drives and parking areas adjacent to self storage
buildings shall be paved with a hard and durable, dustless surface and shall
provide for stormwater drainage according to city engineering standards. Paving
shall extend at least eighteen feet (18') from any building wall containing
storage unit access doors. Permeable non-aggregate surfaces are permitted.
Areas dedicated to outdoor vehicle storage may utilize gravel or similar
aggregate material.
      2.   Self storage units may be utilized only by the owner or lessee of
the unit and may not be used for commercial purposes. A self storage unit may
be used as a personal hobby building, if permitted by the owner. (Ord. 15-10,
9-15-2015; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord. 21-5, 6-1-2021)
12-12-7: Z4 OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
   A.   Overlay District Requirements: Properties within a Z4 Overlay District
as described below shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the Z4
Multi-Use District and all other requirements of this title, except as modified
by this section.
   B.   Z4 Corridor Overlay District Established:
      1.   Properties: The Z4 Corridor Overlay District shall consist of the
properties zoned Z4 Multi-Use District as follows:
         a.   All property zoned Z4 with frontage on North Federal Avenue/U.S.
65.
         b.   All property zoned Z4 with frontage on South Federal Avenue,
between 6th Street SE/SW and 15th Street SE/SW.
         c.   All property zoned Z4 with frontage on the east side of South
Federal Avenue zoned Z4, between 15th Street SE and 22nd Street SE.
         d.   All property zoned Z4 with frontage on 5th Street SE/SW, (IA 122
westbound), between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
         e.   All property zoned Z4 with frontage on 6th Street SE/SW (IA 122
eastbound), between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
         f.   All properties zoned Z4 with frontage on the following streets,
located between 5th Street SE/SW and 6th Street SE/SW:
            (1)   Both sides of South Jefferson Avenue;
            (2)   Both sides of South Adams Avenue;
            (3)   Both sides of South President Avenue;
            (4)   Both sides of South Washington Avenue;
            (5)   Both sides of South Federal Avenue;
            (6)   Both sides of South Delaware Avenue;
            (7)   The west side of South Pennsylvania Avenue.
         g.   All properties zoned Z4 on the south side of 4th Street SE/SW,
between South Jefferson Avenue and South Pennsylvania Avenue.
      2.   Setback Requirements: Principal building, principal front setback:
Zero feet (0') minimum; twenty feet (20') maximum.
      3.   Parking And Landscaping:
         a.   Parking lots within the Z4 Corridor Overlay District shall be
paved with a hard and durable dustless surface and shall provide for stormwater
drainage according to City engineering standards. Permeable non-aggregate
surfaces are permitted.
         b.   Parking shall be allowed in any portion of the second or third
tier. Parking shall not be allowed in the first tier; however, a parking lot
may be located within the first tier if it is located on an adjacent lot or on
the same lot as the principal building it serves, where the building has a
front yard setback of ten feet (10') or less, and the parking lot is located to
the side of the building.
         c.   Notwithstanding the parking lot setback requirements of section
12-8-5, table 4 of this title, a parking lot adjacent to a public sidewalk or
street shall have a minimum setback of three feet (3'); however, this minimum
shall be increased as necessary to provide adequate space to meet the
landscaping requirements of this section.
         d.   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection
12-16-5I4 of this title, a parking lot adjacent to a public sidewalk or street
shall be screened along the entire perimeter of the parking lot where it is
adjacent to the sidewalk or street, as follows:
            (1)   A continuous shrub border or hedge, no less than three feet
(3') and no more than four feet (4') in height comprised of deciduous and/or
evergreen shrubs; or
            (2)   A decorative barrier consisting of a metal railing system
with masonry columns no taller than four feet (4') in height; a solid masonry
wall no taller than four feet (4') in height; or similar architectural barrier
consisting of permanent and durable materials as approved by the Development
Review Committee; or
            (3)   Any combination of existing or proposed landscaping,
decorative barrier, and architectural elements.
            (4)   Parking lot screening shall be approved by the Development
Review Committee and shall:
               (A)   Create a barrier between the parking lot and the sidewalk;
and
               (B)   Create a pedestrian way on the sidewalk, protected from
vehicles in the parking lot; and
               (C)   Screen the parking lot from view of the street and
sidewalk; and
               (D)   Screen headlight glare from adjacent streets and
properties; and
               (E)   Preserve walkability, pedestrian access, and pedestrian
safety to and within the site and within the neighborhood.
   C.   Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District:
      1.   Properties: The Z4 South Federal Gateway Overlay District shall
consist of properties zoned Z4 Multi-Use District with frontage on South
Federal Avenue, located between the centerline of 27th Street SW extended east
across South Federal Avenue to the Union Pacific Railroad right-of-way, and the
south City limits (which is also the north right-of-way line of U.S. 18/IA 27).
      2.   Forms And Functions: Notwithstanding the forms and functions allowed
in the Z4 Multi-Use District as listed in section
12-8-3, table 2, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title the following
forms and functions shall be permitted only as conditional uses in the Z4 South
Federal Gateway Overlay District, subject to approval by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, according to section
12-5-5 of this title:
         a.   Any outdoor storage accessory to any permitted or conditional
form or function allowed in the Z4 District, including seasonal storage and
seasonal outdoor sales.
         b.   Self storage.
         c.   Cross docking facilities.
      3.   Setback Requirements: Notwithstanding the setback requirements in
subsections
12-12-9D and E of this chapter, development, redevelopment, or establishment of
a form or function allowed under subsection C2 of this section shall be subject
to the following:
         a.   Principal Buildings:
            (1)   Principal front setback: Minimum eighty five feet (85'), no
maximum.
            (2)   Secondary front setback: Minimum thirty feet (30'), no
maximum.
         b.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be subject to the
same setback requirements as a principal building.
      4.   Parking And Access:
         a.   A maximum of one access per frontage shall be allowed. Whenever
possible, access to any development shall be from frontage roads, rear access
("backage") roads, or from side streets other than South Federal Avenue.
         b.   Parking lots shall be paved with a hard and durable, dustless
surface and shall provide for stormwater drainage according to City engineering
standards. Permeable non-aggregate surfaces are permitted. However, parking
areas dedicated to commercial vehicle storage or other storage may utilize
gravel or similar aggregate material, provided that such outdoor storage areas
are located and screened according to the requirements of this section.
      5.   Building Design Requirements: In addition to the requirements of
subsection
12-12-6D of this chapter, any side of any building facing a principal or
secondary frontage shall:
         a.   Be finished with high quality materials, including natural
materials such as brick, stone, wood, or architectural metals.
         b.   Vertical-seamed metal siding shall not be allowed on any facade
facing a principal or secondary frontage; however, the Development Review
Committee may permit an architectural metal siding treatment, provided that
seams, if visible, are flush with the wall surface or otherwise concealed, and
hardware for joining panels is not visible.
      6.   Landscaping: All development shall, at minimum, meet the
requirements of section
12-16-5 of this title; however, the Development Review Committee or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as applicable, may require additional landscaping as
necessary to ensure:
         a.   All non-residential forms and functions are screened from view of
adjacent streets, sidewalks and residential forms and functions;
         b.   Parking lots do not cause drainage issues;
         c.   The "heat island" effect is minimized; and
         d.   The South Federal Gateway is an attractive entrance to the City.
      7.   Signs: All signs shall conform to the requirements of chapter 20 of
this title, except off-premises signs are prohibited.
      8.   Additional Standards Of Review: In addition to the standards of
review for a conditional use, as outlined in subsection
12-5-5D of this title, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider the
following before approving a conditional use in the Z4 South Federal Gateway
Overlay District:
         a.   The arrangement of buildings, parking areas, outdoor storage
areas, fences, landscaping, signs, and any other structure shall conform to one
or more of the design guidelines outlined in appendix A to the comprehensive
plan.
         b.   Development shall result in an attractive gateway to the
community from the Avenue of the Saints (U.S. 18/IA 27). (Ord. 18-9, 10-2-2018)
12-12-8: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-12-9: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mixture of retail, personal and business service, office, lodging, automotive
service, civic and medium to high density residential uses necessary to support
the needs of the overall community and planned in a walkable arrangement with
parks, interconnected and landscaped sidewalks, streets and parking facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2576.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. Principal building                                       4 stories maximum
2. Accessory building                                       2 stories maximum
3. Building height shall be measured in number of stories,   
excluding attics and raised basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished
floor to finished ceiling, excluding vaulted spaces serving
an assembly function, except for a first floor commercial    
function, which must be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum
of 25 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2543.jpg]
 
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Permitted
2. Side yard  Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard  Permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot width    a. 25 foot minimum residential function
                b. 400 foot maximum to 100 foot minimum all other functions
2. Lot coverage 75 percent
3. Lot depth    100 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
                                      85 foot maximum and 50 foot minimum, if
                                      parking is provided in the first tier as
1. Principal front setback            allowed by this chapter; 60 foot
                                      maximum, and 10 foot minimum if no
                                      parking is provided in the first tier
2. Secondary front setback            30 foot maximum, 10 foot minimum
                                      a. Edge yard 5 foot minimum
                                      b. 0 foot minimum on 1 side, 6 foot
3. Side setback                       minimum on opposite side, side yard
                                      disposition
                                      c. 0 foot minimum, split yard and rear
                                      yard dispositions
4. Rear setback                       25 foot minimum
5. On a zoning lot with a multiple
principal building development, at
least 1 principal building must meet   
the required principal front and
secondary front setback
6. Principal buildings shall be        
distanced from the lot lines as shown
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2578.jpg]
 
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
   E.   Setbacks; Accessory Building:
 
1. Front setback                      20 feet plus principal building setback
                                      minimum
                                      5 foot minimum; 10 foot minimum at
2. Side setback                       secondary frontage on corner or double
                                      frontage lots
3. Rear setback                       5 foot minimum
4. Accessory buildings shall be        
distanced from the lot lines as shown
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2548.jpg]
SETBACKS; ACCESSORY BUILDING
   F.   Parking/Trash Placement: (See section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential                                        1.5 per dwelling
2. Lodging                                            1 per room
3. Office                                             4 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail                                             4 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic                                              To be determined by DRC
6. Other                                              To be determined by DRC
7. Parking spaces may only be located in 1/3 of the
second tier and all of the third tier as shown in the  
diagram
8. Parking spaces may be provided in the first tier,
subject to the requirements of subsection              
12-12-6C3 of this chapter
9. Trash containers shall be stored only within the    
third tier
10. Parking on properties in a Z4 Overlay District
shall be subject to the requirements of section        
12-12-7
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2580.jpg]
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
   G.   Loading Dock Placement:
      1.   Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second
and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
      2.   Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage
street; however, a loading dock that is set back at least eighty feet (80') may
face a principal or secondary street, provided it is screened according to
subsection
12-16-5I of this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2582.jpg]
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-
2020)
CHAPTER 13
Z5 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-13-1: Purpose
12-13-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-13-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-13-4: Accessory Buildings
12-13-5: Preexisting Standards
12-13-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-13-7: Forms And Functions
12-13-8: Development Standards
12-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z5 Central Business District is to provide for higher
density, multi- story mixed use buildings that accommodate a variety of retail,
entertainment, business and personal service, office, lodging, residential and
civic functions supported by public squares, plazas and miniparks within a
walkable, interconnected grid of landscaped streets with sidewalks. Because of
its unique nature, environment, and purpose, the Z5 Central Business District
is hereby designated as a special purpose zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2586.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 24-13, 11-5-2024)
12-13-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale
showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-13-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed
according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development
standards identified herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-13-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   Accessory buildings are generally not permitted within this zoning
district; however, buildings measuring no more than eighty (80) square feet may
be allowed subject to Development Review Committee site plan compliance review
of purpose, context, location, materials and overall relationship to
surrounding properties.
   B.   Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined in section
12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
12-13-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record
or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-13-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   General: Massing and overall design of new buildings shall be
compatible with the character of the buildings within the immediate area.
   B.   Building Height: Building height shall be a minimum two (2) stories to
a maximum ten (10) stories.
   C.   Building Materials and Design: New Construction. The following
requirements shall apply to all new construction within the Z5 District.
   1.   Permitted Façade Materials:
      a.   Facades shall be constructed of approved materials. Approved facade
materials include stone, brick, concrete, stucco, wood, architectural metal,
clear glass, and tinted glass with no less than thirty-five percent (35%)
visible light transmission.
      b.   Artificial stucco or brick or similar overlay (e.g., EIFS, Z-Brick)
may be allowed only in applications where the Administrative Officer has
determined that the application is constructed with two (2) layers of
reinforcing mesh or equivalent durability to withstand physical contact.
   2.   Prohibited facade skin materials include metal, aluminum, vinyl siding,
lap siding, porcelain panels, non-textured concrete panels and asphalt
shingles. However, use of these materials as trim or accent is allowed,
provided they do not constitute more than ten percent (10%) of the area of any
facade.
   3.   Design Requirements:
      a.   Buildings shall have a mix of materials or design features so as to
reduce the effect of long, blank walls. Design features may include, among
other features, windows, doorways, cornices, and indentations.
      b.   Colors shall be muted or earth tone colors. Accent colors are
allowed but may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the unglazed area of
the facade.
   4.   Windows and Doors:
      a.   The design and location of windows and doors shall consider the
architectural tradition of the building.
      b.   Generally clear glass, with allowance for energy efficiency, shall
be used for all glazing. On the ground floor, tinted glass with no less than
thirty-five percent (35%) visible light transmission is permitted; this
restriction shall not apply to windows above the first floor. Reflective glass
shall not be allowed on any window.
   D.   Building Materials and Design Applying to All Existing Buildings.
   1.   Windows and Doors.
      a.   The replacement of windows or doors, or portions of window openings
or door openings with opaque materials, such as plywood, medium density
fiberboard, oriented strand board or masonry shall be prohibited; however, if
required by City ordinance for safety or security, temporary boarding of
windows or doors is permitted. Openings originally designed as windows or doors
shall retain the appearance of being a window or door. Replacement windows or
doors shall fill the entire original opening.
      b.   Generally clear glass, with allowance for energy efficiency, shall
be used for all glazing. On the ground floor, tinted glass with no less than
thirty-five percent (35%) visible light transmission is permitted for window
and door glazing; this restriction shall not apply to windows above the first
floor. Reflective glass shall not be allowed on any window or door glazing.
   2.   Paint and Other Wall Coverings. Colors shall be muted or earth tone
colors. Accent colors are allowed but may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the unglazed area of the facade. However, a mural that does not include
elements meeting the definition of a sign as stated in chapter 20 of this title
may be applied, provided that the mural reflects the cultural or historic
nature of the property, the Downtown district, or of Mason City as a whole.
   3.   Application of Façade Materials:
      a.   Façade materials added to an existing building shall be constructed
of approved materials. Approved facade materials include stone, brick,
concrete, stucco, wood, architectural metal, and glass as required above.
      b.   Application of façade materials shall not alter the historic
character of an existing structure.
      c.   Artificial stucco or brick or similar overlay (e.g., EIFS, Z-Brick)
may be allowed only in applications where the Administrative Officer has
determined that the application is constructed with two (2) layers of
reinforcing mesh or equivalent durability to withstand physical contact.
   E.   Additional Requirements for Historic and Significant Buildings:
   1.   The following requirements apply only to the following properties and
buildings within the Z5 District:
      a.   Any property listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
      b.   Any property designated as "Contributing" to the Mason City Downtown
National Register Historic District.
      c.   Any property designated as a historic site or landmark by the
Historic Preservation Commission and approved by the City Council, per title 2,
chapter 12 of this code.
      d.   All properties with frontage on North and South Federal Avenue,
between 4th Street NE/NW and the south boundary of the Federal Avenue Plaza
These regulations shall apply to the entire structure, not only the façade
along Federal Avenue.
   2.   Design Requirements. All exterior construction, addition, or alteration
of properties subject to this subsection shall be reviewed and determined
appropriate by the Historic Preservation Commission.
      a.   Exterior additions or alterations, including but not limited to
paint and wall coverings, shall comply with the Secretary of the Interior's
Standards for Rehabilitation, as certified by the Historic Preservation
Commission. Prior to beginning of any such addition or alteration and prior to
issuance of required permits, the owner shall apply for and receive an approved
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
      b.   Application of façade materials, including paint, stain, EIFS, face
brick, metal, or other non-original wall covering, shall not substantially
cover original brick, stone, or original punched metal facade material on an
existing structure. However, the Historic Preservation Commission may issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness for the following:
   (1)   A mural that does not include elements meeting the definition of a
sign as stated in chapter 20 of this title may be applied over original
materials, provided the Historic Preservation Commission finds that the mural
reflects the cultural or historic nature of the property, the Downtown
district, or the City as a whole.
   (2)   Re-painting or re-covering of surfaces that were painted or otherwise
covered with a non-original finish prior to adoption of this section that were
legally permitted under requirements in force at the time the surface was
originally covered.
      c.   Application of EIFS or other siding material over original materials
can be approved if the Administrative Officer has determined that the
application is constructed with two (2) layers of reinforcing mesh or
equivalent durability to withstand physical contact; and shall be permitted
only in cases where the Historic Preservation Commission has determined that
deterioration of the original material cannot reasonably be repaired.
      d.   Signs on buildings subject to this subsection are not required to be
reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission; however, a wall sign meeting
the definition in Chapter 20 of this title shall not be inscribed or painted
directly on original façade materials unless it is issued a Certification of
Appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission.
   3.   Variances to Design Requirements for Historic and Significant
Buildings. Any request for a variance to the requirements of this subsection
shall receive a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation
Commission prior to consideration of a variance request by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Board shall consider the Historic Preservation Commission's
determination in deciding on the variance; however, the standards for approval
of a variance as required in chapter 5 of this title shall prevail.
   4.   Exceptions. No certificate of appropriateness is required for the
following activities, subject to the review and approval of the Administrative
Officer:
      a.   Normal repair and maintenance work which does not alter original
materials, patterns, dimensions, location, style, size and type.
      b.   Interior decoration, interior remodeling, and interior renovation
not involving a change in the use of the property.
      c.   Façade illumination that illuminates only the subject property.
      d.   Reroofing of any roof surface, provided that any new material match
those of the previous in composition, size, shape, color and texture.
      e.   Alteration of any flat roof when no change is visible from the
ground.
      f.   Repointing of mortar joints with mortar matching in composition,
color and texture to the original.
      g.   Replacement of deteriorated wood siding or trim if less than five
percent (5%) of any façade and if replacement wood matches the original
exactly.
      h.   Removal of non-original materials siding made of metal, aluminum,
vinyl, particle board, asphalt, asbestos, plywood, hardboard, or synthetic
masonry.
      i.   Installation of interior storm windows.
      j.   Replacement of missing or broken glass with new glass to match the
previous.
      k.   Repainting or touch up of previously painted surfaces with
appropriate colors for the historic architectural styles represented in the
area.
      l.   Window air conditioning units requiring no alteration to the window
or opening and on a non-primary façade.
      m.   HVAC and utility equipment on roofs not visible from street level.
      n.   Exterior surface-mounted vents, such as those for dryers, heaters,
bathrooms, and kitchens, if no larger than one (1) square foot and not visible
from the street.
      o.   Work necessary for compliance with a lawful order of the City,
including any permit necessary to correct what is determined by the issuing
officer to be an immediate health or safety problem; provided that such order
expressly exempts the alteration or physical modifications from certificate of
appropriateness procedures. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord.
19-9, 6-18-2019; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord. 23-05, 4-4-2023; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-
2024)
12-13-7: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-13-8: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Mix of multi-story mixed use buildings that accommodate a variety of retail,
entertainment, business and personal service, office, lodging, residential and
civic functions supported by public squares, plazas and miniparks within a
walkable, interconnected grid of landscaped streets with sidewalks.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2574.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. Principal building                          2 minimum to 10 stories maximum
2. Accessory building                          With DRC compliance review
3. Building height shall be measured in number
of stories, excluding attics and raised         
basements
4. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height
from finished floor to finished ceiling,
excluding vaulted spaces serving an assembly    
function, except for a first floor commercial
function which must be a minimum of 11 feet
with a maximum of 25 feet
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2584.jpg]
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
Note: "N" stands for any stories above those shown, up to the maximum.
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Not permitted
2. Side yard  Permitted
3. Split yard Permitted
4. Rear yard  Permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot width    1 block maximum, 25 foot minimum
2. Lot coverage 100 percent maximum, 70 percent minimum
3. Lot depth    150 foot maximum, 100 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
 
1. Principal front setback                     5 foot maximum, 0 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback                     5 foot maximum, 0 foot minimum
3. Side setback                                0 foot minimum
4. Rear setback                                25 foot maximum
5. Principal buildings shall be distanced from  
the lot lines as shown
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2588.jpg]
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
   E.   Parking/Trash Placement: (See section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential                                       n/a
2. Lodging                                           n/a
3. Office                                            n/a
4. Retail                                            n/a
5. Civic                                             To be determined by DRC
6. Other                                             To be determined by DRC
7. Covered parking may be provided within the second  
tier shown in the diagram
8. Uncovered parking spaces shall be provided within  
the third tier as shown in the diagram
9. Trash containers shall be stored only within the   
third tier
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2590.jpg]
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
   F.   Loading Dock Placement:
      1.   Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second
and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
      2.   Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage
street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2592.jpg]
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 14
Z6 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-14-1: Purpose
12-14-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-14-3: Conditional Forms And Functions
12-14-4: Accessory Buildings
12-14-5: Preexisting Standards
12-14-6: Interpretation Of Standards
12-14-7: Z6 O; Open Industry
12-14-8: Z6 R; Restricted Industry
12-14-9: Forms And Functions
12-14-10: Development Standards
12-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z6 Industrial District is to promote the management and
preservation of existing industrial facilities within Mason City as well as the
development and management of new ecologically responsible, sustainable
employment centers. Building forms and functions within the Z6 District require
varying degrees of separation from residential and commercial/service districts
due to their potential for noise, bright lighting, traffic from heavy trucks
and other large vehicles, rail traffic and round the clock activities
associated with research and development, manufacturing, warehousing, freight
terminals and agribusiness.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2504.gif]
 
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that are allowed by right within Mason
City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to scale
showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been met.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-14-3: CONDITIONAL FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Conditional forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-8-3, table 2 of this title, are those that must be reviewed and approved by
the board for potential impact on neighboring properties. All conditional forms
and functions shall conform to the standards set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. New development or redevelopment shall be reviewed
according to chapter 7 of this title to show compliance with all development
standards identified herein. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-14-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   A.   All buildings shall be considered principal buildings in this zoning
district.
   B.   Structure standards for trash enclosures are defined in section
12-16-12 of this title. (Ord. 11-3, 2-15-2011)
12-14-5: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within this
zoning district. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record
or structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within this zoning district. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in this zoning district. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-6: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
   A.   Forms and functions that create hazards, excessive noise, vibrations,
smoke, dust, odors, glare or other objectionable influence beyond the property
boundaries shall constitute an open industry designation and be subject to
applicable standards.
   B.   Self Storage:
      1.   All access drives and parking areas adjacent to self storage
buildings shall be paved with a hard and durable, dustless surface and shall
provide for stormwater drainage according to city engineering standards. Paving
shall extend at least eighteen feet (18') from any building wall containing
storage unit access doors. Permeable non-aggregate surfaces are permitted.
Areas dedicated to outdoor vehicle storage may utilize gravel or similar
aggregate material.
      2.   Self storage units may be utilized only by the owner or lessee of
the unit and may not be used for commercial purposes. A self storage unit may
be used as a personal hobby building, if permitted by the owner. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord. 21-5, 6-1-2021)
12-14-7: Z6 O; OPEN INDUSTRY:
Open industry development consists of large, relatively self- contained and
isolated facilities whose potential nuisance or hazard generation from the
processing, manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution of materials and
products is moderately high or higher. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010;
amd. 2017 Code)
Functions that produce emissions of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, toxic materials, odor or glare shall not exceed the
standards set by the Iowa Department of Environmental Quality. Storage,
distribution or sale of gas, fuel or oil shall comply with and be approved by
the Fire Chief. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-14-8: Z6 R; RESTRICTED INDUSTRY:
   A.   Restricted industry development consists of facilities whose
manufacturing, assembly, storage and distribution activities do not create
appreciable nuisances or hazards, or that require a pleasant, hazard and
nuisance free environment. It is intended that the permitted functions be
compatible and not detrimental to adjacent properties.
   B.   Live/work building functions shall only be allowed as a conditional use
in Z6 R Districts. (Ord. 11-10, 9-6-2011)
12-14-9: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
See section
12-8-3, "Zoning Form And Function Table", of this title. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014)
12-14-10: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   TABLE 1
   Z6 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Promote the management and preservation of existing industrial facilities
within Mason City as well as the development and management of new ecologically
responsible, sustainable employment centers with interconnected streets and
sidewalks.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2506.jpg]
 
   A.   Building Configuration:
 
1. All buildings shall be treated as principal a. Open: 75 foot maximum
buildings                                      b. Restricted: 40 foot maximum
2. Building height shall be measured in feet    
3. Structures exceeding height limits shall be  
reviewed as a P1 for site plan approval
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2508.jpg]
 
BUILDING CONFIGURATION
   B.   Building Disposition: (See section
12-8-4, table 3 of this title.)
 
1. Edge yard  Permitted
2. Side yard  Not permitted
3. Split yard Not permitted
4. Rear yard  Not permitted
 
   C.   Lot Occupation:
 
1. Lot width    100 foot minimum
2. Lot coverage 60 percent
3. Lot depth    150 foot minimum
 
   D.   Setbacks; Principal Building:
 
1. Principal front setback                         Open: 50 foot minimum
                                                   Restricted: 35 foot minimum
2. Secondary front setback                         30 foot minimum
3. Side setback                                    Open: 30 foot minimum
                                                   Restricted: 20 foot minimum
4. Rear setback                                    20 foot minimum
5. Side or rear setback abutting a non-Z6 District 50 foot minimum
6. Principal buildings shall be distanced from the  
lot lines as shown
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2511.jpg]
 
SETBACKS; PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. 2017 Code)
   E.   Parking/Trash Placement: (See section
12-8-5, "General Parking Provisions", of this title.)
1. Residential                           n/a
2. Lodging                               n/a
3. Office                                4 per 1,000 square feet
4. Retail                                4 per 1,000 square feet
5. Civic                                 To be determined by DRC
                                         Minimum 1 per 2 employees of largest
6. Industrial                            shift, plus 1 per 2,000 square feet
                                         maximum for principal building
7. Parking spaces may be located within   
any tier
8. Trash containers shall be stored only  
within the third tier
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2513.jpg]
 
 
PARKING/TRASH PLACEMENT
   F.   Loading Dock Placement:
      1.   Loading docks may only be placed in one-third (1/3) of the second
and all of the third tiers as shown in the diagram.
      2.   Loading docks shall not face the principal or secondary frontage
street; however, a loading dock that is set back at least eighty feet (80') may
face a principal or secondary street, provided it is screened according to
subsection
12-16-5I of this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2515.jpg]
 
LOADING DOCK PLACEMENT
(Ord. 12-07, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 15
Z7 SPECIFIC USE DISTRICT
SECTION:
12-15-1: Purpose
12-15-2: Permitted Forms And Functions
12-15-3: Preexisting Standards
12-15-4: Z7-5 District
12-15-5: Z7-6 District
12-15-6: Forms And Functions And Development Standards !2R!
12-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Z7 Specific Use District is to support the ongoing operation
and future expansion of specific areas within Mason City. Any future expansion
within these specific districts shall require conformance to an approved site
plan as outlined in chapter 7 of this title. Each Specific Use District is
outlined below and is legally described within the official Mason City Zoning
Map, as amended.
Z7-1 Mercy Medical Center: The purpose of the Z7-1 District is to provide for
the ongoing operations of this medical facility. The Z7-1 District consists of
clinics, hospital, office buildings, accessory uses and open space.
Z7-2 NIACC: The purpose of the Z7-2 District is to provide for the ongoing
operations of North Iowa Area Community College. The Z7-2 District consists of
a college, office buildings, dormitory, accessory uses and open space.
Z7-3 Mobile Home Park: The purpose of the Z7-3 District is to provide for the
existing forms and functions associated with a mobile home park. The Z7-
3 District consists of a mobile home park and accessory buildings related to
the operation of the mobile home park.
Z7-4 County Fairgrounds: The purpose of the Z7-4 District is to provide for the
existing forms and functions associated with a fairgrounds. The Z7-4 District
consists of agricultural, office, racetrack, grandstand and arena structures
and accessory buildings and open space.
Z7-5 Conservation Subdivision: The purpose of the Z7-5 District is to allow for
residential development of larger lots where City sanitary sewer is not
available and is not anticipated to be provided under an orderly expansion of
City services or within the foreseeable future. The Z7-5 District consists of
single- family dwelling functions served by private streets and by private
water, private sewer, or both.
Z7-6, Golf Course Development: The purpose of the Z7-6 District is to allow for
a mix of forms and functions that add value to a golf course, including
residential, mixed use, and commercial forms and functions. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-
2016; amd. Ord. 22-13, 11-15-2022)
12-15-2: PERMITTED FORMS AND FUNCTIONS:
Permitted forms and functions, which are identified in section
12-15-6, table 1A of this chapter, are those that are allowed by right within
Mason City. New development or redevelopment will require a site plan drawn to
scale showing that all zoning standards in chapter 16 of this title have been
met and that any new development or redevelopment generally conforms to the
approved master plan for the District. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016; amd. Ord. 22-13,
11-15-2022)
12-15-3: PREEXISTING STANDARDS:
Any development, lot of record or structure legally operated prior to July 1,
2010, shall be considered a permitted use and legally conforming within the Z7
District. Any redevelopment or addition to a development, lot of record or
structure shall be required to conform to the forms and functions and
development standards found within the Z7 District. Any change in form or
function shall conform to permitted and conditional form and function standards
as described in the Z7 District. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016)
12-15-4: Z7-5 DISTRICT:
The following requirements apply to any development or subdivision within the
Z7-5 Conservation Subdivision District.
   A.   All lots (except lots fronting upon an existing public right- of-way)
shall be served by a private street approved by the City Engineer:
      1.   The street shall be paved with a dustless surface;
      2.   The street shall be built to support emergency vehicles as required
by the Fire Department;
      3.   A turnaround at the end of any cul-de-sac or dead end street shall
be provided and approved by the Fire Department;
      4.   Ownership and maintenance of the street shall solely be the cost and
responsibility of the abutting property owners. Covenants, in a form acceptable
to the City Attorney and approved by the Administrative Official, shall be
recorded with the plat establishing a Property Owners' Association, outlining
the ownership and maintenance responsibilities of abutting owners.
   B.   A tree preservation plan meeting the requirements of subsection
12-16-5D of this title shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat or
development plan showing the location and species of all trees over six inches
(6") in diameter and including details for protection of trees to be preserved.
Trees to be preserved that are damaged or destroyed shall be mitigated
according to subsection
12-16-5D3 of this title.
   C.   The development shall implement low impact design standards for
stormwater runoff, such as rain gardens, vegetated swales and similar low
impact design methods, subject to approval by the City Engineer.
   D.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall conform to the
requirements for accessory buildings in the Z2, Sub-Urban District. See section
12-10-4. (Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016; amd. Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022)
12-15-5: Z7-6 DISTRICT:
   A.   In addition to the development standards in Section
12-15-6, Table 1B, any multi-family residential development (3 or more dwelling
units within a building, including mixed use) and any Lodging, Office/
Miscellaneous, Commercial/Retail Service, Civic, or Civic Support development
(as listed in Section
12-12-6, Table 1A) shall conform to the following:
      1.   A minimum buffer of fifty (50) feet shall be established between any
building or outdoor activity area and any property zoned Z2, Sub-Urban
District, or Z3, General Urban District. A parking area or access drive (other
than a fire access drive required by the Fire Marshal) shall not be placed
within this buffer. The buffer area shall include berms, landscaping, fencing,
or other barriers in numbers and arrangement sufficient to form an effective
visual screen. This buffer shall be determined to be in compliance by the
Development Review Committee, in accordance with chapter 7 of this title.
         a.   Exception: Fairways, greens and adjacent open space areas on a
golf course are not subject to this requirement; however, prevention of golf-
related incursions upon adjacent property in the Z2 or Z3 districts shall be
implemented in the golf course design. (Ord. 22-13, 11-15-2022)
12-15-6: FORMS AND FUNCTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
TABLE 1
Z7 FORMS AND FUNCTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 
P   = Permitted
n/a = Not applicable
 
 Districts
 Mercy Medical            Mobile Home County      Conservation Golf Course
 Center Z7-1   NIACC Z7-2 Park Z7-3   Fairgrounds Subdivision  Development Z7-
                                      Z7-4        Z7-5         6
                                                 Districts
                                                 Mercy                           County      Conservation Golf Course
                                                 Medical   NIACC Z7- Mobile Home Fairgrounds Subdivision  Development
                                                 Center    2         Park Z7-3   Z7-4        Z7-5         Z7-6
                                                 Z7-1
A.   Residential/Mixed Use
   Accessory dwelling                                                                     P            P
   Dormitory                                  P         P
   Duplex/two flat                                                                                     P
   Family home                                                                            P
   Freestanding house                                                                     P            P
   Mixed use block building                                                                            P
   Mobile home park                                               P
   Residence lodging                                                                      P            P
   Town house                                                                                          P
B.   Lodging
   Bed and breakfast                                                                                   P
   Hotel                                      P                                                        P
   Inn                                        P                                                        P
C.   Office/Miscellaneous
   Corner office                                        P                     P
   Office building                            P         P                     P
D.   Commercial/retail service
   Corner store                                                   P
   Restaurant                                 P         P                     P                        P
E.   Civic
   Auditorium                                 P         P                     P
   Convention center                          P         P                     P
   Daycare                                    P         P         P           P                        P
   Indoor recreation                                    P                     P                        P
   Outdoor recreation                                                                                  P
F.   Civic Support
   Clinic                                     P
   Fairgrounds                                                                P
   Hospital                                   P
   Parking structure                          P         P                                              P
G.   Education
   College                                              P
H.   Agriculture
   Farm                                                 P                     P
I.   Accessory Uses
   Accessory surface parking (off-site)       P
   Active Solar Equipment                     P         P         P           P           P            P
   Home occupations                                               P                       P            P
   Outdoor customer dining area               P         P                     P                        P
   Small and dispersed wind energy conversion P         P         P           P           P            P
systems
J.   Configuration/max. height                6 stories 4 stories 1 story     2 stories   3 stories    3 stories
K.   Building Disposition
   Edge yard                                  Permitted Permitted Permitted   Permitted   Permitted    Permitted
   Side yard                                  Permitted Permitted Not         Not         Not          Permitted
                                                                     Permitted   Permitted   Permitted
   Split yard                                 Permitted Permitted Not         Not         Not          Permitted
                                                                     Permitted   Permitted   Permitted
   Rear yard                                  Permitted Permitted Not         Not         Not          Permitted
                                                                     Permitted   Permitted   Permitted
L.   Lot Occupation                                                                                    Residential
                                                                                                          Mixed Use**
                                                                                                          see Sec.
   Lot Width                                  N/a       N/a       N/a         N/a         150 ft. min  12-11-8
                                                                                                          Table 1 (Z3)

                                                                                                          Lodging,
                                                                                                          Office/
                                                                                             1 acre       Misc.,
                                                                                             minimum or   Commercial
                                                                     5 acre                  minimum      Retail/
                                                                     minimum of              required for Service
                                                                     gross                   on-site      Civic &
   Lot Area                                   N/a       N/a       development N/a         sewage       Civic
                                                                     area, 50                disposal     Support**:
                                                                     acres                   system,      see Sec.
                                                                     maximum                 whichever is 12-12-9 ,
                                                                                             greater; 10  Table 1
                                                                                             acres max.   (Z4); see
                                                                                                          golf course
                                                                                                          exception***
   Lot Coverage                               N/a       N/a       N/a         N/a         N/a
M.   Setbacks (minimum)
   Principal front                            25 feet   25 feet   25 feet     25 feet     35 feet      Accessory
   Secondary front                            25 feet   25 feet   25 feet     25 feet     25 feet      Uses: per
                                                                     5 feet (7                            the district
   Side yard                                  15 feet   15 feet   feet        15 feet     15 feet      requirements
                                                                     building                             of the
                                                                     separation)                          principal
                                                                     5 feet (7                            form/
   Rear yard                                  25 feet*  25 feet*  feet        25 feet     25 feet      function
                                                                     building
                                                                     separation)
N.   Parking provisions                       See Chapter
                                                 12-8-5  General Parking Provisions.
*   Where adjacent to residential, minimum rear yard equals principal building height, measured in feet, to the
highest point of roof or parapet.
**   Uses listed in the Form and Function categories in subsections A - I of Section
12-12-6 , Table 1A; lot occupation and setbacks shall be per the requirements of the stated districts.
***   Fairways, greens and adjacent open space areas on a golf course are not subject to the Z4 setback requirements
N/A = not applicable
 
(Ord. 16-15, 10-4-2016; amd. Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022; amd. Ord. 22-13, 11-15-2022)
CHAPTER 16
ZONING STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-16-1: Lot Development; General
12-16-2: Swimming Pools
12-16-3: Fences
12-16-4: Required Fencing And Screening
12-16-5: Required Landscaping And Screening
12-16-6: Traffic Visibility
12-16-7: Drainage Plans, Soil Erosion And Sediment Control
12-16-8: Dark Sky Conditions And Glare Restrictions
12-16-9: Smoke
12-16-10: Dust And Other Particulate Matter
12-16-11: Air Pollution
12-16-12: Refuse And Recyclable Material
12-16-13: Outside Storage; Residential And Nonresidential Uses
12-16-14: Waste Material
12-16-15: Bulk Storage (Liquid)
12-16-16: Radiation Emission
12-16-17: Electrical Emission
12-16-18: Temporary Storage Of Fill
12-16-19: Outdoor Customer Dining
12-16-20: Permitted Encroachments Into Setbacks
12-16-21: Height Exceptions
12-16-22: Home Occupations
12-16-23: Accessory Buildings In Residential Districts
12-16-1: LOT DEVELOPMENT; GENERAL:
   A.   All buildings shall be placed on a lot so they will not obstruct future
streets that may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets
and according to the Comprehensive Plan and to the system and standards
employed by the City. Furthermore, all buildings shall be placed on a lot so
they will not obstruct future utility routes or the potential resubdivision of
the property.
   B.   When a development is proposed that is to be located on two (2) or more
contiguous lots that are required to meet the minimum district area and
frontage requirement and/or are required to accommodate the use, the lots shall
be combined in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance, prior to the
issuing of a building permit.
   C.   When two (2) or more contiguous lots are located in the same
residential district, one (1) or more of which lacks adequate area or
dimensions to qualify for residential use under the current requirements of
this title and are held in one (1) ownership, they shall be combined in
accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance, prior to the issuing of a
building permit. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 12-07, 9-4-
2012; 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020; Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022)
12-16-2: SWIMMING POOLS:
Outdoor swimming pools shall be prohibited in the Z5 and Z6 Districts. All
swimming pools shall be located in the rear yard and subject to title 10 of
this Code. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-3: FENCES:
Fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following:
   A.   Location: All fences shall be located entirely within the private
property of the person, firm or corporation constructing or causing the
construction of the fence.
   B.   Construction And Maintenance:
      1.   Every fence shall be constructed in a professional and substantial
manner and of substantial material reasonably suitable for the purpose for
which the fence is proposed to be used. The materials and design shall also be
compatible with other structures in the area in which the fence is located and
shall not cause blight or a negative impact.
      2.   The materials and design shall also be compatible with other
structures in the area in which the fence is located and shall not cause blight
or a negative impact. Recycled or construction materials, such as pallets,
doors, windows, corrugated metal or other metal typically used for walls or
roofs, or other materials not specifically designed for fencing are not
permitted. Use of fabric, plastic or other non-rigid material as fencing or
attached to fences is not permitted, except in conjunction with a construction
project as a temporary measure to prevent erosion.
      3.   All posts or similar supporting instruments used in the construction
of fences shall be faced inward toward the property being fenced.
      4.   The decorative side of any fence shall be faced outward from the
property being fenced.
   C.   Access: All fences shall be provided with a gate which affords
reasonable and convenient access for public safety.
   D.   Barbed Wire And Electric Fences: Except as specified in this section,
barbed wire fences and electric fences shall only be allowed when related to
farming activities located within the Z1 District.
   E.   Drainage: Fences shall not obstruct natural drainage.
   F.   Grade Modifications: Any modifications to the grade or drainage of a
property in conjunction with the construction of a fence shall be subject to
section 12-16-7 of this chapter.
   G.   Z2, Z3, Z7-5 and Z7-6 District Fence Standards: All residential
district fences shall be placed within the property being fenced.
      1.   Except in the case of a secondary front yard on a corner lot that
abuts a street, fences along side property lines shall not be more than six
feet (6') in height for the distance commencing from a point on the side
property line located along the rear lot line and proceeding along the side
property line to a point that would be intersected by the front wall line of
the existing principal structure on the lot.
      2.   Fences along or paralleling any rear property line shall not exceed
six feet (6') in height.
      3.   The required screening provisions for residential districts shall
supersede, where applicable, the provisions of this section.
      4.   Fences extending across required principal or secondary front yards
shall be no greater than four feet (4') in height.
      5.   In the Z7-6 Golf Course Development District, the above requirements
shall apply to fences serving residential forms and functions.
   H.   Z4, Z6, and Z7-6 Fence Standards: All commercial and industrial fences
shall be placed within the property being fenced.
      1.   Business and industrial fences may be erected up to eight feet (8')
in height. Fences in excess of eight feet (8') shall require a variance.
      2.   Fences within the Z6 District that are primarily erected as a
security measure may have arms projecting into the applicant's property on
which barbed wire can be fastened commencing at a point at least seven feet
(7') above the ground.
      3.   Fences or walls that enclose self-storage or outdoor storage areas
shall meet the fencing and screening requirements of subsection
12-16-5K of this chapter.
      4.   In the Z7-6 Golf Course Development District, the above requirements
shall apply to fences serving mixed-use and non-residential forms and
functions.
   I.   Z5 Fence Standards: Fences within the Z5 District shall generally be
prohibited; however, fences required for security measures or special purposes,
or to meet landscaping and screening requirements, may be allowed subject to
Development Review Committee site plan compliance review considering purpose,
context, location, materials and overall relationship to surrounding
properties. Approved fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 11-
4, 2-15-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
   J.   Z7 Fence Standards: Except for the Z7-5 and Z7-6 districts as outlined
above, fence standards for the Z7 District shall be established at the time of
site plan compliance review. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-16-4: REQUIRED FENCING AND SCREENING:
   A.   Fencing And Screening: Any property containing a non-residential form
or function, except agriculture and farming, that abuts property zoned Z2, Z3,
Z7-5, or residential forms and functions in the Z7-6 District shall provide
screening along that boundary. Screening shall also be provided where a non-
residential form or function is across the street from a Z2, Z3, or Z7-
5 District. All fencing and screening specifically required by this title shall
consist of either a fence or a green belt planting strip as provided for below:
      1.   A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of coniferous trees and/or
deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to
   provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to
provide visual screening to a minimum height of six feet (6'). Earth mounding
or berms may be used to achieve up to three feet (3') of the required screen.
      2.   A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick,
wood, metal or rigid polymer such as vinyl. The fence shall provide a solid
screening effect at least six feet (6') in height. The design and materials
used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the
approval of the Administrative Officer.
      3.   Self-storage and outdoor storage areas in the Z4, Z6, and Z7
Districts shall meet the fencing and screening requirements of subsection
12-16-5K of this chapter. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-16-5: REQUIRED LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
Landscaping and screening shall be located in accordance with the following
rules:
   A.   Landscaping Required:
      1.   The front, side and rear yards of each site not utilized for parking
(where permitted) shall be landscaped utilizing an effective combination of
trees, grass, ground cover and shrubbery. Undeveloped areas in the interior of
the site shall be seeded with appropriate grasses or other suitable ground
cover and maintained neat and orderly. All tree trimmings, stumps, and
construction debris shall be promptly removed and not be accumulated or stored
on site.
      2.   Landscaping near street, alley and driveway intersections shall
conform to the traffic visibility requirements of section 12-16-6 of this
chapter.
   B.   Site Restoration And Planting: All site areas including public rights-
of-way and private lots shall be finish graded to control the quantity and
quality of stormwater runoff and be restored with appropriate ground cover,
herbaceous and woody vegetation as specified in subsection N, table 1 of this
section.
   C.   Planting Plan: The planting plan shall be prepared by a landscaping
professional, as follows:
      1.   For all developments other than one- or two-family residential, with
an aggregate development site area of two (2) acres or more, or any such
development where the aggregate gross floor area of the principal buildings
exceed seven thousand (7,000) square feet, the planting plan shall be completed
by a landscape architect licensed in the State of Iowa.
      2.   For all other developments other than one- and two-family
residential, the planting plan shall be completed by an experienced and
qualified landscape professional.
   D.   Tree Preservation Plan: With respect to existing trees in new
developments, all trees on the site are to be saved unless they must be removed
for street, buildings, utilities, drainage or public recreational purposes.
      1.   Existing trees and landscaping may be used to meet the requirements
of this section.
      2.   Trees over six inches (6") in diameter that are to remain shall be
marked with a red band and be protected with snow fences or other suitable
enclosure prior to excavation. The planting plan and grading plan shall include
a detail and instructions for preservation of the existing trees. The City may
further require that the property owner and/or developer retain a professional
forester to prepare a Forest Inventory and Management Plan for the development
in order to control and abate any existing or potential shade tree disease and
to save trees from construction loss.
      3.   Any tree over twelve inches (12") in diameter shown to be preserved
that is damaged or destroyed during or as a result of construction shall be
mitigated by new trees, of a similar or better species, with an aggregate
diameter of at least forty percent (40%) of the diameter of the destroyed or
damaged tree, subject to the following:
         a.   No new tree required for mitigation need exceed two and one-half
inches (2.5") in diameter.
         b.   No more than three (3) new trees per destroyed/damaged tree shall
be required, regardless of the size of the damaged or destroyed tree. The
Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may allow
substitution of plants other than trees for one (1) or more of the trees
required for mitigation, where it can be shown that the landscape cannot
accommodate the required trees due to the density of the landscaping, soil
conditions or other condition that would make long term survival of new trees
unlikely.
   E.   Performance Guarantee Required: No building permit except for one- and
two-unit residential buildings shall be issued until the applicant for the
building permit shall file with the City a performance bond, with a corporation
approved by the City as surety thereon, or other guarantee acceptable by the
City, in an amount approved by the City, but for no less than one and one-half
(1.5) times the cost of completing the planting plan. The applicant shall
provide an estimate for the cost of completing the plan from a landscape
architect or other qualified landscape professional, qualified nursery,
greenhouse or other landscape provider/installer. The performance bond must
cover two (2) complete growing seasons subsequent to the completion, and
release of the bond must be conditioned upon complete and satisfactory
implementation of the approved planting plan. Should the applicant fail to
fully comply with the approved landscape plan during the period the performance
guarantee is active, the City may opt to install the landscaping and draw upon
the performance guarantee for the cost thereof.
   F.   Types And Species Of Trees: All plant species shall be noninvasive,
indigenous and/or native to the appropriate USDA hardiness zone and physical
characteristics for Northern Iowa. Prohibited species include:
      1.   Prohibited in all parts of the City:
         a.   Ornamental (Callery) pear (Pyrus species and cultivars: Bradford,
Cleveland select, redspire, capital, etc.), except those varieties proven to be
fire blight resistant.
         b.   Ash (all species and cultivars).
         c.   Poplar (Populus species).
         d.   Ginkgo (female only).
         e.   Chinese elm and Siberian elm (Ulmus pumila). Elm species that are
certified to be disease resistant may be planted.
         f.   Tree of heaven (Ailanthus altissima).
         g.   Austree (Salix alba x matsudana).
         h.   Box elder (Acer negundo).
         i.   Mulberry (Morus species).
      2.   Prohibited in right-of-way only:
         a.   Catalpa (Catalpa speciosa).
         b.   Common fruit and large nut bearing trees (walnut, hickory,
butternut, etc.).
         c.   Birch species (river birch, white or paper birch, etc.).
         d.   American elm. Elm species that are certified to be disease
resistant may be planted.
         e.   Black locust.
         f.   Soft or silver maple.
         g.   Cottonwood.
         h.   Willow (Salix species).
         i.   Russian olive.
         j.   Sumac.
         k.   Hawthorn.
         l.   Conifers (evergreens).
   G.   Minimum Planting Sizes And Equivalents: Plants required in subsection
M, table 1 of this section shall meet the following minimum requirements:
      1.   Deciduous shade trees: Two inches (2.0") to two and one-half inches
(2.5") in diameter measured six inches (6") above the ground.
      2.   Deciduous ornamental trees: One inch (1") to one and one-half inches
(1.5") in diameter measured six inches (6") above the ground.
      3.   Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') in height.
      4.   Evergreen shrubs used for screening purposes, including those used
in conjunction with berming, shall have a minimum spread at planting of thirty
inches (30") to thirty six inches (36") and reach a minimum mature height of
three feet (3').
      5.   The shade tree requirements specified in subsection N, table 1 of
this section shall be met with long-lived deciduous shade trees; however, up to
thirty percent (30%) of the shade tree requirements may be satisfied using
ornamental trees and/or evergreen trees.
H   .   Slopes And Berms: Final slope grades steeper than the ratio of three to
one (3:1) shall not be permitted without special approval of adequate slope
stabilization measures such as ground cover plantings and retaining walls.
   I.   Landscape And Screening Of Off Street Parking And Loading Facilities:
      1.   Off street parking facilities containing five (5) or more spaces and
all loading facilities shall be screened as follows:
         a.   Parking facilities shall be screened from abutting sidewalks and
streets. Loading facilities shall be screened if abutting or visible from
sidewalks and streets.
         b.   Parking and loading facilities shall be screened from any lot
used for any residential purpose sharing a common property line; however, this
shall not apply to parking or loading facilities located at least eighty feet
(80') from the common property line of any single-family residential use and at
least fifty feet (50') from the common property line of any other residential
or mixed residential use. Notwithstanding the above, a parking facility serving
a mixed use shall not be required to be screened from an adjacent lot
containing a mixed use.
      2.   All screening shall be arranged to be a minimum eighty percent (80%)
opaque throughout the year.
      3.   The complement of woody shrubs and trees fulfilling requirements for
the screening of off street parking and loading described in this title shall
incorporate evergreen trees and shrubs in sufficient quantities to provide year
round color and shade, in locations that meet environmental conditions.
      4.   Screening adjacent to public sidewalks and streets shall include at
least two (2) of the following:
         a.   A landscape screening strip at least five feet (5') wide,
measured perpendicularly to the lot line abutting the street or sidewalk,
containing a mix of shrubs and ornamental trees, in sufficient quantities and
arranged to provide an adequate screen;
         b.   One (1) deciduous shade tree per every forty (40) linear feet of
the lot line abutting the street or sidewalk;
         c.   A continuous shrub border or hedge no less than three feet (3')
and no more than four feet (4') in height comprised of deciduous and/or
evergreen shrubs;
         d.   Earth berm (if space permits); or
         e.   A decorative barrier consisting of a metal railing system with
masonry columns or a solid masonry wall no taller than four feet (4') in
height.
      5.   Screening to buffer single-family residential dwellings within
eighty feet (80') of off street parking and loading facilities and to buffer
all other residential and residential mixed use properties within fifty feet
(50') of off street parking and loading facilities shall include a combination
of at least three (3) of the following:
         a.   A landscape screening strip at least ten feet (10') wide,
measured perpendicularly to the common lot line, containing a mix of shrubs and
ornamental trees in sufficient quantities and arranged to provide an adequate
screen;
         b.   One (1) tree per every thirty (30) linear feet of lot line
contiguous to the residential property with at least forty percent (40%) of
trees being evergreen varieties;
         c.   A continuous shrub border or hedge no less than five feet (5')
and no more than eight feet (8') in height comprised of deciduous and/or
evergreen shrubs;
         d.   Earth berm (if space permits);
         e.   Solid, board fence or masonry wall meeting the requirements of
section
12-16-3 of this chapter.
   J.   Internal Parking Lot Landscaping:
      1.   Parking bays of twelve (12) spaces or more in length shall be
subdivided by intermediate landscape islands or peninsulas. Landscape islands/
peninsulas shall provide at least one (1) parking space width of landscape area
(10 feet wide by 18 feet long island or peninsula for a single bay or 10 feet
wide by 36 feet long island for a double bay). The Administrative Officer may
permit peninsulas or islands of lesser length to allow for safe turning radii
within parking lot aisles and drives.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2517.jpg]
 
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
      2.   Double parking bays with a length of six (6) or more double parking
spaces shall terminate at each end with a planting area of a minimum of a
double parking space of landscape area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2521.jpg]
 
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
      3.   Parking bays greater than seven (7) spaces in length shall have one
(1) landscaped island or peninsula placed at both ends.
      4.   Parking Lot Islands And Peninsulas: Where possible, planting islands
should be depressed and surrounded by flat, ribbon curbs to facilitate
stormwater filtering. Each landscaped island or peninsula shall be landscaped
with perennial grasses or flowers, and at least one (1) of the following:
         a.   One (1) deciduous shade tree;
         b.   One (1) ornamental tree;
         c.   Two (2) salt tolerant low shrubs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2519.jpg]
 
Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
   K.   Landscaping Requirements For Outdoor Storage And Mini-Warehouse Self-
Storage:
      1.   In addition to the fence requirements of sections
12-16-3 and
12-16-4 of this chapter, outdoor storage areas and mini-warehouse self-storage
facilities shall be effectively screened and meet the applicable standards in
this chapter, as follows:
         a.   A building wall may be used as a screen and may be counted
towards meeting the screening requirements.
         b.   Z4 and Z7 Districts: Outdoor storage areas and mini-warehouse
self- storage in the Z4 Multi-Use District and the Z7 Specific Use District
shall be screened from view of any adjacent public street or sidewalk, and from
any adjacent property in the Z2 Sub-Urban, Z3 General Urban, or Z7-
5 Conservation Subdivision Zone Districts, and from any property containing a
permitted residential use in the Z7-6 Golf Course Development, with one (1) or
more of the following:
            (1)   A fence that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least
eighty percent (80%) opaque, comprised of weatherproof or treated wood or rigid
vinyl or similar rigid polymer material.
            (2)   A freestanding masonry wall that is at least six feet (6') in
height and at least eighty percent (80%) opaque, comprised of structural
foundations, clad in brick or decorative masonry units, pilasters and/or
columns and protective capping. All masonry shall be either integrally colored
or painted in subdued, earth tone colors.
         c.   Z6 District: Outdoor storage areas and mini-warehouse self-
storage in the Z6 Industrial District shall be screened from view of any
adjacent public street or sidewalk and from any adjacent property zoned Z2 Sub-
Urban or Z3 General Urban, with one (1) or more of the following:
            (1)   A fence that is at least six feet (6') in height and at least
forty percent (40%) opaque, comprised of weatherproof or treated wood or rigid
vinyl or similar rigid polymer material.
            (2)   Galvanized metal mesh (chain-link) with openings no greater
than five-eighths of one inch (5/8"). A galvanized metal mesh fence with
openings of up to two inches (2") may be used if slats are integrated into the
mesh, the forty percent (40%) opacity requirement can be met, and the slats are
maintained in good condition.
            (3)   A freestanding masonry wall that is at least six feet (6') in
height and at least fifty percent (50%) opaque, comprised of structural
foundations, clad in brick or decorative masonry units, pilasters and/or
columns and protective capping. All masonry shall be either integrally colored
or painted in subdued, earth tone colors.
      2.   Additional landscaping screening requirements beyond those required
in subsection N, table 1 of this section are as follows:
         a.   One (1) additional evergreen tree reaching a height of at least
twenty feet (20') at maturity shall be planted for every fifty (50) linear feet
of fencing facing adjacent public rights- of-way, within the yards adjacent to
the rights-of-way.
         b.   Two (2) additional shrubs shall be required per forty (40) linear
feet of right-of-way. The shrubs shall be planted along the outside of the
fence within the yards adjacent to the right- of-way, no closer than three feet
(3') from the fence or any impervious surfaces and shall meet the applicable
landscaping requirements found in this chapter.
         c.   For outdoor storage areas within fifty feet (50') of a common
property line with any property used for a residential purpose, a landscaped
buffer shall be provided along the entire length of the property line, at least
fifteen feet (15') in width, measured perpendicular to the property line. No
structure or parking area, including the required fence or wall, may be located
within this buffer area. The buffer area shall contain at least one (1)
deciduous shade tree for each forty feet (40') of length of the buffer, one (1)
evergreen tree for each twenty five feet (25') of length of the buffer, and
either one (1) ornamental tree or three (3) shrubs for each forty feet (40') of
the length of the buffer.
   L.   Installation: Landscaping as shown on the approved site development
plan shall be installed prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy
by the Chief Building Official. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued pending delays in landscaping installation due to seasonal change or
other unavoidable delay; however, all landscaping must be completed before June
30 of the next growing season. The City may opt to utilize the performance
guarantee required under subsection E of this section to purchase and install
the required landscaping if the owner fails to do so by the above deadline.
   M.   Landscape Maintenance: Landscaping, including plantings required by
this chapter and subsection N, table 1 of this section such as lawns,
groundcovers, trees, shrubs and herbaceous perennial and annual gardens, shall
be kept in healthy condition, free of invasive plants and weeds, in perpetuity.
   N.   Site Restoration And Planting:
   TABLE 1
   SITE RESTORATION AND PLANTING
Minimum landscape standards in this table are prescribed on a per lot basis. Up
to thirty percent (30%) of the shade tree requirements may be met with
deciduous ornamental or evergreen trees; see subsection G5 of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2523.jpg]
 
 
 Edge Yard Side Yard Split Yard Rear Yard
   Edge Yard            Side Yard     Split Yard           Rear Yard
                                      Right-of-way: Hardy
                                      turf grass, 1 shade
                                      tree per 40 linear
                                      feet
                                      Front yard: Hardy
                                      turf grass, 1 shade
   Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1  tree per 4 dwelling
   shade tree                         units, 1 deciduous
   Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1    or evergreen shrub
Z2 shade tree, 5 shrubs, of which at  per dwelling unit    Not permitted
   least 2 shall be evergreen shrubs  Side yards: Hardy
   Side yards: Hardy turf grass       turf grass
   Rear yard: Hardy turf grass        Rear yard: Hardy
                                      turf grass and/or
                                      herbaceous ground
                                      cover; 1 shade tree
                                      per 40 linear feet
                                      of rear lot line
                                      length
   Right-of-way: Hardy
   turf grass, 1 shade
   tree                 Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1
   Front yard: Hardy    shade tree
   turf grass, 1 shade  Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1    Right-of-way: Hardy
   tree, 3 shrubs, of   shade tree, 4 shrubs, of which at  turf grass, 1 shade
Z3 which at least 2     least 1 shall be an evergreen      tree
   shall be evergreen   shrub                              Rear yard: Hardy
   shrubs               Side yards: Hardy turf grass       turf grass
   Side yards: Hardy    Rear yard: Hardy turf grass
   turf grass
   Rear yard: Hardy
   turf grass
   Nonresidential:                                          
   Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50     Right-of-way: Hardy
   linear feet                                             turf grass, 1 shade
   Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50       tree per 50 linear
   linear feet of building frontage, 2 deciduous or        feet
Z4 evergreen shrubs per 20 linear feet of building         Rear yard: Hardy
   frontage                                                turf grass and/or
   Side yards: Hardy turf grass                            herbaceous ground
   Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground    cover; 1 shade tree
   cover; 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of rear lot line per 50 linear feet
   length                                                  of rear lot line
                                                           length
                                                            
   Residential:                                            Right-of-way: Hardy
   Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 40     turf grass, 1 shade
   linear feet                                             tree per 40 linear
   Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 4        feet
Z4 dwelling units, 2 deciduous or evergreen shrubs per     Rear yard: Hardy
   dwelling unit                                           turf grass and/or
   Side yards: Hardy turf grass                            herbaceous ground
   Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground    cover; 1 shade tree
   cover; 1 shade tree per 40 linear feet of rear lot line per 40 linear feet
   length                                                  of rear lot line
                                                           length
                        Right-of-way: Sidewalk with tree well; 1 shade tree per
                        30 linear feet
                        Front yard: n/a
Z5 Not permitted        Side yards: n/a
                        Rear yard: n/a
                        Roofscape: Vegetated, green roof may be installed in
                        lieu of yard landscaping
   Right-of-way: Hardy
   turf grass, 1 shade
   tree per 50 linear
   feet
   All yards: New
   industrial
   developments or uses
   shall require 1 new
Z6 tree per 1,000       Not permitted Not permitted        Not permitted
   square feet of gross
   building floor area
   For building sites
   that have over
   40,000 square feet
   of gross floor area,
   the maximum number
   of trees required
   shall be 50
   Right-of-way: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50     Right-of-way: Hardy
   linear feet                                             turf grass, 1 shade
   Front yard: Hardy turf grass, 1 shade tree per 50       tree per 50 linear
   linear feet of building frontage, 2 deciduous or        feet
   evergreen shrubs per 20 linear feet of building         Rear yard: Hardy
Z7 frontage                                                turf grass and/or
   Side yards: Hardy turf grass                            herbaceous ground
   Rear yard: Hardy turf grass and/or herbaceous ground    cover; 1 shade tree
   cover; 1 shade tree per 50 linear feet of rear lot line per 50 linear feet
   length                                                  of rear lot line
                                                           length
 
(Ord. 13-14, 4-2-2013; amd. Ord. 15-10, 9-15-2015; 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-
2020; Ord. 21-5, 6-1-2021; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-16-6: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY:
   A.   Corner Lots: On corner lots in all zoning districts, except for
buildings in the Z5 District, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a
height of three feet (3') and ten feet (10') within twenty feet (20') from the
intersecting property lines. Any such obstruction shall not be wider than two
feet (2').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2527.jpg]
 
   B.   Alleys And Driveways: Except for buildings in the Z5 District, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of two feet (2') and eight feet (8')
where it will interfere with traffic or pedestrian visibility from a driveway
or alley to a public way. These regulations shall apply unless it can be
demonstrated to the Administrative Officer that the planting, structure, or
other obstruction provides an unobstructed view so as not to create a safety
hazard. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 22-3, 3-1-
2022; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-16-7: DRAINAGE PLANS, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   No land shall be developed and no form and function shall be permitted
that results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals
on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm
drain, watercourse, ponding area, or other public facilities subject to the
review and approval of the City Engineer and in accordance with storm drainage
plans as may be established by the City.
   B.   In the case of all residential subdivisions of three (3) or more lots,
business and industrial developments, the drainage plans with appropriate spot
site elevations shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and the
final drainage plan shall be subject to written approval. In the case of such
uses, no modifications in grade and drainage flow through fill, erection of
retaining walls or other such actions shall be permitted until such plans have
been reviewed and received written approval from the City Engineer.
   C.   The following standards shall apply to all development and activity
that necessitates the grading, stripping, cutting, filling, or exposure of
soils.
      1.   General Standards:
         a.   The development shall conform to the natural limitations
presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil
erosion.
         b.   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with
the different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
         c.   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.
         d.   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as
quickly as possible during construction.
         e.   Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained and
protected.
         f.   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set
aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a
depth of four inches (4") and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil
quality prior to development.
         g.   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest
feasible period of time. No exposure shall be planned to exceed sixty (60)
days. Said time period shall be extended only if the City Engineer is satisfied
that adequate measures have been established and will remain in place.
         h.   The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible
for the storage and flow of runoff. Stormwater drainage shall be discharged to
marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other treatment facilities. Diversion
of stormwater to marshlands or swamps shall be considered for existing or
planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for stormwater shall
provide for natural or artificial water level control. Temporary storage areas
or retention basins scattered throughout developed areas shall be encouraged to
reduce peak flows, erosion damage, and construction costs.
      2.   Exposed Slopes: The following control measures shall be taken to
control erosion during any activity where soils are exposed:
         a.   No slope should be steeper in grade than four feet (4')
horizontal to one foot (1') vertical (4:1).
         b.   Exposed slopes steeper in grade than ten feet (10') horizontal to
one foot (1') vertical (10:1) should be contour plowed to minimize direct
runoff of water.
         c.   At the foot of each exposed slope, a channel and berm should be
constructed to control runoff. The channelized water should be diverted to a
sedimentation basin (debris basin, silt basin or silt trap) before being
allowed to enter the natural drainage system.
         d.   Along the top of each exposed slope, a berm should be constructed
to prevent runoff from flowing over the edge of the slope. Where runoff
collecting behind said berm cannot be diverted elsewhere and must be directed
down the slope, appropriate measures shall be taken to prevent erosion. Such
measures should consist of either an asphalt paved flow apron and drop chute
laid down the slope or a flexible slope drain. At the base of the slope drain
or flow apron, a gravel energy dissipator should be installed to prevent
erosion at the discharge end.
         e.   Exposed slopes shall be protected by whatever means will
effectively prevent erosion considering the degree of slope, soil material, and
expected length of exposure. Slope protection shall consist of mulch, sheets of
plastic, burlap or jute netting, sod blankets, fast growing grasses or
temporary seedings of annual grasses. Mulch consists of hay, straw, wood chips,
corn stalks, bark or other protective material. Mulch should be anchored to
slopes with liquid asphalt, stakes, and netting, or should be worked into the
soil to provide additional slope stability.
         f.   Control measures, other than those specifically stated above, may
be used in place of the above measures if it can be demonstrated that they will
as effectively protect exposed slopes. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
      3.   Design Standards:
         a.   Manmade Waterways:
            (1)   The natural aboveground drainage system shall be utilized to
the extent possible to dispose of runoff. Storm sewers are only to be used
where it can be demonstrated that the use of the aboveground natural drainage
system will not adequately dispose of runoff. Aboveground runoff disposal
waterways may be constructed to augment the natural drainage system. To the
extent possible, the natural and constructed waterways shall be coordinated
with an open space trail system. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd.
2017 Code)
            (2)   The widths of a constructed waterway shall be sufficiently
large to adequately channel runoff from a ten inch (10") storm. Adequacy shall
be determined by the expected runoff when full development of the drainage area
is reached.
            (3)   No fences or structures shall be constructed across the
waterway that will reduce or restrict the flow of water.
            (4)   The banks of the waterway shall be protected with a permanent
turf vegetation.
            (5)   The banks of the waterway shall not exceed five feet (5')
horizontal to one foot (1') vertical (5:1) in gradient.
            (6)   The gradient of the waterway bed shall not exceed a grade
that will result in a velocity that will cause erosion of the banks of the
waterway.
            (7)   The bed of the waterway shall be protected with turf, sod, or
concrete. If turf or sod will not function properly, riprap may be used. Riprap
shall consist of quarried limestone, fieldstone (if random riprap is used) or
construction materials, provided said construction materials are limited to
asphalt cement and concrete. The riprap shall be no smaller than two inches
(2") square nor larger than two feet (2') square. Construction materials shall
be used only in those areas where the waterway is not used as part of a
recreation trail system.
            (8)   If the flow velocity in the waterway is such that erosion of
the turf sidewall will occur and said velocity cannot be decreased via velocity
control structures, then other materials may replace turf on the sidewalls.
Either gravel or riprap may be allowed to prevent erosion at these points.
         b.   Water Velocity:
            (1)   The flow velocity of runoff in waterways shall be controlled
to a velocity that will minimize erosion of the waterway.
            (2)   Flow velocity shall be controlled through the installation of
diversions, berms, slope drains, and other similarly effective velocity control
structures.
         c.   Sediment Control:
            (1)   To prevent sedimentation of waterways, pervious and
impervious sediment traps and other sediment control structures shall be
incorporated throughout the contributing watershed.
            (2)   Temporary pervious sediment traps could consist of a
construction of bales of hay with a low spillway embankment section of sand and
gravel that permits a slow movement of water while filtering sediment. Such
structures may serve as temporary sediment control features during the
construction stage of a development.
            (3)   Permanent impervious sediment control structures consist of
sediment basins (debris basins, silt basins, or silt traps) and shall be
utilized to remove sediment from runoff prior to its disposal in any permanent
body of water.
         d.   Maintenance Of Erosion Control System:
            (1)   The erosion and velocity control structures shall be
maintained in a condition that will ensure continuous functioning according to
the provisions of this title.
            (2)   Sediment basins shall be maintained as the need occurs to
ensure continuous desilting action.
            (3)   The areas utilized for runoff waterways and sediment basins
shall not be allowed to exist in an unsightly condition. The banks of the
sediment basins and waterways shall be landscaped.
            (4)   Prior to the approval of any development, the developer shall
make provision for continued maintenance of the erosion and sediment control
system.
   D.   The top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of
the street, gutter or inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of twelve
inches (12") plus two percent (2%). Exceptions to this standard may be approved
by the City Engineer when it can be demonstrated that required drainage to the
point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on
the site. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-8: DARK SKY CONDITIONS AND GLARE RESTRICTIONS:
Lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, sign or other structure
shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining property and from
public rights-of-way. Direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights
or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be
directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or
controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property or the public
right-of-way. Bare luminaries (light bulbs) shall not be permitted in view of
adjacent property or public right-of-way.
Lighting standards for Zoning Districts Z1 through Z6 as well as the Z7
Specific Use Districts are described below. For Zoning Districts Z1, Z2, Z3 and
Specific Use District Z7-3, the following standards (table 2 of this section)
shall be considered dark sky guidelines. These suggested guidelines will serve
as a connection between general planning practices and zoning regulations. For
Zoning Districts Z4, Z5, Z6 and Specific Use Districts Z7-1, Z7-2 and Z7-4, the
following standards shall be required as a part of development standards.
   TABLE 2
   PUBLIC DARKNESS
This table outlines standards for preserving public darkness.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2525.jpg]
 
               Z1        Z2, Z7-3,  Z3         Z4, Z7-2   Z5, Z7-1,  Z6
                         Z7-5                             Z7-4
Ambient light  None      Very low   Low        Medium     High       High
levels
              Guidelines                      Standards
                                               Full       Full       Full
                                               cutoff     cutoff     cutoff
                                               lighting,  lighting,  lighting,
               Minimal                         some low   some       some
               electric                        wattage,   nonfull    nonfull
               lighting; Minimal    Minimal    nonfull    cutoff     cutoff
Maximum        should be lighting,  lighting,  cutoff     lighting;  lighting;
lighting       turned    all full   all full   lighting;  controlled controlled
standards      off most  cutoff     cutoff     controlled with       with
               of the                          with       dimmers,   dimmers,
               time                            dimmers,   time       time
                                               time       switch or  switch or
                                               switch or  motion     motion
                                               motion     sensors    sensors
                                               sensors
Maximum
allowed        1.25 -    2.5 - 3.2  3.3 - 4.2  7.6 - 9.7  10.9 -     10.9 -
initial lamp   1.6                                        13.9       13.9
lumens/sf 1
Maximum lamp
allowance      6,500     17,000     24,000     44,000     60,000     60,000
(lumens)
               Fully     Fully      Fully
Required       shielded  shielded   shielded   Fully      Fully      Fully
shielding      luminaire luminaire  luminaire  shielded   shielded   shielded
               with no   with no    with no    luminaire2 luminaire2 luminaire2
               uplight   uplight    uplight
               8:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M. 10:00 P.M. 12:00      10:00 P.M.
               or close  or close   or close   or close   midnight   or close
Lighting       of        of         of         of         or close   of
curfew for     business, business,  business,  business,  of         business,
nonresidential whichever whichever  whichever  whichever  business,  whichever
               is later  is later   is later   is later   whichever  is later
                                                          is later
 
Notes:
   1.    A lumen is equal to 1 foot-candle falling on 1 square foot of surface
area and 1 foot-candle is equal to 1 lumen per square foot.
   2.    The Administrative Officer or the Development Review Committee may
permit a luminaire that is partially shielded if it can be shown that a
partially shielded luminaire is necessary to provide adequate light for the
conditions specific to its location and that adjoining properties are not
negatively affected.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-9: SMOKE:
The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by
the State of Iowa Pollution Control Standards, as amended. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-10: DUST AND OTHER PARTICULATE MATTER:
The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be
in compliance with and regulated by the State of Iowa Pollution Control
Standards, as amended. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-11: AIR POLLUTION:
The emission of air pollution, including potentially hazardous emissions, by
any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by Iowa Statutes, as amended.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-12: REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL:
   A.   Location And Screening:
      1.   New Development:
         a.   All refuse and refuse handling containers, including, but not
limited to, garbage cans, carts and dumpsters, shall be stored within the
principal structure, within an accessory building, or screened from eye level
view from any public right-of-way, except alleys. Exceptions shall be made for
garbage cans and carts provided for public and/or customer use and convenience.
         b.   Screening shall be of sufficient height to conceal the container
and provide a minimum opaqueness of eighty percent (80%). Screening may be
partially accomplished with landscape materials if deemed of sufficient height
and opaqueness year round.
         c.   Screened containers shall generally be located in the third tier
of a property, being that area measured from a point twenty feet (20') back
from the principal structure's front facade and extending to the rear lot line.
         d.   Screened containers shall generally comply with minimum setback
requirements for accessory buildings. (Ord. 11-08, 8-16-2011)
         e.   The design, construction and location of all required screening
shall be subject to Development Review Committee (DRC) compliance review. New
one- and two-family residential functions shall be subject to the standards of
this subsection; however, DRC review and approval is not required.
      2.   Existing Development:
         a.   While not required, screening of existing refuse handling
containers from eye level view from any public right-of-way, except alleys, is
highly recommended. Every effort shall be made to locate existing containers
where they will have the least visual impact while maintaining adequate
vehicular circulation and parking on the premises.
         b.   The placement of refuse handling containers on premises where no
refuse containers were previously located shall be required to meet the
requirements for new development above.
      3.   Development, General Requirements:
         a.   All refuse handling containers and screening shall be kept in a
state of good repair and appearance at all times.
         b.   In outside locations, all refuse shall be placed inside the
container or within the screened area, not outside or alongside the container
or screened area. Refuse handling container capacity shall be "right sized" to
handle the typical waste stream resulting from uses operating on the premises.
         c.   All refuse handling containers located outside of a building
shall have tightfitting lids to prevent spilling and spreading of debris.
Exceptions will be made if open, no lid containers are necessary for
construction debris or for similar purposes where spreading of debris is not
likely or if the use is for a temporary period of time.
         d.   If being used temporarily for construction, moving or similar
limited purposes occurring on the premises, refuse handling containers do not
have to meet the screening or location requirements. However, in no case shall
a container remain on a premises for these purposes longer than three (3)
months within any twelve (12) month period if located in a Z2 or Z3 Zoning
District or six (6) months within any twelve (12) month period if located in
any other zoning district, unless a limited extension is approved for good
cause by the Administrative Officer. If the container is being used for a
construction purpose, a valid building permit must be issued for an active
construction project on the premises. (Ord. 11-08, 8-16-2011; amd. 2017 Code)
   B.   Dumping And Disposal:
      1.   Except if associated with a permitted use, the use of land within
the City for dumping and disposal of sewage, rubbish, scrap iron, junk,
garbage, ashes, slag industrial waste byproducts, and petroleum contaminated
soil is not permitted in any zoning district of the City. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-13: OUTSIDE STORAGE; RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   The Administrative Officer may order the owner of the property to
cease or modify open storage uses including existing uses, provided it is found
that such use constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or general
welfare.
      2.   Parking and storage of vehicles on private lots, including
recreational and commercial vehicles, shall be subject to the requirements of
sections
12-8-5 and
12-8-6 of this title.
   B.   Residential Uses:
      1.   Exceptions: The storage of materials and equipment for residential
uses (excluding farms) shall be stored within a building or fully screened so
as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
         a.   Clotheslines, pole and wire.
         b.   Patio equipment, including chairs, tables and grills.
         c.   Play and recreational equipment.
         d.   Off-street parking of currently registered and operable passenger
vehicles and trucks owned for personal, non-commercial purposes, not to exceed
a gross vehicle weight of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds.
         e.   Off-street parking of recreational vehicles and commercial
vehicles in accordance with section
12-8-6C and D.
         f.   Rear or side yard exterior storage of firewood for the purpose of
consumption only by the person or persons on whose property it is stored.
   C.   Nonresidential Uses:
      1.   Exterior Storage/Display: Outside storage shall be governed by the
respective zoning district in which the use is located.
      2.   Additional Standards: All outside storage shall be screened so as
not to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets, in accordance
with subsection
12-16-5K of this chapter, except for the following:
         a.   Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with zoning
district requirements.
         b.   Materials and equipment currently being used for construction on
the premises. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-
10, 11-3-2020)
12-16-14: WASTE MATERIAL:
Waste material resulting from or used in industrial or commercial
manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or trimming shall not be
washed into the public storm sewer system, the sanitary sewer system or any
public water body, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Iowa
State Fire Marshal, appropriate State or Federal agencies and the
Administrative Officer. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-15: BULK STORAGE (LIQUID):
All uses associated with the bulk storage of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemical, flammable and similar liquids shall comply with requirements of the
Iowa State Fire Marshal, the Iowa Department of Agriculture and other agencies
with jurisdiction, and shall have documents from those offices stating the use
is in compliance. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-16: RADIATION EMISSION:
All activities that emit radioactivity shall comply with the minimum
requirements of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, as amended. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-16-17: ELECTRICAL EMISSION:
All activities that create electrical emissions shall comply with the minimum
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, as amended. (Ord. 10-
003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-18: TEMPORARY STORAGE OF FILL:
   A.   The temporary storage of fill from building excavations or construction
projects shall be allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Storage shall not exceed the term of the building permit.
      2.   The storage shall be in compliance with requirements and approved by
the City building official and the City Engineer.
      3.   Provisions as approved by the City building official and the City
Engineer shall be made for erosion control.
   B.   The storage of fill beyond that allowed in subsection A of this section
shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter as may be applicable
and allowed but only within those zoning districts of the City where outside
storage is allowed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-16-19: OUTDOOR CUSTOMER DINING:
   A.   Contiguous To Principal Building: The outdoor customer dining area must
be contiguous to the building housing the principal restaurant use; however,
the area may be separated from the building by a pedestrian walkway, with a
width meeting the requirements of this section and applicable regulations. The
outdoor customer dining area may be located on an adjoining property so long as
the contiguity is maintained.
   B.   Encroachment Into Setbacks: The outdoor customer dining area may
encroach into the required setbacks of the principal building.
   C.   Encroachment Into Public Right-Of-Way And Public Property: An outdoor
customer dining area that is located partially or completely upon public right-
of-way or other public property shall be subject to the requirements of title
5, articles C and F of this code.
   D.   Off Street Parking: The outdoor customer dining area cannot displace
required off street parking.
   E.   Roof Cover:
      1.   If the customer dining area is enclosed on three (3) sides by the
same or an adjacent principal building, it cannot have a solid roof cover.
      2.   If the outdoor customer dining area is enclosed by one (1) or two
(2) sides of the building, the area may be roofed by a solid roof cover;
however such a cover is not required.
   F.   Areas Serving Alcohol: If alcohol is being served, the outdoor customer
dining area must be delineated by a short fence, rope or chain barrier to
comply with applicable alcoholic beverage regulations.
   G.   Food Preparation: Food preparation is prohibited in the outdoor
customer dining area.
   H.   Takeout Or Self-Service Food Sales: An outdoor customer dining area
that is associated with a restaurant offering "takeout" or "self-service" food
sales must provide and maintain a trash container with a self-closing lid.
   I.   Capacity: The capacity of the outdoor customer dining area shall not be
considered as part of the occupant load used to calculate the minimum or
maximum number of parking stalls required for the principal restaurant
function. (Ord. 14-1, 1-7-2014; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020)
12-16-20: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS INTO SETBACKS:
In addition to encroachments into setbacks stated in this title for specific
zoning districts, the following shall be permitted in any zoning district:
   A.   An access ramp meeting accessibility requirements and serving a
residential function may encroach into any required setback. A ramp serving any
other function may encroach into a required side or rear setback, but not into
a principal front or secondary front setback.
   B.   A roof overhang or eave may extend up to twenty four inches (24") into
any required setback.
   C.   A stoop, with an area no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet, may
encroach up to six feet (6') into any required setback. (2017 Code; amd. Ord.
20-10, 11-3-2020)
12-16-21: HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
The following may exceed the maximum height for structures as required in each
zoning district:
   A.   Ornamental elements, such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes,
ornamental towers, flag poles and monuments.
   B.   Necessary appurtenances, such as: chimneys and smokestacks, water
tanks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, ventilators, and similar structures;
provided, that any such structures that exceed height limitations be limited to
the minimum necessary height to meet the operational needs of the building.
   C.   Structural extensions appropriate to the building design, such as
cornices and parapets.
   D.   Structures serving public utilities.
   E.   Wind energy conversion systems, subject to the requirements of chapter
17 of this title.
   F.   Communication towers, subject to the requirements of chapter 19 of this
title.
   G.   Buildings (including accessory buildings) in the Z6 District may exceed
height limitations if reviewed and approved as P1 by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. (2017 Code)
12-16-22: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A home occupation is a permitted accessory use to any residential function,
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   A home occupation shall be clearly accessory and incidental to the
principal residential function.
   B.   Only those members of the family residing within the dwelling may be
employed in the home occupation.
   C.   A home occupation shall not have a sign, other than a nameplate not
more than two (2) square feet in area, nor any display that will indicate from
the exterior that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling.
   D.   There shall be no stock in trade nor commodity sold upon the premises.
   E.   No mechanical equipment shall be used except equipment common to
domestic or household purposes.
   F.   The home occupation shall occupy no more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the gross floor area of the residence. (2017 Code)
12-16-23: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In the Z1, Z2, Z3, Z7-5 and Z7-6 districts, on lots where a residential
dwelling is the principal function, an accessory building may only be located
on a lot that also contains a principal building. In addition, the following
requirements shall apply:
   A.   An accessory building may not be erected unless a principal building is
being or has been constructed upon the same lot.
   B.   An existing accessory building may remain on a lot where the principal
building is proposed to be or has been demolished only if the owner has entered
into an agreement with the City that:
      1.   Requires construction of a new principal building to begin no later
than six (6) months after the previous principal building was demolished; and
      2.   Requires that, if construction of the new principal building does
not commence no later than six (6) months as required above, the City may enter
the property and demolish the existing accessory building, with all costs
assessed to the property owner. (Ord. 22-3, 3-1-2022; amd. Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
CHAPTER 17
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
SECTION:
12-17-1: Intent
12-17-2: Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Systems Illegal
12-17-3: General Regulations
12-17-4: Bulk Regulations
12-17-5: Location
12-17-6: Design And Technical Standards
12-17-7: Application And Approval Requirements
12-17-1: INTENT:
In order to balance the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the
necessity to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community,
the City finds that these regulations are necessary in order to ensure that
wind energy conversion systems are appropriately designed, sited and installed.
(Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-17-2: COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS ILLEGAL:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a commercial wind energy conversion
system within Mason City. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
12-17-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install,
alter or locate any wind energy conversion system until all required building
and electrical permits have been issued and all conditions imposed by the Chief
Building Official and (if applicable) the board are met. The owner/operator of
any wind energy conversion system must also obtain any other permits required
by other Federal, State and local agencies/departments prior to erecting the
system.
   B.   Dispersed WECS; Conditional Use: A dispersed wind energy conversion
system shall be allowed only as a conditional accessory use to a permitted
principal or approved conditional principal use. A dispersed WECS shall not be
installed and operated until a conditional use has been approved by the board
and all conditions imposed by the board are met. The conditional use permit may
be revoked at any time the approved system does not comply with the rules set
forth in this chapter and the conditions imposed by the board.
   C.   Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot:
      1.   Dispersed WECS: A maximum of five (5) dispersed wind energy
conversion systems may be placed on any zoning lot, provided the minimum lot
size and setbacks stipulated in section
12-17-4 of this chapter are met.
      2.   Small WECS: Multiple small wind energy conversion systems may be
placed on a lot, but the total rated capacity of all systems shall not exceed
fifty (50) kilowatts. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-17-4: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size:
      1.   Dispersed WECS: A dispersed wind energy system shall not be erected
on a zoning lot smaller than seven (7) acres. If four (4) dispersed wind energy
systems are placed on the lot, the zoning lot shall measure at least ten (10)
acres. If five (5) dispersed wind energy systems are placed on the lot, the
zoning lot must measure at least thirteen (13) acres.
      2.   Small WECS: No minimum lot size shall apply to small wind energy
conversion systems.
   B.   Maximum Tower Height: Tower height shall be measured from the ground to
the top of the tower, excluding the wind turbine generator and blades.
      1.   Dispersed WECS: There shall be no maximum tower height for dispersed
wind energy conversion systems.
      2.   Small WECS: The maximum tower height for small wind energy
conversion systems shall be one hundred feet (100').
   C.   Setbacks:
      1.   Dispersed WECS:
         a.   The minimum distance between a dispersed wind energy conversion
system and any property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the total system height.
         b.   A dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be set back at
least seven hundred fifty feet (750') from any public right-of- way.
         c.   The board may authorize a lesser setback distance if a registered
engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the collapse
of the system will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances.
      2.   Small WECS: There shall be no setback required for a small wind
energy conversion system. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-17-5: LOCATION:
   A.   No part of a wind energy conversion system shall be located within or
over drainage, utility or other established easements, or on or over property
lines.
   B.   A wind energy conversion system shall not be located in any required
principal front or secondary front yard setback.
   C.   A wind energy conversion system shall be located in compliance with the
guidelines of the Federal Aviation Regulations with regard to airport approach
and clearance around VOR (VHF omnirange beacon) and DVOR (Doppler VHF omnirange
beacon) stations.
   D.   A dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be located a minimum of
one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest inhabitable residential structure,
school, hospital, park or place of worship not on property owned or controlled
by the owner/operator of the dispersed wind energy system. This setback can be
reduced by up to fifty percent (50%), at the discretion of the board, upon a
positive determination that: (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
      1.   A noise study, prepared by a qualified professional, demonstrates
that except for intermittent episodes, the dispersed wind energy system shall
not emit noise in excess of the limits established by this Code. The noise
study shall include:
         a.   A description and map of the project's noise producing features,
including the range of noise levels expected, and the basis of the expectation.
         b.   A description and map of the noise sensitive environment,
including any sensitive noise receptors, e.g., residences, hospitals,
libraries, schools, places of worship, parks, areas with outdoor workers and
other facilities where quiet is important or where noise could be a nuisance
within one thousand feet (1,000').
         c.   A survey and report prepared by a qualified engineer that
analyzes the preexisting ambient noise (including seasonal variation) and the
affected sensitive receptors located within one thousand feet (1,000').
         d.   A description and map of the cumulative noise impacts of any
problem areas identified.
         e.   A description of the project's proposed noise control features
and specific measures proposed to mitigate noise impacts for sensitive
receptors as identified above to a level of insignificance. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
      2.   A shadow flicker model demonstrating that shadow flicker shall not
fall on, or in, any existing residential structure regardless of distance from
the WECS. Shadow flicker expected to fall on a roadway or a portion of a
residentially zoned parcel may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed
thirty (30) hours per year and the traffic volumes are less than five hundred
(500) vehicles on the roadway. The shadow flicker model shall:
         a.   Map and describe within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of
the proposed dispersed wind energy system the topography, existing residences
and location of their windows, locations of other structures, wind speeds and
directions, existing vegetation and roadways. The model shall represent the
most probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind
directions and speed;
         b.   Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed
project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, calculate
the total number of hours per year of flicker at all locations;
         c.   Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with
existing or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation
measures, including, but not limited to, a change in siting of the wind energy
conversion system, a change in the operation of the wind energy conversion
system, or grading or landscaping mitigation measures. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010,
eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
12-17-6: DESIGN AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
The following standards are required of all small and dispersed wind energy
conversion systems:
   A.   Color: The wind energy conversion system shall be white or light gray
in color. Other neutral colors may be allowed at the discretion of the board.
The surface shall be nonreflective.
   B.   Lighting: No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to
meet FAA regulations.
   C.   Signs: One (1) sign, limited to four (4) square feet, shall be posted
at the base of the tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a
warning of high voltage, and the phone number of the property owner/operator to
call in case of emergency.
   D.   Climbing Apparatus: All climbing apparatus shall be located at least
twelve feet (12') above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent
climbing within the first twelve feet (12').
   E.   Fence: To limit access to the tower, a fence six feet (6') high with
smooth side to the outside, with no more than one inch (1") gaps and a locking
portal shall be placed around the wind energy conversion system, unless the
system is a small WECS located within a fenced or otherwise secured yard, or is
a small WECS mounted on a rooftop.
   F.   Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational
condition that poses no potential safety hazard.
   G.   Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the wind energy
conversion system shall not result in the net displacement of required parking
as specified in this title.
   H.   Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: A wind energy conversion
system shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on site
consumption, except that when a parcel on which a wind energy conversion system
is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company,
excess electrical power generated by the wind energy conversion system and not
presently needed for on site use may be used by the utility company in
accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
   I.   Clearance Of Blade Aboveground: No portion of a small wind energy
conversion system blade or rotor shall extend within twenty feet (20') of the
ground. No portion of a dispersed wind energy conversion system blade or rotor
shall extend within fifty feet (50') of the ground. No blades or rotors may
extend over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks.
   J.   Automatic Overspeed Controls: All wind energy conversion systems shall
be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade
rotation speed to within the design limits of the wind energy conversion
system.
   K.   Noise: Except during short term events including utility outages and
severe wind events, a wind energy conversion system shall be designed,
installed and operated so that the noise generated does not exceed the maximum
noise levels established by this Code.
   L.   Electromagnetic Interference: All blades shall be constructed of a
nonmetallic substance. A wind energy conversion system shall not be installed
in any location where its proximity with existing fixed broadcast,
retransmission, or reception antenna for radio, television, wireless phone or
other communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with
signal transmission or reception. A wind energy conversion system shall not be
installed in any location along the major axis of an existing microwave
communications link where its operation is likely to produce electromagnetic
interference in the link's operation. If it is determined that the wind energy
conversion system is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall
take the necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference, including
relocation or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the board
(in the case of a dispersed WECS) or the Administrative Officer (in the case of
a small WECS). The board may revoke a conditional use permit granting a
dispersed wind energy conversion system if electromagnetic interference from
the system becomes evident.
   M.   Interconnection: The wind energy conversion system, if interconnected
to a utility system, shall meet the requirements for interconnection and
operation as set forth by the utility and the Iowa Utilities Board.
   N.   Wind Access Easements: The enactment of this chapter does not
constitute the granting of an easement by the City. The owner/operator shall
provide covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient
wind to operate the wind energy conversion system unless adequate accessibility
to the wind is provided by the site.
   O.   Insurance: The owner/operator of a wind energy conversion system must
demonstrate adequate liability insurance.
   P.   Complaint Resolution: The owner/operator of a dispersed wind energy
conversion system shall develop a process to resolve complaints from nearby
residents. The process shall use an independent mediator or arbitrator and
include a time limit for acting on a complaint. The owner/operator shall make
every reasonable effort to resolve any complaint.
   Q.   Removal: If the wind energy conversion system remains nonfunctional or
inoperative for a continuous period of one (1) year, the system shall be deemed
to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner/operator
shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of the system
includes the entire structure including foundations, transmission equipment and
fencing from the property. Nonfunction or lack of operation may be proven by
reports from the interconnected utility. The owner/operator and successors
shall make available to the Administrative Officer all reports to and from the
purchaser of energy from the wind energy conversion system if requested. If
removal of towers and appurtenant facilities is required, the Administrative
Officer shall notify the owner/operator. If the City removes a tower and
appurtenant facilities, it may sell the salvage to defray the cost of removal.
Any remaining cost shall be reimbursed by the owner/operator.
   R.   Right Of Entrance: By the acceptance of a conditional use permit, the
owner/operator of a dispersed WECS grants permission to Mason City to enter the
property to remove the wind energy conversion system pursuant to the terms of
the conditional use permit and to assure compliance with the other conditions
set forth in the permit. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017
Code)
12-17-7: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
Approval or denial of an application for a conditional use permit to allow
construction of a dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be made by the
board as outlined in chapter 5 of this title.
   A.   Application: An application for a conditional use permit for a
dispersed wind energy conversion system shall be made on the forms provided by
the Administrative Officer and shall be accompanied by the following
information:
      1.   A site plan showing the following:
         a.   Complete property dimensions.
         b.   Location and full dimensions of all buildings existing on
property including exterior dimensions, height of buildings and all uses on
property. Location and full dimensions of all buildings within two hundred feet
(200') of the property including exterior dimensions, height and uses on
property.
         c.   Location and dimensions of any other natural or manmade features
within two hundred feet (200') of the property such as trees, ridges, highways,
streets, bridges and underpasses.
         d.   Proposed location of tower including height, setbacks and
distance to all buildings on the property and all buildings within two hundred
feet (200') of the base of the tower.
      2.   A map showing the location of the tower and all property within a
one thousand foot (1,000') radius of the base of the tower, showing lot lines
and the location of all habitable residential structures, schools, hospitals,
parks, or places of worship within that radius, along with the distance to such
functions from the base of the proposed tower, or showing that none of the
above listed functions are located within the indicated radius.
      3.   Drawings, to scale, of the structure, including the tower, base,
wind turbine generator, rotors, footings and guywires, if any, including
dimensions necessary to show compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
The drawings and any necessary calculations shall be certified by a licensed
engineer as meeting the requirements of the Mason City Building Code.
      4.   Line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to
allow for a determination that the manner of installation will meet the Mason
City Electrical Code.
      5.   Certification from a licensed engineer or qualified person that the
rotor and overspeed control have been designed for the proposed use on the
proposed site.
      6.   Evidence that the applicant has notified the utility that the
customer intends to install an interconnected customer owned generator, and
that the generator meets the minimum requirements established by the utility
and the Iowa Utilities Board. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
      7.   Evidence from a qualified individual that the site is feasible for a
wind energy conversion system, or that covenants, easements and other
assurances to document sufficient wind to operate the wind energy conversion
system have been obtained.
      8.   Evidence that the proposed wind energy conversion system will comply
with applicable Federal Aviation Regulations, including any necessary approvals
from the Federal Aviation Administration.
      9.   Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate
liability insurance for the facility.
      10.   A noise study, if applicable.
      11.   A shadow flicker model, if applicable.
      12.   A site specific electromagnetic compatibility analysis assessing
the impact to existing microwave bands with frequencies between nine hundred
megahertz (900 MHz) and forty gigahertz (40 GHz). The report shall include the
following elements:
         a.   An inventory of existing microwave links operating in the nine
hundred megahertz (900 MHz) to forty gigahertz (40 GHz) range within ten (10)
miles of the dispersed wind energy system.
         b.   An obstruction analysis of these links including the Fresnel zone
of the microwave path.
         c.   Any recommended mitigation actions necessary to ensure that the
dispersed wind energy system will not obstruct the first Fresnel zone.
         d.   An inventory of licensed television stations in a one hundred
fifty (150) mile radius of the proposed dispersed wind energy system that are
providing programming services to Mason City.
         e.   A baseline measurement of signal strength and picture quality.
         f.   Recommended means of mitigation, avoidance or remedy to minimize
or eliminate signal degradation or interference.
      13.   Any other evidence or information as required by the Administrative
Officer or board.
      14.   An application fee plus charge for each additional public notice
sign.
   B.   Public Notice: The Administrative Officer shall cause notice to be
published in the time and manner set forth in section
12-5-5 of this title. Notices shall be mailed to the owners of all properties
within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the zoning lot on which the
dispersed WECS would be constructed. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010;
amd. 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 18
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
12-18-1: Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, and Purpose
12-18-2: Definitions
12-18-3: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
12-18-4: Reserved
12-18-5: Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries
12-18-6: Compliance
12-18-7: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-18-8: Interpretation
12-18-9: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-18-10: Severability
12-18-11: Establishment Of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
12-18-12: Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)
12-18-13: Floodway Fringe Overlay District (FF)
12-18-14: General Floodplain Overlay District (FP)
12-18-15: Administration
12-18-16: Duties Of The Zoning Board of Adjustment
12-18-17: Nonconforming Uses
12-18-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa,
as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   B.   Findings of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the City of Mason City are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
      2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
         (a)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
         (b)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
      3.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   C.   Statement of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of Mason City and its
residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and
comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses
described in 12-18-1.B.1 of this chapter with provisions designed to:
      1.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and definitions are unique to this chapter. Unless
specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of the property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one (1) percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the "100-year
flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation floodwaters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor."
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials. "Development" does not include "minor projects" or
"routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities" as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building when all the following criteria are met:
   a.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of 12-
18-13.5.a of this Ordinance, and
   b.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
   c.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1)
foot above the base flood elevation, and
   d.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before November 17, 1980, the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 17, 1980,
the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY-BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use which is wholly
or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site.
For the purpose of this Ordinance factory-built homes include mobile homes,
manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include "recreational vehicles"
which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully
licensed for and ready for highway use.
FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
FIVE HUNDRED (500) YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths
(0.2) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500)
years.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A report published by FEMA for a community issued
along with the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The study contains such
background data as the base flood discharge and water surface elevations that
were used to prepare the FIRM.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one (1) foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area outside the
floodway.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure
HISTORIC STRUCTURE:
Any structure that is:
   a.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
   b.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   c.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   d.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either i) an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of Enclosed Area
below Lowest Floor are met.
MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hospitals and like institutions;
buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or instruments of
great public value; buildings or building complexes containing materials
dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power installations needed
in emergency or other buildings or building complexes similar in nature or use.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and
excavating) valued at less than $500.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (New buildings, factory-built home parks): Those structures or
development for which the start of construction commenced on or after November
17, 1980, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 17,
1980, the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   a.   Built on a single chassis;
   b.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   c.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   d.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS:
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions
during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each
such flood event, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market
value of the structure, excluding the value of the land on which the structure
is located, before the damage occurred
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to
keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of
the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
   a.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles and replacing siding;
   b.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops and similar finish work;
   c.   Basement sealing;
   d.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
   e.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land within a community subject to the
"base flood". This land is identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, A99, and those areas of Shaded Zone X
excluding those Shaded Zone X areas within the Winnebago River floodplain and
those shaded Zone X areas within the Cheslea Creek floodplain extending from
Cross Section J to the confluence with Willow Creek.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and/or other
similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in the
estimated cost of repair. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten (10)-year
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the
average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials
shall be included in the estimated cost of repair.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   a.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure taking place
during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which, equals or exceeds fifty
(50) percent of the market value of the structure either (i) before the "start
of construction" of the first improvement of the structure, or (ii) if the
structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.) The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
   b.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty-five (25) percent or more. All additions constructed after November 7,
1980, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted
by the community, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining
whether the total increase in original floor space would exceed twenty-five
(25) percent.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 12-03,
4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020; Ord. 22-12, 10-4-2022)
12-18-3: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the City of Mason City shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as being
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, and General Floodplain
(Overlay) Districts, as established in section 12-18-11. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012;
amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL FLOODPLAIN ZONING MAP:
The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Cerro Gordo County and Incorporated
Areas, City of Mason City, Panels 19033C0142E, 0144E, 0161E, 0162E, 0163E,
0164E, 0166E, 0167E, 0168E, 0169E, dated December 15th, 2022 and Panels 0188D,
0251D, 0252D, dated June 5th, 2020, which were prepared as part of the Flood
Insurance Study for Cerro Gordo County, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all
explanatory material contained with the Flood Insurance Study are also declared
to be a part of this ordinance. (Ord. 23-01, 1-17-2023)
12-18-5: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling
distances on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is
needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Administrative Officer shall
make the necessary interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear
and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Administrative Officer in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd.
2017 Code; Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-6: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code;
Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-7: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-8: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by state statutes. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-
2020)
12-18-9: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated
Floodplain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Mason City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
there under. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. Ord.
20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-11: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
   A.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW): those areas identified as Floodway on
the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map;
   B.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF): those areas identified as Zone
AE and Shaded Zone X, excluding those Shaded Zone X areas within the Winnebago
River floodplain and within the Cheslea Creek floodplain extending from Cross
Section J to the confluence with Willow Creek, on the Official Flood Plain
Zoning Map but excluding those areas identified as Floodway;
   C.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF): those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, and;
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all forms or functions not allowed as permitted or conditional
forms or functions are prohibited. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code; Ord.
20-02, 6-2-2020; Ord. 22-12, 10-4-2022)
12-18-12: FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (FW):
   A.   Permitted Forms and Functions: All forms and functions permitted in the
underlying Zoning District, as identified in Title 12-8, Table 2 (Form and
Function Table) shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the Floodway District.
   B.   Performance Standards: All Floodway District development shall meet the
following standards.
      1.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
      2.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
         a.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      3.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system.
      4.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if
permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway
Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.
      5.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
      6.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District
within the time available after flood warning.
      7.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      8.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
      9.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 12-03, 4-
3-2012; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-13: FLOODWAY FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (FF):
   A.   Permitted Forms and Functions: All forms and functions permitted in the
underlying Zoning District, as identified in Title 12-8, Table 2 (Form and
Function Table) shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited
by any other ordinance and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
   B.   Performance Standards: Performance Standards: All development must be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following
applicable performance standards. Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no
development may increase the Base Flood Elevations more than one (1) foot. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determination.
      1.   Fill: Fill shall be allowed subject to the following standards:
         a.   No more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lot located
in the Floodway Fringe District shall be filled above the grade depicted on the
City's 2006 Topographic Maps.
         b.   The fill material must be compacted to at least ninety five
percent (95%) of Standard Laboratory Maximum Dry Density (Standard Proctor),
according to ASTB Standard D-698. Fill soils must be fine grained soils of low
permeability such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according to ASTM
Standard D-2487, "Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes". The fill
material must be homogenous and isotropic.
         c.   The fill cannot alter existing drainage patterns on the lot.
         d.   All fill added to the lot since May 1, 2006, shall be added to
the proposed fill in determining whether more than twenty percent (20%) of the
lot has been filled.
         e.   A certification from an accredited soil testing professional,
certifying that the requirements of this subsection are met, shall be submitted
prior to issuance of any permits for further construction on the site.
      2.   All new and substantially improved structures shall:
         a.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
         b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      3.   Residential structures: All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood elevation.
Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no
lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation and extend at such
elevation at least eighteen (18) feet beyond the limits of any structure
erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers or extended
foundations) may be allowed subject to approval by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, where the Board finds that existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces
and hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential structures located in areas that would become isolated due
to flooding of surrounding ground shall be provided with a means of access that
will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this
criterion shall not apply where the Administrator determines there is
sufficient flood warning time for the protection of life and property. When
estimating flood warning time, consideration shall be given to the criteria
listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
      4.   Non-residential structures: All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a
level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in
the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and
uplift forces and other factors associated with the base flood; and that the
structure, below the base flood elevation is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the
certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to North American
Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained by the Administrator.
      5.   All new and substantially improved structures:
         a.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
            (1)   A minimum of two (2) openings, with positioning on at least
two (2) walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage. Where the distance between the floor and ceiling
of the fully enclosed area below the "lowest floor" is five (5) feet or more,
the applicant shall be required to sign and record with the Cerro Gordo County
Recorder a Non-Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area
remains compliant with the criteria outlined in Title 12-18-13.B.5.
         b.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         c.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating,
air conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated, or in the case on non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to a minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood
elevation.
         d.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with plumbing, gas lines, water/gas meters and other similar service utilities
either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed to) a minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or
designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a level.
      6.   Factory-built homes:
         a.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood elevation.
         b.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage systems
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
      7.   Utility and Sanitary Systems:
         a.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located
or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
         b.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well
as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation.
         c.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than three (3) feet above the base
flood elevation.
         d.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      8.   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of three (3) feet above the base flood elevation. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to major
flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or (ii) be
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
      9.   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc.
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood with a minimum of
six (6) feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall approve
structural flood control works.
      10.   Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain
the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In
addition, the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or
relocations.
      11.   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions)
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public
utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with
a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base
flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50)
lots (whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those
areas located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
      12.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses:
         a.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental and accessory to a residential use are exempt from the base flood
elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
            (1)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed six hundred (600) sq. ft. in size. Those
portions of the structure located less than one (1) foot above the BFE must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
            (2)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
            (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
            (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
            (5)   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
            (6)   The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section12-18-13 (B) 5a of this chapter.
         b.   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
      13.   Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section12-18-13.B.6 of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes when the following criteria are satisfied.
            (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for
less than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days; and
            (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         b.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements
of 12-18-13.B.6 of this chapter regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-
built homes.
      14.   Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the
streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due
to channel degradation and meandering.
      15.   Maximum Damage Potential Development: All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the elevation of the 500-
year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2% annual
chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2% chance flood
elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determinations. (Ord. 12-03,
4-3-2012; amd. Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020; Ord. 22-12, 10-4-2022)
12-18-14: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FP):
   A.   Permitted Forms and Functions:
      1.   All forms and functions permitted in the underlying Zoning District,
as identified in Title 12-8, Table 2 (Form and Function Table) shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and
provided they meet the applicable performance standards of the General
Floodplain District.
      2.   Any development which involve placement of structures, factory-built
homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine (i) whether the land involved is either
wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and (ii) the base flood
elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the
determination.
      3.   Review by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources is not required
for the proposed construction of new or replacement bridges or culverts where:
         a.   The bridge or culvert is located on a stream that drains less
than two (2) square miles, and
         b.   The bridge or culvert is not associated with a channel
modification that constitutes a channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2),
Iowa Administrative Code.
   B.   Performance Standards:
      1.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
as determined by the Department of Natural Resources, shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (section
12-18-12).
      2.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources, shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
(section
12-18-13). (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 code, Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-15: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Local Official:
      1.   The Administrative Officer is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this Ordinance and will herein be referred to as
the Administrator.
      2.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         a.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         b.   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, state and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for floodplain construction.
         c.   Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
         d.   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         e.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
         f.   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
         g.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community's boundaries.
         h.   Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this ordinance and advise the Mason City
Planning and Zoning Commission of potential conflict.
         i.   Maintain the accuracy of the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when;
         (1)   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District
results in any of the following:
            a)   An increase in the Base Flood Elevations, or
            b)   Alteration to the floodway boundary
         (2)   Development place in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
         (3)   Development relocates or alters the channel.
      Within 6 months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
         j.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
         k.   Forward all requests for Variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
   B.   Floodplain Development Permit:
      1.   Permit Required: A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrative Officer shall be secured prior to any floodplain development
(any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built
homes.
      2.   Application for Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         a.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         b.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         c.   Location and dimensions of all buildings and building additions.
         d.   Indication of the form or function for which the proposed work is
intended.
         e.   Elevation of the base flood.
         f.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
         g.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
         h.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      3.   Action on Permit Application: The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for variances except as directed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
      4.   Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans:
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure. (Ord. 12-03, 4-3-2012; amd. 2017 Code,
Ord. 20-02, 6-2-2020)
12-18-16: DUTIES OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
   A.   Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment: The Mason City Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as authorized by Title 2-3 of the Municipal Code, shall
hear and decide (i) appeals and (ii) requests for variances to the provisions
of this ordinance, and shall take any other action which is required of the
Board.
   B.   Appeals: Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason
for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to
the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
   C.   Variance: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in
specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Applications for a Variance shall follow the review process and
approval standards in section 12-5-4 and must also meet the following
applicable standards.
      1.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of the variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      3.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         a,   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
         b.   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
      5.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   D.   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment: In
passing upon applications for Variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      2.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      5.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
      6.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      7.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      12.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
      13.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   E   Conditions Attached to Variances: Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      2.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      5.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area. (Ord. 20-02, 6-
2-2020)
12-18-17: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises that was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      3.   If any nonconforming use or structure is damaged by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred,
unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   If any nonconforming structure that has been designated as a
repetitive loss structure by the federal emergency management agency or the
national flood insurance program is damaged by any means, including flood, it
shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, any use that has
been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use. (Ord. 21-12, 10-6-2021)
CHAPTER 19
COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
12-19-1: Existing Antennas And Towers
12-19-2: General Requirements
12-19-3: Design Requirements For New Towers
12-19-4: New Towers And Antennas; Review Process
12-19-5: Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portions Of Towers
12-19-6: Telecommunications Operations
12-19-1: EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
   A.   Nonconforming Antennas And Towers: Antennas and towers in existence as
of July 1, 2010, that do not conform to or comply with this chapter, are
subject to the requirements of chapter 6 of this title. In addition, if a
nonconforming tower is hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or
cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use,
location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining required permits; provided,
however, that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical
dimensions, and location would exceed the cost of a new tower of like kind and
quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full
compliance with this chapter.
   B.   Substantial Changes: Any modification to wireless telecommunication
equipment associated with an existing tower or an existing support structure
shall be approved, unless the modification is a substantial change. A
"substantial change" shall mean any one (1) or more of the following:
      1.   Increase in the height of an existing tower, other than a tower in
the public right-of-way, by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one
(1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna,
not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater.
      2.   Increase in the height of existing support structures by more than
ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater.
      3.   Addition of an appurtenance to the body of the tower, other than a
tower in the public right-of-way, that would protrude from the edge of the
tower more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width of the tower
structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.
      4.   Addition of an appurtenance to an existing support structure that
would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet (6').
      5.   Installation of more than the standard number of new equipment
cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets.
      6.   Installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if no
preexisting ground cabinets are associated with the existing support structure
or the existing tower.
      7.   Installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%)
larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated
with an existing support structure or an existing tower.
      8.   Excavation, construction or deployment of wireless telecommunication
towers or equipment outside the current site.
      9.   Removal or reduction of any element of the existing support
structure designed or intended to camouflage or conceal the tower or equipment.
      10.   Noncompliance with conditions associated with the siting approval
of the construction or modification of the tower or the existing support
structure, unless the change does not exceed the thresholds identified in this
subsection. (2017 Code)
12-19-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Antennas Mounted To Existing Towers Or Existing Support Structures: An
antenna may be mounted to an existing tower or may be mounted on an existing
support structure; however, if the installation of the equipment results in a
"substantial change" as outlined in subsection
12-19-1B of this chapter, it shall be considered a new tower and shall be
subject to the review process for a new tower as outlined below.
   B.   Zoning District Requirements:
      1.   Z2 And Z3 Zoning Districts:
         a.   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas, television antennas,
broadcast radio antennas, citizen band radio antennas, and shortwave listening
antennas, etc., and conforming to all applicable provisions of this chapter and
the requirements of the zoning district shall be allowed only in the rear yard
and/or side yard.
         b.   Freestanding towers or existing support structures supporting
wireless telecommunication antennas and conforming to all applicable provisions
of this chapter shall be allowed only in the following sites in the Z2 and Z3
Districts:
            (1)   Church sites, when mounted on existing support structure and
camouflaged as a steeple or bell tower;
            (2)   Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and
            (3)   Government, school, utility, and hospital sites.
      2.   Z5 District: New towers are not permitted within the Z5 Central
Business District. Antennas in the Z5 District may be located on existing
support structures.
      3.   Z7 Specific Use District: A freestanding tower is permitted in the
Z7-2 (NIACC) and Z7-4 (County Fairgrounds) districts. In the Z7-1 (Mercy
Medical Center) and Z7-3 (Mobile Home Park) districts, antennas may only be
mounted to existing support structures; however, where at least thirty five
percent (35%) of contiguous property under the same ownership in the Z7-1 or
Z7-3 District is maintained in open space, a freestanding tower may be erected,
provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met. In the Z7-
5 District (Conservation Subdivision), only those towers permitted in the Z2
and Z3 districts, as noted in Subsection B1 of this section, may be erected.
      4.   All Other Districts: A new tower may be erected on any lot within
the Z1 Agricultural District, Z4 Multi-Use District or Z6 Industrial District,
except upon a lot where the principal function is residential.
   C.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of any tower or tower and antenna(s)
in combination shall be subject to the setback and fall zone requirements
outlined below; however, in no case shall any tower or tower/antenna
combination exceed the following:
      1.   Z1, Z6, Z7-2 and Z7-4 Districts: Three hundred feet (300').
      2.   Z2, Z3 Z7-1, Z7-3, And Z7-5 Districts: One hundred feet (100');
however, on land in the Z7-1 district where at least thirty-five percent (35%)
of contiguous property under the same ownership is maintained in open space, a
tower may have a maximum height of three hundred feet (300').
      3.   Z4 District: Two hundred feet (200').
   D.   Setback And Fall Zone Requirements:
      1.   The setback and fall shall be measured between the base of the tower
located nearest the property line and the actual property line.
      2.   A tower or antenna in the Z1, Z2, Z3, Z7-3, or Z7-5 districts shall
not encroach into any easement or required yard setback in those districts as
specified by this title.
      3.   A tower or antenna in the Z4, Z5, Z6, Z7-1, Z7-2 or Z7-4 Districts
shall not encroach upon any easements. The minimum distance to the nearest
property line shall be equal to the height of the tower.
      4.   In any zoning district, the minimum fall zone distance from the base
of the tower to the nearest point of the nearest habitable building shall be
one and one-half (1.5) times the height of the tower.
      5.   A tower shall not be located within the first tier of the lot;
however, on sites adjacent to public rights-of-way on three (3) or more sides,
a tower may be placed within a secondary front yard abutting a public right-of-
way if the setbacks are met from all other property lines as specified by this
title.
      6.   The required setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied at the discretion of the Administrative Officer to allow
the integration of an antenna or tower into an existing or proposed structure
such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device or similar
structure.
      7.   A lesser setback or fall zone distance may be permitted if a
registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in writing that the
collapse of the tower will occur within a lesser distance under all foreseeable
circumstances; but in no case shall the setback or fall zone be less than one-
half (1/2) the height of the tower. (2017 Code; amd. Ord. 20-10, 11-3-2020)
12-19-3: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW TOWERS:
   A.   Type: A tower shall be a monopole or other structure that is stabilized
at the base. Guy wires may not be used.
   B.   Colors: Towers shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment to the maximum extent possible through the use of color, except in
instances where the color is dictated by Federal or State authorities such as
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
   C.   Tower Lighting: Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and
shall not display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required
by the Federal Aviation Administration or other Federal or State authority for
a particular tower, or if required by the Administrative Officer for security
or safety reasons. This provision shall not preclude the placement of an
antenna on an existing or proposed lighting standard.
   D.   Signs And Advertising: The use of any portion of a tower for signs
other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. Upon
completion of tower site construction, a placard containing the name, address,
and telephone number of the principal owner or operator of the tower structure
is required. This placard shall be affixed in a location so that it is clearly
visible at the perimeter of the site. Said placard shall not exceed four (4)
square feet in area. The pertinent ownership information on the placard shall
be kept current and updated as needed. No additional signage shall be allowed
other than those required by the FCC.
   E.   Accessory Utility Buildings: All utility buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the
surrounding environment and shall meet such setback requirements as are
compatible with the actual placement of the tower. Ground mounted equipment
shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of
nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural
character of the surrounding neighborhood. Acceptance of design from a
registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa shall be left to the
discretion of the Administrative Officer.
   F.   Collocation On New Towers: New towers shall be designed to support at
least three (3) wireless telecommunications providers, including the initial
provider (3 total). (2017 Code)
12-19-4: NEW TOWERS AND ANTENNAS; REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   New Antennas On Existing Towers And Existing Support Structures: A new
antenna to be collocated on an existing tower or mounted on an existing support
structure (with or without collocation) shall be reviewed administratively for
compliance with this chapter by the Development Services Department.
      1.   A request for an antenna that is to be collocated on an existing
tower or an existing support structure shall be reviewed and a decision
rendered in no less than ninety (90) days from the date the application is
determined to be complete.
      2.   A request for a new antenna that is the first or only antenna to be
mounted on an existing support structure shall be reviewed and a decision
rendered no less than one hundred fifty (150) days from the date the
application is determined to be complete.
      3.   Any installation that results in a "substantial change" as outlined
in subsection
12-19-1B of this chapter shall be considered a new tower and shall be reviewed
according to the process outlined for a new tower.
   B.   New Towers: All new freestanding towers or any antenna installation
that meets the requirements for a "substantial change" as outlined in
subsection
12-19-1B of this chapter shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee
as outlined in chapter 7 of this title. A decision on a new tower shall be
rendered in no less than one hundred fifty (150) days from the date the
application is determined to be complete.
   C.   Required Submittals For New Towers: In addition to the required
submittals for a concept plan or major site plan as outlined in chapter 7 of
this title, a request for a new tower shall include the following:
      1.   A report from a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa
indicating the following:
         a.   Description of the tower/antenna height and design including a
cross section and elevation;
         b.   Documentation of the approximate height above grade for potential
mounting positions for the initial and the collocated antennas (minimum of 3
total) and the approximate minimum separation distance between antennas; and
         c.   Description of the tower's general capacity including the number
and type of antennas that can be accommodated on the tower (minimum of 3).
      2.   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his/her successors
to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use, including, without
limitation, reasonable rental rates for such shared use.
      3.   Documentation showing that the applicant has completed a survey of
existing collocation opportunities within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed
new tower location and, if collocation opportunities exist, a statement
regarding the reason for choosing the proposed location instead of collocation.
The explanation shall include a sworn statement from an individual who has
responsibility over placement of the tower, attesting that one (1) or more of
the following exists:
         a.   Collocation within the half-mile radius would not result in the
same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity.
         b.   Collocation within the half-mile radius is technically
infeasible.
         c.   Collocation within the half-mile radius is economically
burdensome to the applicant.
      4.   The tower owner, if he/she is not the wireless telecommunication
provider, shall provide proof of a lease agreement with a wireless
telecommunication provider for the location of at least one (1) antenna on the
proposed structure.
   D.   Approval: Construction of an approved new antenna or new tower must
commence within two (2) years of the date of approval, and shall be diligently
pursued until completion. Failure to meet this requirement voids the approval
and any associated permits.
   E.   Denial: If an application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be
provided to the applicant in writing, along with minutes of meetings and other
documents that support the denial. (2017 Code)
12-19-5: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
The operator/owner of a tower shall provide the City with a copy of the notice
to the FCC of intent to cease operations. All abandoned or unused towers and
associated aboveground facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of
the cessation of operations of an antenna facility at the site unless the
Administrative Officer approves a time extension. In the event that a tower is
not removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at a site,
the City may remove the tower and associated facilities and the costs of
removal assessed against the property. (2017 Code)
12-19-6: TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS:
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public
safety telecommunications or private telecommunications, including, without
limitation: radio, television, and personal communications. Any violation shall
be enforced in accordance with rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). (2017 Code)
CHAPTER 20
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-20-1: Introduction
12-20-2: Definitions
12-20-3: Sign Approval And Permits
12-20-4: Prohibited Signs
12-20-5: Signs Allowed But Not Requiring A Zoning Permit
12-20-6: Performance Requirements For All Signs Requiring A Zoning Permit
12-20-7: On Premises Campus Complex Signs
12-20-8: On Premises Sign Requirements
12-20-9: Off Premises Signs
12-20-10: Nonconforming And Abandoned Signs And Sign Structures
12-20-11: Public Nuisance Declared
12-20-1: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote, preserve and
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, to alleviate the
congestion of public streets, to provide for the promotion of traffic safety,
to conserve the value of buildings, and to enhance and protect the appearance
of the community by providing reasonable regulations and standards relating to
the type, placement and physical dimensions of signs. This chapter recognizes
and subscribes to the right of businesses to advertise and the right of
advertising companies to pursue their business, subject to reasonable
regulations as adopted in this chapter.
   B.   Scope: This chapter shall apply to all on premises signs and off
premises signs within the City. All signs erected, repaired, altered, relocated
or maintained within the City shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms and definitions are unique to this chapter. Other terms not
included may be found in the general definitions of this title, or in any
standard dictionary or may be inferred by context.
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which, for more than ninety (90) days, does not display
any advertisement, copy or message or any sign which identifies or advertises a
business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, which is no longer
provided or available at the indicated location or for which no legal owner can
be found.
ABANDONED SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign support, frame, pole or structure which, for
more than ninety (90) days, does not support a sign.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign that uses movement or change of light to depict action or
to create a special effect or scene. This definition does not include message
center or time and temperature signs.
ATTACHED SIGN: A sign attached to any building or habitable structure. Types of
attached signs include wall, window, projecting and blade signs.
BALLOON SIGN: A transient sign consisting of graphics or any three-dimensional
figure erected for the purposes of advertising, that is inflated with or
supported by air or other gas.
BANNER SIGN: A transient sign made of fabric or other nonrigid materials with
no enclosing framework. This definition includes "feather" signs or similar
banner signs which are supported on fewer than three (3) sides with a rigid
post or similar support.
BLADE SIGN: A small attached sign mounted perpendicularly to a building and
projecting no more than fifteen inches (15") from the wall, intended to direct
pedestrian traffic to specific locations or businesses.
CAMPUS COMPLEX: An agglomeration of industrial, commercial, or professional
office parcels that may, because of ownership, proximity of location or
arrangement of buildings, be considered a single premises by the Administrative
Officer for the purpose of allowing a multi-tenant sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field,
such as a reader board with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels.
CIVIC BANNERS: A temporary sign erected or permitted by a government agency on
rights-of-way or other City property.
CLEARANCE (Of A Sign): The vertical distance between the prevailing, natural
surface grade and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and
embellishments, extending over that grade.
DETACHED SIGN: A sign permanently affixed to the ground and otherwise not
attached to a building or structure. It may be supported by poles, uprights,
braces, or placed on a base mounted directly to the ground. Detached signs
include monument signs and pole signs.
DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN: An on premises sign giving directions,
instructions, or facility information, e.g., parking or exit and entrance
signs, and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no other
advertising copy.
DOUBLE HEAD SIGN: An off premises sign that contains two (2) sign faces when
viewed head on. A double head sign may be a side by side or a stacked ("double
decker") sign.
EXPRESSWAY SIGN: A detached on-premises sign structure with one (1) or more
signs, advertising a business or businesses on the same parcel, with a frontage
on the US Highway 18 - IA Highway 27 expressway and placed to be visible from
that expressway.
FACADE, OTHER: The exterior walls of a building other than the primary facade
or secondary facade.
FACADE, PRIMARY: A single exterior wall of a building that faces the front line
of the lot or the exterior wall of a building that contains the primary
entrance to the building. The designation of a primary facade shall be at the
discretion of the owner.
FACADE, SECONDARY: A single exterior wall of a building other than the primary
facade. The designation of a secondary facade shall be at the discretion of the
owner.
FACE (Of A Sign): The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
FESTOONS: A string or series of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or
similar devices.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign that contains an
intermittent flashing light source. This does not include message center or
time/temperature signs.
FLIER SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, utility pole, fence,
etc.
HEIGHT (Of A Sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of
the sign or sign structure to the prevailing natural surface grade beneath the
sign.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign erected without a permit required by this chapter, or in
violation of any of the limitations, prohibitions or requirements of this
chapter.
ILLEGAL SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign structure erected without a permit required by
this chapter, or in violation of any of the limitations, prohibitions or
requirements of this chapter.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A small sign, emblem or decal informing the public of
information (such as hours of operation, credit cards accepted, etc.), goods,
facilities or services available on the premises.
LOT WIDTH: The average width of a zoning lot measured parallel to the front lot
line.
MAINTENANCE: The cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts
of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic size, design, or structure
of the sign.
MESSAGE CENTER: All or a portion of an attached or detached sign consisting of
an electronically or computer controlled reader board where different copy
changes are shown on a lamp bank or other electronic displays. This definition
includes a sign or portion of a sign that displays only current time and
temperature.
MONUMENT SIGN: A detached sign where the base of the sign is on the ground or a
maximum of no more than twelve inches (12") above the adjacent grade or with no
more than twelve inches (12") of clearance from the ground.
MULTI-TENANT SIGN: A sign advertising a shopping mall, shopping center, strip
mall or campus complex depicting multiple tenants and/or the name of the
shopping center.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that was erected legally but does not comply with
subsequently enacted sign regulations and restrictions.
NONCONFORMING SIGN STRUCTURE: A sign structure that was erected legally but
does not comply with subsequently enacted sign regulations and restrictions.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession,
product, service, activity or entertainment that is not conducted, sold or
offered on the premises upon which the sign is located. An off premises sign
shall be considered a principal use in the zoning districts in which it is
allowed.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign that directs attention to a business, profession,
product, service, or activity conducted, sold or offered on the same premises
where the sign is located. An on premises sign shall be considered an accessory
use in the zoning districts in which it is allowed.
POLE SIGN: A detached sign that is affixed, attached or erected on a pole that
is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign mounted on a sign structure which, by its construction or
nature, may be moved from one location to another, and the principal intended
use of the sign structure is advertising. The removal of the wheels or
undercarriage does not place the sign in another category. Portable signs
mounted on trailers, vehicles or connected to vehicles with hitch mechanisms
are also considered to be portable signs. See examples. Portable signs do not
include vehicle signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/90eed1847c30cd9c4b474b06544a229973331d3a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2969.jpg]
POSTER PANEL SIGN: A sign placed outside of a business, usually on the adjacent
sidewalk, that is oriented to pedestrians and provides information about the
business (e.g., products and services offered, daily specials, etc.) and is not
permanently attached to the ground or structure.
PREMISES: An individual zoning lot, parcel or campus complex, together with the
buildings and structures thereon.
PROJECTING SIGN: An attached sign supported by uprights, braces, or other
devices or otherwise attached to a building or structure and projecting
perpendicular to the face of the building.
PUBLIC SIGN: A. A temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the
City, County, State or Federal government for traffic control or direction.
   B.   A temporary or permanent sign erected for the designation of or
direction to any school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property
or facility.
ROOF SIGN: An attached sign erected, constructed or maintained wholly or
partially upon or over the roofline of any building with the principal
structural support on the roof or building structure.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher,
excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.
SIGN: An object, device, graphic design or part thereof, visible outdoors, that
is used to advertise, announce, identify, declare, demonstrate, display,
instruct, direct or attract attention by any means including words, letters,
figures, designs, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination, illuminated neon
tubing, and projecting images.
SIGN AREA: A. Area of signs not requiring a permit, detached on premises signs,
attached on premises signs with frames, and off premises signs:
      1.   For a sign composed of one (1) face: The sign area is the area
enclosed by one (1) continuous line, connecting the extreme points or edges of
the sign. The area shall be determined using the largest sign area or
silhouette, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights.
      2.   For a sign composed of more than one (1) face: The sign area is the
areas enclosed by a continuous line connecting the extreme points or edges of
each face and shall be totaled. The area shall be determined using the total
sign area or silhouette, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights.
      3.   For a sign composed of two (2) faces constructed back to back, or at
less than a forty five degree (45°) angle to each other: The sign area shall be
determined using the sign area or silhouette of the largest face, but excluding
the necessary supports or uprights.
      4.   For a sign composed of two (2) faces constructed at more than a
forty five degree (45°) angle to each other: The sign area shall be determined
using the total area of all faces, but excluding the necessary supports or
uprights.
   B.   Area of attached on premises signs without frames, or attached on
premises signs that are inscribed, painted or otherwise directly affixed to the
wall surface: The sign area is the area including all lettering, wording, and
accompanying design or symbols together with any background.
   C.   Area of a sign composed of individual letters or figures: The area of
the smallest rectangle or other geometric shape that encompasses all the
letters or symbols.
SIGN SEPARATION: The horizontal distance between sign faces when measured along
the centerline of a public right-of-way from a point on the centerline of the
public right-of-way at a right angle to the center of one (1) sign face to a
point on the centerline of the same public right-of-way at a right angle to the
center of another sign face.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing, or framework of any structure
exhibiting a sign.
SINGLE HEAD SIGN: An off premises sign that contains a single sign face when
viewed head on.
STREET FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of any one (1) premises
abutting the public right-of-way.
SWINGING SIGN: A sign installed on an arm, mast or spar that is by design
intended to allow the sign to swing due to wind action or other force.
TRANSIENT SIGN: A sign, banner, pennant, placard, valance or advertising
display or sign constructed of light fabric, plastic, cardboard, wallboard,
plywood, paper or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time, e.g., garage sale, rummage sale, real
estate, open house, product sign, vendor sign and similar types of signs, but
not including political signs advocating for a candidate, issue, or point of
view.
VEHICLE SIGN: A sign other than a portable sign attached to a vehicle, that
usually, but not always, identifies the business name, service or other
advertising or identifying information pertaining to the vehicle or the service
provided by the vehicle on which the sign is attached, other than the license
plate, vehicle brand name, or model name.
WALL SIGN: An attached sign that is mounted, inscribed or painted directly on a
wall of any building or structure.
WINDOW SIGN: A nontemporary, on premises attached sign installed in, on, or
behind a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-
2014; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 21-14, 12-7-2021; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-20-3: SIGN APPROVAL AND PERMITS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Zoning Permit: Except as specifically exempted in this chapter, no
sign may be erected, painted or otherwise installed or inscribed on a lot or
onto a building unless a zoning permit has been issued that ensures that the
proposed sign is in compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Sign Permit: Any sign requiring a permit in accordance with title
10, chapter 2, article G of this Code shall not be erected, painted or
otherwise installed or inscribed on a lot or onto a building unless a sign
permit has been issued that ensures that the proposed sign is in compliance
with the Building Code adopted under title 10 of this Code.
   B.   Zoning Review And Approval Required: Except for signs exempt from
zoning permits according to this chapter, a zoning permit to erect, alter or
relocate any sign subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be issued
only after zoning review and approval. Review and approval shall be required
for each sign or signs regulated by this chapter, whether erected concurrently
or not.
      1.   Off premises signs shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee, according to the process outlined in chapter 7 of this title.
      2.   All other signs subject to zoning permits under this chapter shall
be reviewed and approved by the Administrative Officer before issuance of a
zoning permit.
   C.   Normal Maintenance Or Repair: These regulations shall not be construed
to require zoning review and approval or a zoning permit for a change of copy
on a sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or
repair of a sign or sign structure for which zoning approval has previously
been granted; provided, that the sign or sign structure is not modified in any
way. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The signs listed in table 1 of this section are expressly prohibited in all
zoning districts:
   TABLE 1
   PROHIBITED SIGNS
Signs prohibited in all zone districts:
Abandoned and/or obsolete signs.
Abandoned and/or obsolete sign structures.
Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter.
Any sign that is not a public sign that is located in, on, under or over a
public right-of-way, except as allowed in subsection
12-20-6D of this chapter and title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
Any sign that violates or advertises activities that violate City, State or
Federal law.
Flashing signs, other than allowed message centers.
Flier signs.
Off premises advertising signs mounted to the wall or roof of a building.
Signs bearing or containing statements, words or pictures that describe or
depict specified anatomical areas or specific sexual activities, as defined in
title 13 of this Code.
Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or governmental signs or
signals.
Swinging signs.
Vehicle signs, when the vehicle to which the sign is attached is: 1) not
located on a property where the vehicle is providing services for which the
vehicle is designed; 2) not located on the business property from which the
vehicle’s services are provided or dispatched; or 3) not located on the
property of the vehicle’s owner, lessee, or authorized operator. (Ord. 14-2, 2-
4-2014; amd. Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-20-5: SIGNS ALLOWED BUT NOT REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT:
   A.   General regulations for signs not requiring a zoning permit:
      1.   Signs shall not be illuminated unless otherwise provided in this
chapter.
      2.   Signs shall not be located in, on, under or over any public right-
of-way except as allowed in title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code.
      3.   The sign area shall not be applied to the total sign area allowed by
the zoning district, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
      4.   Signs are not subject to the setback requirement unless specifically
stated in this chapter.
      5.   Signs shall not be placed in the traffic visibility zone, per
section
12-16-6 of this title.
      6.   Signs must be constructed of a rigid material, or erected tightly so
as to appear of a rigid material, and securely mounted without the use of
guywires, ropes, strings, or cords.
   B.   The signs listed in table 2 of this section are allowed and are
exempted from the zoning permit requirements: (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
      TABLE 2
      SIGNS ALLOWED BUT NOT REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT
  Z1, Z2, Z3, Z7-3, Z7-5- 6(1) Z4, Z5, Z6, Z7-1, Z7-2, Z7-4 - 6(1)
                    Z1, Z2, Z3, Z7-3,  Z4, Z5, Z6, Z7-1, Z7-2, Z7-4 - 6(1)
                    Z7-5- 6(1)
Transient signs:                       
                    Per individual     Lots with <200' of street frontage:
  Area (maximum sq. sign: 6 sq. ft.    Cumulative area of all signs: 16 sq. ft.
  ft.)              Cumulative area of Lots with 200' of street frontage:
                    all signs: 12 sq.  Cumulative area of all signs: 32 sq. ft.
                    ft.
 Height (maximum   6'                 8'
  ft.)
                    May be placed
                    within the
                    required setbacks, May be placed within the required
 Location          but not within the setbacks, but not within the traffic
                    traffic visibility visibility zone (see section
                    zone (see section  12-16-6 of this title)
                    12-16-6 of this
                    title)
                    Shall be removed
                    within 10 days
                    after the
 Time limits       precipitating      No limitation
                    project, event,
                    sale, or promotion
                    is concluded
Balloons, festoons
and other                              
promotional
devices:
                    No more than 10
 Time limits       days per calendar  No more than 30 days per calendar year
                    year
 Restrictions      On single-family and two-family properties, may be used for
                    noncommercial purposes only
Others (allowed in all zone districts):
 Civic banners
 Directional/informational signs. 1 per street access, not to exceed 4 sq. ft.
  in area per sign. May be illuminated but may not flash
 Holiday decorations
 Home occupations sign. 1 attached sign per lot, advertising an allowed home
  occupation. Maximum area = 2 sq. ft. May not be illuminated
 Incidental signs
 Public signs. Signs may be illuminated but may not flash; however, time/
  temperature and message centers are allowed
 Signs mounted inside a building, that are not visible from the exterior of
  the building
 Temporary window signs. May not be displayed for more than 30 consecutive
  days
                       (1)   Applies only to residential forms and functions in
 Notes to Table 2: the Z7-6 District
                       (2)   Applies only to mixed-use and non-residential
                    forms and functions in the Z7-6 District
 
 
   (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-20-6: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS REQUIRING A ZONING PERMIT:
   A.   General Regulations:
      1.   Signs shall not be placed in a drainageway, ingress/egress easement,
utility easement or other easement of record.
      2.   Signs shall not be located in, on, under or over any public right-
of-way except as allowed in subsection D of this section and in title 5,
chapter 1, article C of this Code.
      3.   Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to
obstruct any fire escape, required exitway, window or door opening used as a
means of egress or to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to another
part thereof or access thereto.
      4.   Signs shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that a sign may be
erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the
provisions of the Building or Fire Prevention Codes.
      5.   Signs shall not be suspended by chains, hooks or cables or other
devices that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action or other force.
Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that could cause wear
on supporting members or connections.
      6.   Signs shall not have moving, rotating or animated parts.
      7.   Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design.
Angle irons, chains, or wires used for supports or braces shall be hidden from
public view to the extent technically feasible.
      8.   Detached signs shall be self-supporting structures and be
permanently attached to sufficient foundations as required by the City Building
Code. Supporting posts shall be painted in a neutral color.
      9.   An attached sign must derive all of its structural support from the
building to which it is attached.
      10.   A mural painted directly upon a building wall shall not be
considered a sign and therefore not subject to regulation, unless the artwork
or graphics contain letters, logos or other representations that constitute
advertising. Any portion of a mural that constitutes advertising shall be
subject to the requirements for wall signs as outlined in section
12-20-8, table 3 of this chapter.
      11.   After any sign that requires a zoning permit is constructed,
affixed or erected, the sign owner or sign contractor performing the work or
service shall notify the Administrative Officer for final inspection of the
sign.
      12.   Signs shall not be placed in the traffic visibility zone, per
section
12-16-6 of this title.
   B.   Electrical And Illumination Requirements:
      1.   Electrical service to on premises and off premises signs shall be
concealed to the greatest extent feasible.
      2.   External lighting used in conjunction with or the lighting of any
sign, shall be directed only upon the sign to be illuminated. Any illumination
of a sign, whether internal or external, shall not be directed onto adjoining
property or constitute a hazard to vehicles upon a street or highway.
      3.   Any sign that is allowed to be illuminated shall not have any
flashing elements, unless a message center is allowed.
      4.   In the Z2 and Z3 Zone Districts, only signs for multiple- family
developments and allowed nonresidential uses may be illuminated.
   C.   Maintenance Standards:
      1.   Every sign, including signs for which zoning permits are not
required, shall be maintained in a safe, representable and good structural and
aesthetic condition at all times, including replacing of defective parts and
lettering, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of
the sign.
      2.   The ground area around any detached sign shall be kept free and
clean of weeds, trash and other debris. Landscaping at the base of the sign, if
required, shall be maintained in a healthy and hardy condition.
   D.   Encroachment Standards:
      1.   Wall signs attached parallel to the face of a building and blade
signs may encroach into an adjacent right-of-way up to fifteen inches (15").
      2.   Projecting signs, canopy and awning signs that encroach into the
public right-of-way are allowed after review and approval by the City Council
per title 5, chapter 1, article C of this Code and after confirmation that the
signs meet the requirements of this section.
      3.   A poster panel sign on a public sidewalk or plaza shall not require
an encroachment permit from the City Council; provided, that the requirements
of subsection E3 of this section are met.
      4.   Detached signs shall not be allowed to encroach into any right-of-
way.
   E.   Specific Sign Requirements:
      1.   Projecting Signs:
         a.   A projecting sign must be constructed to provide a minimum height
above grade at least ten feet (10') above any pedestrianway and fourteen feet
(14') above any vehicularway.
         b.   A projecting sign may not project more than four feet (4') from
the face of the building.
      2.   Blade Signs:
         a.   Extension: A blade sign shall not extend more than fifteen inches
(15") from the face of the wall.
         b.   Maximum Area: Three (3) square feet. The area of the blade sign
shall be counted toward the cumulative maximum area of allowed attached signs.
         c.   Minimum Clearance From Sidewalk: Seven feet (7').
         d.   Number Of Signs Permitted: One (1) blade sign shall be permitted
for each business accessed from a building frontage. A blade sign shall be
located near the business entrance. A business fronting on two (2) or more
streets, or streets and a parking lot in combination, may have one (1) blade
sign per frontage, but in no case may a business have more than two (2) blade
signs.
         e.   Faces; Thickness: Blade signs shall have no more than two (2)
faces, placed back to back to each other in the same plane, and shall be no
more than three inches (3") thick.
         f.   Materials: Blade signs shall be constructed of rigid and
permanent materials, such as wood, metal, or rigid polymer.
         g.   Illumination: A blade sign may be illuminated only by an internal
light source or by a low intensity light source that is not directly visible
from the ground and is directed only upon the sign, or indirectly illuminated
by a shielded, wall mounted building light or other ambient light source.
      3.   Poster Panel Signs:
         a.   The sign shall be located at least two feet (2') from an adjacent
curb and shall not impede passage of pedestrians along the sidewalk.
         b.   The sign shall be anchored or weighted to prevent it from being
affected by wind or other force.
         c.   A poster panel sign shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored
indoors whenever the business is not in operation or open to the public.
         d.   The holder of the sign permit for the poster panel sign shall
provide proof of insurance sufficient to hold the City harmless from and
indemnified against all damages arising from or growing out of the placement of
the sign.
      4.   Message Center Signs:
         a.   A sign permit application for a message center sign shall be
accompanied with all data and information necessary to show compliance with the
requirements of this section.
         b.   The sign may not display commercial messages related to products
or services that are not offered on the same premises.
         c.   No more than seventy percent (70%) of the area of any detached
sign may be dedicated to a message center. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of
an attached sign may be dedicated to a message center.
         d.   No more than one (1) message center sign is allowed per property,
regardless of sign type (attached or detached).
         e.   No element of the display may flash more than one (1) time per
second. Foreground elements, including text, may be animated, but shall not
move or change size in a manner that simulates blinking or flashing (such as
rapid increase or decrease in the size of elements or rapid movement of
elements from one part of the display to another).
         f.   Full motion video or film display via an electronic file imported
into the message center software or streamed into the message center is
prohibited.
         g.   Transition from one message to the next shall be smooth;
transitions that simulate flashing (such as spinning transitions, simulated
flying in and out of the display, rapid zooms, or similar) are not permitted.
Transitions shall not exceed one (1) second.
         h.   The minimum message display duration shall be seven (7) seconds.
         i.   The sign must be equipped with brightness controls that
automatically adjust the intensity of the light, based on ambient light levels.
         j.   A message center shall not operate at brightness levels of more
than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light, as measured using a foot-candle
meter at a pre-set distance, calculated using the following formula:
measurement distance = √ area of sign X 100 (the measurement distance can be
rounded to the nearest whole number).
         k.   In the Z5 District, a message center sign is permitted only on
lots with frontage on those segments of Delaware Avenue and Washington Avenue
under the jurisdiction of the Iowa Department of Transportation as US Highway
65. Such message center signs must be placed so as to be visible from Highway
65.
      5.   Expressway signs. In addition to any other sign structures and signs
permitted by this chapter, one (1) expressway sign structure may be erected on
a lot in the Z4 or Z6 District which has at least seventy-five feet (75') of
frontage on the US Highway 18 - IA Highway 27 expressway, subject to the
following:
         a.   Number Permitted. Only one (1) expressway sign structure is
permitted per parcel with frontage on the expressway. More than one (1) sign
may be mounted to the sign structure, provided that the cumulative height and
area of all signs conform to the requirements of this section.
         b.   Setbacks: Minimum setback from any right-of-way shall be fifty
feet (50') to the leading edge of the sign; maximum setback from any right-of-
way shall be one hundred fifty feet (150') from the trailing edge of the sign.
         c.   Area: The maximum area of an expressway sign shall be two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. The area of an expressway sign shall not be counted
towards the cumulative square footage allowed for all other detached signs.
         d.   Height: The maximum height of an expressway sign shall be seventy
feet (70').
         e.   Illumination: An expressway sign may be internally illuminated,
but may not include a message center; however, a gas/convenience function may
display gasoline prices that are changed electronically. (Ord. 14-14, 12-2-
2014; amd. 2017 Code; Ord. 21-1, 1-5-2021; Ord. 21-14, 12-7-2021)
12-20-7: ON PREMISES CAMPUS COMPLEX SIGNS:
   A.   A campus complex may be designated by the Administrative Officer in the
Z4, Z6 and Z7 Districts where several parcels are located and arranged so that
they give an appearance to the general public of an institutional or commercial
center. A designation of a campus complex allows the various parcels to be
considered a single premises for the purpose of meeting the requirements for a
multi-tenant sign.
   B.   The designation of several parcels as a campus complex allows a single
sign structure to support the detached signs of the various parcels. The
formula for determining detached sign allowances in the zoning district shall
be applied to each individual parcel. A single sign structure, located on any
one of the parcels, may be used to support the various detached signs of each
individual parcel. In no case shall more total or individual sign area be
allowed under the campus complex designation than would be allowed using the
sign area requirements of each individual premises.
   C.   A sign designating the name of the campus complex may be attached to
the campus complex sign structure. The total sign area allowed on the campus
complex sign structure, including the sign designating the name of the campus
complex, shall not exceed the sign area allowed above. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-8: ON PREMISES SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Allowed Signs: Attached, detached and portable on premises signs are
permitted in each zoning district according to tables 3, 4 and 5 of this
section.
   TABLE 3
   ON PREMISES SIGN REQUIREMENTS - ATTACHED SIGNS
 
                          Z2, Z3, Z7-  Z4, Z7-1,
             Z1, Z7-5     3- 6(5)      Z7-2, Z7-4-  Z5            Z6
                                       6(6)
                                       Wall,        Wall, window,
                                       window,      projecting,   Wall, window,
Type allowed Wall, window Wall, window projecting,  blade,        projecting,
                                       blade,       message       message
                                       message      center,       center
                                       center       poster panel
             One/Two      Residential
             Family       uses: 2 sq.  20% of the
             Residential: ft.          area of the                10% of the
             2            All others:  primary                    area of the
             All others:  32 sq. ft.   facade                     primary
Cumulative   32           Lots with 3              10% of any    facade
area         Lots with 3  or more      10% of       facade         
(maximum sq. or more      frontages:   secondary                 10% of
ft.)         frontages:   64, but no   facade       See note 3    secondary
             64, but no   more than 32                           facade
             more than 32 per any      See notes 2                 
             per any      frontage     and 3                      See note 3
             frontage     See note 1
             See note 1
                                       Shall not    Area of wall  Shall not
                                       exceed a     signs placed  exceed a
             Shall not be Shall not be height       above the     height
Location     placed above placed above greater than first floor   greater than
             the first    the first    125% of the  may not       125% of the
             floor        floor        height of    exceed 15% of height of the
                                       the roofline allowed sign  roofline
                                                    area
Additional                           See note 4   See note 4    See note 4
requirements
 
Notes:
    1.    The required maximum area stated is cumulative for all signs,
including both attached and detached signs.
    2.    A portion of the allowed attached sign area may be placed on other
facades; provided, that the cumulative area of attached signs on any other
facade does not exceed 10 percent of the area of that facade.
    3.    There is no limit to the number of attached signs per facade;
provided, that the cumulative area for all attached signs does not exceed the
required maximum.
    4.    See subsection
12-20-6E of this chapter for specific requirements for projecting signs, blade
signs, message centers, and poster panel signs.
   5.   Applies only to residential forms and functions in the Z7-6 District.
   6.   Applies only to mixed-use and non-residential forms and functions in
the Z7-6 District.
   TABLE 4
   ON PREMISES SIGN REQUIREMENTS - DETACHED SIGNS
 
                          Z2, Z3, Z7-  Z4, Z7-1,
             Z1, Z7-5     3 - 6(7)     Z7-2, Z7-4-6 Z5            Z6
                                       (8)
Number       n/a          n/a          1 per street 1 per lot     1 per street
                                       frontage                   frontage
                                       Monument,                  Monument,
                                       pole,        Monument,     pole, message
Type allowed Monument     Monument     message      message       center,
             signs only   signs only   center,      center        expressway
                                       expressway                 (See note 6)
                                       (See note 6)
             One/Two      One/Two      1 sq. ft.                  1 sq. ft. per
             Family       Family       per each 1'                each 1' of
             Residential: Residential: of lot                     lot width;
             2            2            width;       1 sq. ft. per minimum 30
             All others:  All others:  minimum 30   each 1' of    sq. ft.
Area         32           32           sq. ft.      lot width;    allowed;
(maximum     Lots with 3  Lots with 3  allowed;     minimum 20    cumulative
square feet) or more      or more      cumulative   sq. ft.       maximum area
             frontages:   frontages:   maximum area allowed;      = 200 sq. ft.
             64, but no   64, but no   = 250 sq.    maximum area  per lot
             more than 32 more than 32 ft. per lot  = 100 sq. ft.  
             per any      per any      See notes 4,               See notes 4,
             frontage     frontage     6                          6
             See note 1   See note 1
                                       Monument                   Monument
                                       signs may be               signs may be
                                       within                     within
                                       required                   required
                                       setbacks                   setbacks
             May be                                May be within  
Location     within       5' from      Pole sign    required      Pole sign
(feet)       required     right-of-way structure    setbacks      structure
             setbacks                  setback = 5'               setback = 5'
                                       from right-                from right-
                                       of-way                     of-way
                                                                  
                                       See notes 5,               See notes 5,
                                       6                          6
                                       On an
                                       arterial
                                       street: 35'                On an
                                       All other                  arterial
Height (ft.                            streets: 25'               street: 35'
maximum)     6'           4'           Within 100'  15'           All other
                                       of Z1, Z2 or               streets: 25'
                                       Z3                         See note 6
                                       Districts:
                                       25'
                                       See note 6
Additional               See notes 2                            
requirements              and 3
 
Notes:
   1.   The required maximum area shown is cumulative for all signs, including
both attached and detached signs.
   2.   Not permitted for single-family and two-family uses.
   3.   The area around the sign shall be landscaped to accent and enhance the
sign. Detailed site and landscape plans shall accompany the zoning review
application.
   4.   The area of a monument sign may be increased by 10 percent of the
formula amount.
   5.   Setback measured from lot line to base of pole structure. The leading
edge of an allowed pole sign may extend to the right-of- way line, but may not
encroach into the right-of-way.
   6.   See Section
12-20-6.E.5 for specific requirements for expressway signs.
   TABLE 5
   ON PREMISES SIGN REQUIREMENTS - PORTABLE SIGNS
 
             Z1, Z7-5  Z2, Z3, Z7-  Z4, Z7-1, Z7- Z5            Z6
                       3 - 6(4)     2, Z7-4-6(5)
Number per             1            1                           1
lot
Area
(maximum sq.           32 sq. ft.   32 sq. ft.                  32 sq. ft.
ft.)
Setback                10' from any 10' from any                10' from any
(ft.)        Not       lot line     lot line      Not permitted lot line
Height (ft.  permitted 6'           6'                          6'
maximum)
Time limits            Up to 7      Up to 30                    Up to 30
(days)                                                         
                       See note 1   See note 1                  See note 1
Additional             See notes 2  See note 3                  See note 3
requirements           and 3
 
Notes:
    1.    There shall be a minimum of 60 days between the date of removal of a
portable sign and the first day allowed by a new permit for a portable sign.
    2.    Permitted only on a nonresidentially used parcel that has at least
400 feet of frontage on a principal arterial.
    3.    Portable signs may not displace any parking spaces required by this
title.
   4.   Applies only to residential forms and functions in the Z7-6 District.
   5.   Applies only to mixed-use and non-residential forms and functions in
the Z7-6 District.
(Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014; amd. Ord. 14-14, 12-2-2014; 2017 Code; Ord. 20-10, 11-3-
2020; Ord. 21-14, 12-7-2021; Ord. 24-6, 4-2-2024)
12-20-9: OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
   A.   Principal Use: An off premises sign shall be considered a principal use
in the zoning districts in which it is allowed.
   B.   Where Permitted: Off premises signs are permitted according to the
requirements of table 6 of this section:
      TABLE 6
      OFF PREMISES SIGNS
Districts allowed       Z4, Z6, Z7-4
                        Single head
Types allowed           Double head
                        Electronic digital display message centers1
Area (maximum)          300 sq. ft.
Height (maximum)        Z4 and Z7-4 Districts: 25 feet
                        Z6 District: 35 feet
                        Leading edge(s) of the sign must meet minimum setbacks
                        of zoning district2
Setbacks (minimum)      From property in a Z2 or Z3 District: 1,000 feet
                        From an at grade intersection of any street and
                        railroad: 300 feet
                        From an off premises sign on the same side of the
Separation requirements street: 1,000 feet
                        From an off premises sign on the opposite side of the
                        street or on any other street: 500 feet
 
   Notes:
       1.    Electronic digital display message centers shall be subject to the
requirements of subsection E of this section.
       2.    If a minimum and maximum setback range is indicated for the
district, the off premises sign shall meet the maximum setback required for the
district.
   C.   Identification Plate: All off premises signs hereafter erected or
remodeled shall bear a permanent, legible identification plate stating the name
of the owner of the sign or corporation responsible for the construction or
erection of the sign.
   D.   Construction: All off premises signs shall be constructed on steel
supports and such supports shall have a neutral color.
   E.   Electronic Digital Display Message Center Off Premises Signs: An off
premises sign meeting all other requirements of this section may consist of an
electronic digital display message center, subject to the following:
      1.   Each message shall be static and not animated in any way.
      2.   Minimum duration of a message shall be seven (7) seconds.
      3.   Transition from one (1) message to the next shall be instantaneous
and shall not fade, scroll or otherwise be animated.
      4.   Maximum brightness of the electronic graphic display message center
shall not exceed illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per
square meter) during daylight hours, nor five hundred forty (540) nits between
dusk and dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness.
      5.   An electronic graphic display message center shall be equipped with
automatic dimmer features to adjust brightness levels for ambient light during
daylight hours. The illumination system shall be set to "automatic" in order to
comply with levels of brightness as set forth in this section.
      6.   The electronic graphic display message center shall have an
automatic dimmer switch control to produce a distinct illumination change from
a higher illumination level to a lower illumination level for the period of
time between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and one-half (1/2) hour after
sunrise.
      7.   An off premises sign with an electronic graphic display message
center may only be constructed to replace an existing off premises sign. (Ord.
14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-10: NONCONFORMING AND ABANDONED SIGNS AND SIGN STRUCTURES:
   A.   On Premises Signs: All signs legally erected and in existence on the
adoption date of this chapter and which do not conform to the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and may continue in existence
until:
      1.   The sign is deemed abandoned.
      2.   The sign is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
its replacement cost at the time of damage or destruction.
   B.   On Premises Sign Structures: All sign structures legally erected and in
existence on the adoption date of this chapter and which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming sign structure and
may continue in existence until:
      1.   The sign structure is deemed abandoned.
      2.   The sign structure is damaged or destroyed in excess of fifty
percent (50%) of replacement cost at time of damage or destruction.
   C.   Off Premises Signs And Sign Structures: All off premises signs and sign
structures legally erected and in existence on the adoption date of this
chapter and which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a nonconforming off premises sign or sign structure and may continue in
existence until:
      1.   The sign or sign structure is deemed abandoned.
      2.   The sign or sign structure is destroyed in excess of fifty percent
(50%) of replacement cost at time of destruction.
   D.   Abandoned Signs And Sign Structures: An abandoned sign and/or sign
structure, regardless of nonconforming status, shall be removed within ninety
(90) days after abandonment. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
12-20-11: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Unmaintained Signs:
      1.   The owner of any unmaintained sign is prima facie responsible for
the maintenance of that sign upon public or private property in violation of
this chapter. Any owner, occupant or person in possession of real property
within the City upon which one (1) or more unmaintained signs are found is
prima facie responsible for permitting the unmaintained sign upon the property
in violation of this chapter. No person shall be charged with more than one (1)
violation of this chapter for any one (1) sign. The owner of an unmaintained
sign and the owner of real estate upon which the unmaintained sign are found
may both be charged.
      2.   Each day the owner of an unmaintained sign and the owner, occupant
or person in possession of real property within the City is found in violation
of this chapter and permits the violation to continue after the notice period
provided in subsection A4 of this section shall be a new violation of this
chapter.
      3.   Upon discovery of any unmaintained sign upon private property within
the corporate limits of this City, any police officer, or other City officer,
official or employee having authority or responsibility for enforcement of any
provisions of this title, may notify in writing the owner of the unmaintained
sign, and the owner of the property upon which it is located that:
         a.   The unmaintained sign constitutes a violation under the
provisions of this chapter.
         b.   The owner must abate the violation by removing or repairing the
sign in accordance with the terms of subsection A4 of this section.
         c.   Failure to remove or repair the unmaintained sign shall be
sufficient cause for removal and disposal by the City and assessment of costs.
         d.   In the alternative, the City may cause to be issued to the owner
of the unmaintained sign, or to the owner of the property on which the
unmaintained sign is found, a citation for a Municipal infraction setting forth
the violation of this chapter and seeking an order of removal on conviction.
         e.   The notice provided by this section relates only to the abatement
of a violation of this chapter and is not an element of a violation; provided,
however, that a second or any subsequent citation shall not be issued until
after the notice provided herein.
      4.   The owner of the unmaintained sign that violates the provisions of
this chapter, or the owner of the property upon which it is located, shall
within ten (10) days after service of a written notice from any police officer,
or other City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility
for enforcement of any provisions of this title, remove or repair the sign.
      5.   If the owner of an unmaintained sign or the owner of the property
upon which it is located shall fail to remove or repair same in accordance with
the requirements of subsection A4 of this section, any police officer, or other
City officer, official or employee having authority or responsibility for
enforcement of any provisions of this Code, may abate the violation by causing
the sign to be removed to a place of safekeeping and the cost of the removal
and storage shall be charged to the owner of the unmaintained sign, or to the
owner of the property upon which it was located.
   B.   Violation: A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be
charged as a Municipal infraction or a misdemeanor. (Ord. 14-2, 2-4-2014)
CHAPTER 21
ACCESS TO SOLAR ENERGY
SECTION:
12-21-1: Requirements And Process For Easements
12-21-1: REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS FOR EASEMENTS:
The commission is established as the Solar Access Regulatory Board for Mason
City, pursuant to chapter 564A, Code of Iowa. The Solar Access Regulatory Board
may grant solar access easements upon application, following a public hearing,
and subject to the following requirements: (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-
2010)
   A.   An owner of property may apply for a solar access easement by filing an
application with the Secretary of the Planning and Zoning Commission which
shall contain the following:
      1.   A statement of the need for the solar access easement by the owner
of the dominant estate.
      2.   A legal description of the dominant and servient estates.
      3.   The name and address of the dominant and servient estate owners of
record.
      4.   A description of the solar collector to be used.
      5.   The size and location of the collector including heights, its
orientation with respect to south and its slope from the horizontal shown
either by drawings or in words.
      6.   An explanation of how the applicant has done everything reasonable,
taking cost and efficiency into account, to design and locate the collector in
a manner to minimize the impact on development of servient estates.
      7.   A legal description of the solar access easement that is sought and
a drawing that is a spatial representation of the area of the servient estate
burdened by the easement illustrating the degrees of the vertical and
horizontal angles through which the easement extends over the burdened property
and the points from which those angles are measured. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010,
eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
      8.   A statement that the applicant has attempted to voluntarily
negotiate a solar access easement with the owner of the servient estate and has
been unsuccessful in obtaining the easement voluntarily.
      9.   A statement that the space to be burdened by the solar access
easement is not obstructed at the time of filing of the application by anything
other than vegetation that would shade the solar collector.
      10.   Appraisal prepared by a qualified appraiser, establishing the
difference between the full market value of the servient estate prior to and
after the existence of the solar access easement sought.
      11.   A filing fee to defray the cost of copying and mailing the
application and notice.
   B.   Upon receipt of the application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board
shall determine whether the application is complete and contains the
information required under subsection A of this section. The Solar Access
Regulatory Board may return an application for correction of any deficiencies.
Upon acceptance of an application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board shall
schedule a hearing. The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall cause a copy of the
application and a notice of the hearing to be served upon the owners of the
servient estates in the manner provided for service of original notice and at
least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state
that the Solar Access Regulatory Board will determine whether and to what
extent a solar access easement will be granted, that the Solar Access
Regulatory Board will determine the compensation that may be awarded to the
servient estate owner if the solar access easement is granted and that the
servient estate owner has the right to contest the application before the Solar
Access Regulatory Board.
   C.   After the hearing on the application, the Solar Access Regulatory Board
shall determine whether to issue an order granting a solar access easement. The
Solar Access Regulatory Board shall grant a solar access easement if the Solar
Access Regulatory Board finds that there is a need for the solar collector,
that the space burdened by the easement was not obstructed by anything except
vegetation that would shade the solar collector at the time of filing of the
application, that the proposed location of the collector minimizes the impact
of the easement on the development of the servient estate and that the
applicant tried and failed to negotiate a voluntary easement. However, the
Solar Access Regulatory Board may refuse to grant a solar access easement upon
a finding that the easement would require the removal of trees that provide
shade or a windbreak to a residence on the servient estate. The Solar Access
Regulatory Board shall not grant a solar access easement upon a servient estate
if the Solar Access Regulatory Board finds that the owner, at least six (6)
months prior to the filing of the application, has made a substantial financial
commitment to build a structure that will shade the solar collector. In issuing
its order granting the solar access easement, the Solar Access Regulatory Board
may modify the solar access easement applied for and impose conditions on the
location of the solar collector that will minimize the impact upon the servient
estate.
   D.   The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall grant a solar access easement
only within the area that is within three hundred feet (300') of the center of
the northernmost boundary of the collector and is south of a line drawn east
and west tangent to the northernmost boundary of the collector. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
   E.   The Solar Access Regulatory Board shall determine the amount of
compensation that is to be paid to the owners of the servient estate for the
impairment of the right to develop the property. Compensation shall be based on
the difference between the fair market value of the property prior to and after
granting the solar access easement. The Solar Access Regulatory Board may
request the assistance of a professional appraiser to determine the fair market
values; any costs thereof shall be paid by the applicant. The parties shall be
notified of the Solar Access Regulatory Board's decision within thirty (30)
days of the date of the hearing. The owner of the dominant estate shall have
thirty (30) days from the date of notification of the Solar Access Regulatory
Board's decision to deposit the compensation and any other relevant costs with
the Solar Access Regulatory Board. Upon receipt of the compensation, the Solar
Access Regulatory Board shall issue an order granting the solar access easement
to the owner of the dominant estate and remit the compensation awarded to the
owners of the servient estate. The owner of the dominant estate may decline to
deposit the compensation with the Solar Access Regulatory Board and no order
granting the solar access easement shall then be issued. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-
2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2017 Code)
   F.   When the order granting the solar access easement is issued, the owner
of the dominant estate shall have it recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder who shall record the solar access easement and list the owner of the
dominant estate as grantee and the owner of the servient estate as grantor in
the deed index. After being recorded, the solar access easement shall be
considered an easement appurtenant in or on the servient estate.
   G.   The owner of a servient estate may apply to the Solar Access Regulatory
Board for an order removing a solar access easement granted by the Solar Access
Regulatory Board under this section under any of the following conditions:
      1.   If the solar collector is not installed and made operational within
two (2) years of recording the easement.
      2.   If the dominant estate owner ceases to use the solar collector for
more than one (1) year.
      3.   If the solar collector is destroyed or removed and not replaced
within one (1) year.
The procedure for filing an application with the Solar Access Regulatory Board
under this section and for notice and hearings on the application shall be the
same as that prescribed for an application for granting a solar access
easement. An order issued by the Solar Access Regulatory Board removing a solar
access easement may provide for the return by the servient estate owner of
compensation paid by the dominant estate owner for the solar access easement
after the deduction of reasonable expenses incurred by the servient estate
owner in proceeding for the granting and removal of the easement. (Ord. 10-003,
1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
CHAPTER 22
ADULT USES
SECTION:
12-22-1: Requirements
12-22-1: REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the zoning regulations herein, adult uses shall meet the
requirements of title 13 of this Code. (Ord. 10-003, 1-19-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
TITLE 13
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 1
OVERVIEW
SECTION:
13-1-1: Title
13-1-2: Purpose
13-1-3: Severability
13-1-4: Interpretation
13-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the MASON CITY ADULT ORIENTED
BUSINESS ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to protect the established rights of adult
businesses while at the same time providing for physical separation from
sensitive land uses to minimize negative secondary impacts to the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the citizens of
Mason City. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this title is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall not affect the remainder of this title. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
13-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word
"shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; the word "person" includes
a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation
as well as an individual; the words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied". (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13-2-1: Definitions
13-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: Any employee or official authorized to enforce this
title of the City of Mason City.
ADULT: As used in this title refers to persons who have attained the age of
eighteen (18) years.
ADULT CABARET: A building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing
or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment that constitutes
the primary live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on the exhibiting of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MEDIA: Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CD-ROMs or other
devices used to record computer images, or other media that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating
to hardcore material.
ADULT MEDIA SHOP: An establishment that rents and/or sells media, and that
meets any of the following three (3) tests:
   A.   Forty percent (40%) or more of the gross public floor area is devoted
to adult media.
   B.   Forty percent (40%) or more of the stock in trade consists of adult
media.
   C.   It advertises or holds itself out in any forum as "XXX", "adult",
"sex", or otherwise as a sexually oriented business other than an adult media
store, adult motion picture theater, or adult cabaret.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting motion pictures, slides or
photographic reproductions which: a) are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for observance by patrons therein, or
b) excludes minors by reason of age.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons used predominantly for presenting motion pictures, slides
or photographic reproductions which: a) are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein,
or b) excludes minors by reason of age.
COMMUNITY GATEWAY: Highly visible entrances to the community generally located
along arterial streets at or near the edge of the community.
DISPLAY PUBLICLY: The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any
fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in such
a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished
by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk,
or from the property of others, or from any portion of the premises where items
and material other than adult media are on display to the public.
HARDCORE MATERIAL: Media characterized by sexual activity that includes one (1)
or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth of one (1)
person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger or male organ
into any orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a sex toy
into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male ejaculation.
HARDCORE PERFORMANCE: Live human performance characterized by sexual activity
that includes one (1) or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of
the mouth of one (1) person with the genitals of another; penetration with a
finger or male organ into any orifice in another person; open female labia;
penetration of a sex toy into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of
male ejaculation.
LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO: An establishment or business that provides the
service of live models modeling lingerie to individuals, couples, or small
groups in a room smaller than six hundred (600) square feet.
MASSAGE: Any method of treating the external parts of the human body by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand or any
instrument for any form of consideration or gratuity.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business,
which excludes minors by reason of age, where massages are administered for any
form of consideration or gratuity, including, but not limited to, massage
parlors, health clubs, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition shall not
be construed to include: a) persons licensed by the State of Iowa under the
provisions of chapter 148, 148A, 148B, 150, 152, 153, 157 or 158, Iowa Code,
when performing massage therapy or massage services as a part of the profession
or trade for which licensed; b) persons performing massage therapy or massage
services under the direction of a person licensed as described in item a of
this definition; c) persons performing massage therapy or massage services upon
a person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;
d) nurses' aides, technicians and attendants at any hospital or healthcare
facility licensed pursuant to chapter 135B, 135C or 145A, Iowa Code, in the
course of their employment and under the supervision of the Administrator
thereof or of a person licensed as described in item a of this definition; e)
an athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or private secondary
school, junior college or university or employed by a professional or
semiprofessional athletic team or organization, in the course of his employment
as such coach or trainer. This definition shall not be construed to include a
nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis
court or other educational, cultural, recreational and athletic facilities for
the welfare of the residents of the area.
MEDIA: Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion
picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation
or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used
as a means of communication. Media includes, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-
ROMs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
MEDIA SHOP: A general term, identifying a category of business that may include
sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special provisions
applicable to adult media shops. In that context, media shop means a retail
outlet offering media for sale or rent, for consumption off the premises,
provided that any outlet meeting the definition of "adult media shop" shall be
treated as an adult media outlet.
PROTECTED LAND USE: Religious institutions, community gateway corridors, public
or private K through 12 educational institutions, public park, or a childcare
facility licensed by or registered with the State of Iowa.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building wherein persons regularly assemble for
religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body
organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and
uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. Includes synagogue,
temple, mosque, church or other such place for worship and religious
activities.
SADOMASOCHISTIC PRACTICES: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed
or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one clothed or naked.
SEX SHOP: An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any
of the following tests:
   A.   The establishment offers for sale or rent items from any two (2) of the
following categories: 1) adult media, 2) lingerie, or 3) leather goods marketed
or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices;
and the combination of such items constitutes more than ten percent (10%) of
its stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of its floor area.
   B.   More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually
oriented toys or novelties.
   C.   More than five percent (5%) of its gross public floor area is devoted
to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.
SEXUAL ACTIVITY ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which excludes minors by reason
of age, used for the display of live presentations distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing or involving
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Provided, that the
provisions of this definition shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, art
center, museum or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to
presentations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting
or describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An inclusive term used to describe the following
collectively: adult cabaret; adult media shop; adult mini-motion picture
theater; lingerie modeling studio; adult motion picture theater; video arcade;
bathhouse; massage establishment; sex shop; and/or sexual activity
establishment.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES: Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia
either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts,
or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this title is defined as: a) less than
completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2) buttocks;
and 3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
b) human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this title is defined as: a) human
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; b) acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; c) fondling or other erotic
touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH: Any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment
that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons and is used for
presenting live human performances or motion pictures or viewing publications
by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media
(including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disk, CD-
ROM, books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons therein. A
video viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or a room
or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than six hundred (600)
square feet. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 3
COMMUNITY GATEWAYS
SECTION:
13-3-1: Community Gateways Established
13-3-1: COMMUNITY GATEWAYS ESTABLISHED:
For the purposes of this title, the following community gateways are
established:
   A.   All property having frontage on South Federal Avenue extending from
Twenty Seventh Street south, southward to the southern corporate limits.
   B.   All property having frontage on Fourth Street Southwest extending west
from South Taft Avenue westward to the western corporate limits.
   C.   All property having frontage on North Federal Avenue extending from
Seventeenth Street north northward to the northern corporate limits.
   D.   All property having frontage on Fourth Street Southeast extending east
from Birch Drive eastward to the eastern corporate limits. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 4
ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED
SECTION:
13-4-1: Video Viewing Booth Or Arcade Booth Prohibited
13-4-1: VIDEO VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH PROHIBITED:
Video viewing booths or arcade booths are prohibited within the corporate
limits of Mason City. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 5
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-5-1: Z1 Agricultural Zoning District
13-5-1: Z1 AGRICULTURAL ZONING DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in a corner store form within the Z1 Agricultural
Zoning District. A media shop is prohibited in all other forms in this
district. Adult media shall constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the
stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public
floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 6
SUB-URBAN DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-6-1: Z2 Sub-Urban Zoning District
13-6-1: Z2 SUB-URBAN ZONING DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in a corner store form within the Z2 Sub-Urban
Zoning District. A media shop is prohibited in all other forms in this
district. Adult media shall constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the
stock in trade or occupy no more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public
floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 7
URBAN DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-7-1: Z3 General Urban District
13-7-1: Z3 GENERAL URBAN DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in the Z3 General Urban Zoning District so long
as it is located in an allowed form in that district. Adult media shall
constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no
more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 8
MULTI-USE DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-8-1: Z4 Multi-Use Zoning District
13-8-1: Z4 MULTI-USE ZONING DISTRICT:
   A.   A media shop shall be allowed in the Z4 Multi-Use Zoning District, so
long as it is located in an allowed form in that district and meets the
following conditions:
      1.   Adult media shall constitute no more than forty percent (40%) of the
stock in trade or occupy no more than forty percent (40%) of the gross public
floor area.
      2.   If adult media constitutes more than ten percent (10%) of the stock
in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor
area, the adult media shall be kept in a separate room or section of the shop,
which room or section shall:
         a.   Not be open to any person under the age of eighteen (18);
         b.   Be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store
by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet (8') high
or to the ceiling, whichever is less;
         c.   Be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably
practicable from media or other inventory in the store likely to be of
particular interest to children;
         d.   Have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide
assurance that persons under age eighteen (18) will not easily gain admission
and that the general public will not accidentally enter such room or section,
or provide continuous video or window surveillance of the room by store
personnel;
         e.   Provide signage at the entrance stipulating that persons under
age eighteen (18) are not permitted inside.
   B.   The Mason City Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve a conditional use
permit, pursuant to section
12-5-5 of this Code, for the following uses in the Z4 Multi-Use Zoning
District, so long as it is located in an allowed form in that district:
      1.   Adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion
picture theater, lingerie modeling studio or sexual activity establishment,
subject to these restrictions:
         a.   These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500')
of each other, nor shall they be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between
establishments shall be the shortest distance measured in a straight line from
the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the
adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater
or lingerie modeling studio and the protected use or residential zoning
district shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use
or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance
door of the premises of the adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater,
adult motion picture theater or lingerie modeling studio along the street
right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by
pedestrians between such points.
         b.   All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered
or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any
public or semipublic area.
         c.   In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible
by the Zoning Administrator, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize
any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
         d.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian
sidewalks, walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
      2.   Adult media shop or sex shop, subject to these restrictions:
         a.   These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500')
of each other, nor shall they be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between
establishments shall be the shortest distance, measured in a straight line from
the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the
protected use or residential zoning district and the adult media shop or sex
shop shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use or
district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance door
of the premises of the adult media shop or sex shop along the street right-of-
way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians
between such points.
         b.   All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered
or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any
public or semipublic area.
         c.   In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible
by the Administrative Officer, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize
any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
         d.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian
sidewalks, walkways or from other public or semipublic areas. (Ord. 10-22, 12-
21-2010)
CHAPTER 9
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-9-1: Z5 Central Business Zoning District
13-9-1: Z5 CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT:
A media shop shall be allowed in the Z5 Central Business Zoning District, so
long as it is located in an allowed form in that district. Adult media shall
constitute no more than ten percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupy no
more than ten percent (10%) of the gross public floor area. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-
2010)
CHAPTER 10
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
13-10-1: Z6 Industrial Zoning District
13-10-1: Z6 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT:
The following uses shall be allowed in the Z6 Industrial Zoning District, so
long as it is located in an allowed form in that district:
   A.   Adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture
theater, lingerie modeling studio or sexual activity establishment, subject to
these restrictions:
      1.   These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of
each other, nor shall they be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between
establishments shall be the shortest distance measured in a straight line from
the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the
adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater
or lingerie modeling studio and the protected use or residential zoning
district shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use
or district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance
door of the premises of the adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater,
adult motion picture theater or lingerie modeling studio along the street
right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by
pedestrians between such points.
      2.   All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or
screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any
public or semipublic area.
      3.   In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by
the Zoning Administrator, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize any
possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
      4.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
   B.   Adult media shop or sex shop, subject to these restrictions:
      1.   These uses shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of
each other, nor shall they be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
protected land use or residential zoning district. The distance between
establishments shall be the shortest distance, measured in a straight line from
the boundary of the zoning lots containing such uses. The distance between the
protected use or residential zoning district and the adult media shop or sex
shop shall be measured from the nearest property line of such protected use or
district boundary of such zoning district, to the nearest public entrance door
of the premises of the adult media shop or sex shop along the street right-of-
way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians
between such points.
      2.   All building openings, entries, windows, etc., shall be covered or
screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any
public or semipublic area.
      3.   In new construction, and whenever else it is considered feasible by
the Administrative Officer, the building shall be oriented so as to minimize
any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semipublic areas.
      4.   Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not be
shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks,
walkways or from other public or semipublic areas.
   C.   Media shop; provided, that adult media constitutes no more than forty
percent (40%) of the stock in trade or occupies no more than forty percent
(40%) of the gross public floor area. If adult media constitutes more than ten
percent (10%) of the stock in trade or occupies more than ten percent (10%) of
the gross public floor area, the following conditions shall be met:
      1.   Adult media shall be kept in a separate room or section of the shop,
which room or section shall:
         a.   Not be open to any person under the age of eighteen (18);
         b.   Be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store
by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet (8') high
or to the ceiling, whichever is less;
         c.   Be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably
practicable from media or other inventory in the store likely to be of
particular interest to children;
         d.   Have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide
assurance that persons under age eighteen (18) will not easily gain admission
and that the general public will not accidentally enter such room or section or
provide continuous video or window surveillance of the room by store personnel;
and
         e.   Provide signage at the entrance stipulating that persons under
age eighteen (18) are not permitted inside. (Ord. 10-22, 12-21-2010)
