Code of Ordinances
of the
CITY OF
ORANGE CITY, Iowa
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.comr
 
Adopted February 21, 2022, by Ordinance No. 834
 
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                           ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds    Ord. No. Date     Subject
Feb-22    Ch. 3                      828      12-6-21  Voting Precincts
          Ch. 11                     832      12-20-21 Orange City Urban
                                                       Revitalization Area
          Ch. 165                    833      2-21-22  Zoning Map
                                     834      2-21-22  Adopting Ordinance
          160.03(1); 160.04(1)(B)
Oct-22    (3); 160.04(2)(B)(6);      835      3-21-22  Floodplain Management
          160.05(3); 160.05(4)(C-D);
          160.05(14)
          165.34                     836      5-2-22   Mixed Use Overlay Zone
          Ch. 10                     837      5-2-22   MOC-FV Elementary School
                                                       Urban Renewal Area
          92.02; 92.03               838      6-6-22   Water Rates
          165.34(8)(A)               839      7-18-22  Mixed Use Overlay Zone
          75.04; 75.05; 75.07(1 & 5) 840      10-17-22 All-Terrain Vehicles and
                                                       Snowmobiles
Oct-23    106.06; 106.10(1)(A);      841      3-6-23   Solid Waste Collection
          106.10(1)(B)(3)                              Fees, Recycling
                                                       Liquor Licenses and
          120.04; 120.05; 121.05     842      10-16-23 Cigarette and Tobacco
                                                       Permits
          7.05; 7.08                 843      10-16-23 Fiscal Management
Mar-24    7.10                       844      11-6-23  State Income Setoff
                                                       Program
          Ch. 125                    845      2-5-24   Mobile Food and Beverage
                                                       Vendors
          124.03; 124.16             846      2-5-24   Special Events
                                     847               Not Adopted
          Ch. 138                    848      3-18-24  Street Grades
Jan-25    110.10                     849      5-6-24   Natural Gas Rates
          165.06(33); 165.06(34);    850      7-1-24   Commercial Use Types
          165.20(2)(B)
          165.06(35)                 851      7-15-24  Veterinary Hospital
                                     852               Failed
          Ch. 140                    853      9-3-24   Dedication of Street
                                                       MOC-FV Elementary School
          Ch. 10                     854      10-7-24  Urban Renewal Area
                                                       (Gelderland Second
                                                       Addition Property)
          106.10(1)(A)               855      1-20-25  Solid Waste Collection
                                                       Fees
          5.02; 5.06; 5.14; 7.05(4);
          18.03; 35.16; 50.09;       856      1-20-25  2024 Legislative Changes
          60.02; 65.07; 136.04
          165.03(13)(E); 165.16(1)   857      1-20-25  Maternity Group Home
          (A); 165.19(1)(A)
Oct-25    157.08(3-4); 157.08(6-7)   858      4-21-25  Financial Assistance
                                                       Guidelines
          63.04(1)(D); 63.04(2)      859      9-2-2025 Special Speed Zones
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
 
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Orange City, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code
of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council
or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2.   “City” means the city of Orange City, Iowa.
3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Orange City, Iowa.
4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Orange
City, Iowa.
6.   “Council” means the city council of Orange City, Iowa.
7.   “County” means Sioux County, Iowa.
8.   “May” confers a power.
9.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
10.   “Must” states a requirement.
11.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
12.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Orange City, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
14.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
16.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of
the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
17.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
18.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
19.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council
or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not
specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00.† 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 4.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Orange City, Iowa.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
VOTING PRECINCTS
 
3.01 Purposes                3.03 Delineation and Designation of Precinct
3.02 Division into Precincts 3.04 Elections and Terms of City Council
3.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this article is to divide the City of Orange City into voting
precincts of no more than 3,500 persons in each precinct, in conformity with
the provisions and requirements of Sections 49.3 and 49.5 of the 2021 Code of
Iowa as amended.
3.02   DIVISION INTO PRECINCTS.
The City of Orange City is divided into two (2) voting precincts.
3.03   DELINEATION AND DESIGNATION OF PRECINCT.
Precinct One (1) and Precinct Two (2) of the City of Orange City, Iowa, shall
include all incorporated tracts of land at the time of this ordinance, and
shall be delineated by a line described as follows:
Beginning at the eastern edge of the City limits of Orange City, Iowa on the
approximate centerline of the Sioux County, Iowa street designated as 440th
Street; thence westerly along the centerline of 440th Street, also known as 7th
Street NE within the City limits of Orange City, Iowa to the intersection of
Albany Avenue NE; thence southernly along the approximate centerline of Albany
Avenue NE to the intersection of 6th Street SE; thence westerly along the
centerline of 6th Street SE to the intersection of Colorado Avenue SW; thence
southerly along the approximate centerline of Colorado Avenue SW to the
intersection of 8th Street SW; thence easterly along the approximate centerline
of 8th Street SW approximately 114’; thence southerly approximately 756’ to the
intersection of Arizona Place SE and Industrial Bypass Road SW; thence easterly
along the approximate centerline of Industrial Bypass Road SW to the
intersection of Albany Avenue SE; thence southerly along the approximate
centerline of Albany Avenue SE to the intersection of the centerline of the
Sioux County, Iowa street designated as 460th Street, which is the South City
limits of Orange City, Iowa.
That portion of the City of Orange City, Iowa lying north and west of said line
shall be designated as Precinct One (1).
That portion of the City of Orange City, Iowa, lying south and east of said
line, shall be designated as Precinct Two (2).
Precinct One (1) and Precinct Two (2) shall both contain areas of
unincorporated territories as outlined in the agreement with the Sioux County
Board of Supervisors.
3.04   ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall consist of five (5) members, all of said member to be
elected to said office by the entire electorate, and terms of office shall be
four (4) years.
(Ch. 3 – Ord. 828 – Feb. 22 Supp.)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
4.01 Municipal Infraction    4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties               4.06 Alternative Penalties
 
4.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted
by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or
a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.† 2
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
2 Ordinances, see Section
  1.14.
4.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa
or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of
Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City
has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03   PENALTIES.
A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
   A.   First offense – $100.00
   B.   Second offense – $250.00
   C.   Third and each subsequent offense – $500.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
2.   Special Civil Penalties.
   A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user
is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation
exists or continues.
   B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
      (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the time
that the violation begins.
      (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
4.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue
a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1.   The name and address of the defendant.
2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
3.   The location and time of the infraction.
4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6.   The time and place of court appearance.
7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
4.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation
for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by
criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.08 Resignations
5.02 Bonds                 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.10 Vacancies
5.04 Books and Records     5.11 Gifts
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.12 Positions Combined
5.06 Meetings              5.13 Unlawful Use of City Property
5.07 Conflict of Interest  5.14 Gender Balance
 
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Orange
City as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
   A.   Mayor
   B.   City Clerk
   C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 5.02 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
   A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public do
not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
   C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public have
access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
   D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
   E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
   F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
   G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction using
integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants do not
share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of each
meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time, and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes
shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and
in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 5.06 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was
elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section,
for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee,
if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative
total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City
utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
5.12   POSITIONS COMBINED.
The powers and duties of an appointed office or employment may be delegated to
any other officer or employee or may be combined with each or any other office
or position by resolution passed by a majority vote of the entire Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.3)
5.13   UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY.
No person shall use or permit any other person to use City property owned or
leased by the City for any private purpose and for personal gain to the
detriment of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 721.2(5))
5.14   GENDER BALANCE.
(Repealed by Ordinance 856 - Jan. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used        6.05 Qualification
6.02 Candidacy                           6.06 Time Held
6.03 Run-Off Election in Lieu of Primary 6.07 Candidates Elected
6.04 Run-Off Election Procedure
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   CANDIDACY.
An eligible elector of the City may become a candidate for an elective City
office by filing with the County Commissioner of Elections a valid petition
requesting that the elector’s name be placed on the ballot for that office, or
by filing a valid petition with the designated City Clerk. The petition must be
signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least two percent of those
who voted to fill the same office at the last regular City election, but not
less than 10 persons.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.4)
6.03   RUN-OFF ELECTION IN LIEU OF PRIMARY.
A run-off election shall be held in lieu of a primary election for the choosing
of persons for elective offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.6)
6.04   RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE.
A run-off election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of failure
of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in the regular
City election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.05   QUALIFICATION.
Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an office, but
who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in the regular
City election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled positions, are
candidates in the run-off elections.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.06   TIME HELD.
Run-off elections shall be held four weeks after the date of the regular City
election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular City elections,
except that the County Board of Supervisors required to canvass the vote of the
runoff election pursuant to Section 50.24 of the Code of Iowa shall meet to
canvass the vote on the Thursday following the runoff election.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
6.07   CANDIDATES ELECTED.
Candidates in the run-off election who receive the highest number of votes cast
for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary to fill the
positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.9)
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose                      7.06 Budget Amendments
7.02 Finance Officer              7.07 Accounting
7.03 Cash Control                 7.08 Financial Reports
7.04 Fund Control                 7.09 Mileage
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation 7.10 Setoff Program Provisions
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
The City Finance Officer is the finance and accounting officer of the City and
is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall
apply:
1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the office of the Clerk. If any said fees
are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the
finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making
adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance, or Council
directive.
2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5[2])
4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[3])
5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[4])
6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
   A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
   B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5[5])
7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each
month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation of
the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by
the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must
submit their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the
proposed City budget at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
   A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
   B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information compiled
and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each property
owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual statement
containing all of the required information as provided under Section 24.2(2)(B)
(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
   C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
   D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property
tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year
immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At
the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any
resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate
from any other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public
hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is
not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
      (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than 10
nor more than 20 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper published at least
once weekly and having general circulation in the City. However, if the City
has a population of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three
public places in the City.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly identified
on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date of the
newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet site with
all such prior year notices.
      (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on one
or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an electronic
link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such account on a
date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
      (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
         a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property owner
and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required under
Section 24.2A(2)(b) of the Code of Iowa.
         b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the County Auditor
that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the newspaper to
publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make
any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until the requirements, of
Subsection 4 of this section, are completed, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that the
budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of
copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
(Section 7.05 – Ord. 843 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to
adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books
of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
3.   Checks. Two signatures are required on all City checks. Checks shall be
prenumbered and signed by any two of the following: Mayor, City Administrator,
Finance Officer, Clerk, or any of the five Council members, following Council
approval, except as provided by Subsection 5 hereof.
4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the
Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
(Section 7.08 – Ord. 843 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
7.09   MILEAGE.
Each officer or employee driving his or her own automobile on City business
shall be entitled to claim reimbursement for the expense thereof, at the rate
authorized by the National Internal Revenue Code of 1951, as amended. Verified
and itemized claims for such reimbursement shall be filed monthly upon forms
provided by the Finance Officer and shall set out the name of the claimant, and
the number of miles actually and necessarily incurred on behalf of the City.
Such claims shall be paid only upon approval by the Council.
7.10   SETOFF PROGRAM PROVISIONS.
This section shall establish policies and procedures for the City pursuant to
Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa, to allow the City to utilize and invoke the
setoff program provisions of the State for collection of debts owed to the City
and for which the City has provided the obligor with an opportunity to contest.
1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section:
   A.   “Department” means the Iowa Department of Revenue.
   B.   “Obligor” means a person, not including a public agency, who has been
determined to owe a qualifying debt.
   C.   “Public agency” means a board, commission, department, including the
Department of Revenue, or other administrative office or unit of the State or
any other State entity reported in the Iowa Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report, or a political subdivision of the State, or an office or unit of a
political subdivision. Public agency does include the Clerk of the District
Court as it relates to the collection of a qualifying debt. Public agency does
not include the general assembly or Office of the Governor.
   D.   “Public payment” means any claim a public agency owes to an obligor.
   E.   “Qualifying debt” means any of the following:
      (1)   Any debt, which is assigned to the Department of Health and Human
Services, or which is owed to the Department of Health and Human Services for
unpaid premiums under Section 249A.3(2)(a)(1) of the Code of Iowa, or which
child support services is otherwise attempting to collect, or which foster care
services of the Department of Health and Human Services is attempting to
collect on behalf of a child receiving foster care provided by the Department
of Health and Human Services.
      (2)   Any debt which is in the form of a liquidated sum due, owing, and
payable to the Clerk of the District Court.
      (3)   Any liquidated sum certain, owning and payable to a public agency,
with respect to which the public agency has provided the obligor an opportunity
to protest or challenge the sum in a manner in compliance with applicable law
and due process, and which has been determined as owing through the challenge
or protest, or for which the time period provided by the public agency to
challenge, or protest has expired.
2.   Memorandum of Understanding. The City shall enter into a memorandum of
understanding with the Department which shall outline the program guidelines
for use of the State Setoff Program.
3.   Qualifying Debt. The Clerk shall only certify to the Department qualifying
debt as approved by the Department through the completion of a qualifying debt
questionnaire and for which the City has provided appropriate documentation
showing the City’s legal authority for charging, implementing a fine or fee for
violation of, or imposing costs related to the abatement of certain conditions
when appropriate legal authority exists to the City. The qualifying debt
questionnaire may be updated from time to time as required by the City to add
or remove qualifying debt or as needed by the Department.
4.   Due Process. Prior to submission of a debt to the Department the City
shall provide the obligor due process as outlined in this section prior to the
submission of a debt:
   A.   With respect to the qualifying debt, the City shall provide the obligor
with 15 days’ advance written notice to the obligor’s last-known address. Such
notice shall provide the obligor with a minimum period of 15 days in which they
may file an appeal in writing to the Clerk.
   B.   Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal on a debt to be
submitted to the Setoff Program the Clerk shall schedule a hearing with the
Council for the next regularly scheduled meeting and notify the obligor of the
hearing date and time at least five days in advance of the hearing.
   C.   At the time and date of the hearing, the Council shall hear any
evidence brought forth by the obligor and shall examine the City’s file
regarding the matter. The Council shall make a ruling upon a majority vote of
the members in attendance.
   D.   If the qualifying debt is upheld by the Council and the debt has not
yet been paid by the obligor, the Clerk may certify the delinquency to the
Department pursuant to the Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa and the
memorandum of understanding between the City and the Department.
(Section 7.10 – Ord. 844 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 9
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
 
9.01 Purpose     9.04 When Effective
9.02 Definitions 9.05 Application
9.03 Eligibility
 
9.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption for
shell buildings constructed by community development organizations, not-for-
profit cooperative associations under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or for-
profit entities for speculative purposes in accordance with Section 427.1 of
the Code of Iowa.† 3   
 
Notes
3 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 783 was adopted by the City on September 15, 2014
  establishing the property tax exemption.
9.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Community development organization” means a City organization or a multi-
community group formed for one or more of the following purposes:
   A.   To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity and
economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
   B.   To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
   C.   To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
   D.   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have
at least 15 members with representation from the government at the level or
levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of
operation; a private sector lending institution; a community organization in
the area; business in the area; and private citizens in the community, area, or
region.
2.   “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings
or structures. “New construction” also includes reconstruction or renovation of
an existing building or structure that constitutes complete replacement of an
existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure, if the reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or
renovation is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing or processing of products, and the reconstruction or renovation
is required in order to competitively manufacture or process products or for
community development organizations, not-for-profit cooperative associations
under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or for-profit entities to market a
building or structure as a speculative shell building, which determination must
receive prior approval from the Council.
3.   “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization, a not-
for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa, or a
for-profit entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an
employer or user that will complete the building to the employer’s or user’s
specification for manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer’s or
user’s product line.
9.03   ELIGIBILITY.
The new construction of shell buildings by the community development
organization, not-for-profit cooperative association under Chapter 499 of the
Code of Iowa, or for-profit entity for speculative purposes is eligible for
property tax exemption. The exemption shall be for one of the following:
1.   The value added by new construction of a shell building or addition to an
existing building or structure.
2.   The value of an existing building being reconstructed or renovated, and
the value of the land on which the building is located, if the reconstruction
or renovation constitutes complete replacement or refitting of the existing
building or structure.
9.04   WHEN EFFECTIVE.
1.   If the exemption is for a project described in Subsection 1 of Section
9.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the
building is first assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in
which the addition to an existing building first adds value. If the exemption
is for a project described in Subsection 2 of Section
9.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year following the
assessment year in which the project commences. An exemption allowed under this
section shall be allowed for all subsequent years until the property is leased
or sold or until the exemption is terminated by ordinance of the City Council.
The exemption shall continue for a period of seven years.
2.   Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be
determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. However, an exemption shall
not be granted for a speculative shell building of a not-for-profit cooperative
association under Chapter 499 of the Code of Iowa or a for-profit entity if the
building is used by the cooperative association or for-profit entity or a
subsidiary or majority owners thereof for other than as a speculative shell
building. If the shell building or any portion of the shell building is leased
or sold, the portion of the shell building that is leased or sold and a
proportionate share of the land on which it is located, if applicable, shall
not be entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent years. Upon
the sale of the shell building, the shell building shall be considered new
construction for purposes of Section 427B.1 of the Code of Iowa if used for
purposes set forth in Section 427B.1.
9.05   APPLICATION.
1.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 1 of Section
9.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427B.4 of the Code of
Iowa.
2.   If the speculative shell building project is a project described in
Subsection 2 of Section
9.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427.1(27) of the Code
of Iowa.
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
10.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied on
the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Areas of the City each year by and
for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts, or other taxing
districts after the effective date of the ordinances codified in this chapter
in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on
loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the
City, to finance projects in such areas.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED          NAME OF AREA
758           November 2010    Downtown Urban Renewal
762           November 2010    Industrial Park Urban Renewal
791           November 2, 2015 HWY No. 10 East Urban Renewal Area
792           November 2, 2015 Puddlejumper Residential Urban Renewal Amendment
                               No. 5
793           November 2, 2015 8th Street Corridor Urban Renewal Area
823           October 19, 2020 Amendment No. 6 to the Puddlejumper Residential
                               Urban Renewal Plan
829           December 6, 2021 Amendment No. 3 to the Highway #10 East Urban
                               Renewal Plan
830           December 6, 2021 Salem Avenue Urban Renewal Plan
831           December 6, 2021 Highland Post Urban Renewal Area (Tax Parcels
                               Nos. 2305476012 and 230547613)
837           May 2, 2022      MOC-FV Elementary School Urban Renewal Area
854           October 7, 2024  MOC-FV Elementary School Urban Renewal Area
                               (Gelderland Second Addition Property)
 
CHAPTER 11
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect. The Urban Revitalization Plan for the
City is on file in the office of the Clerk.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect. The Urban Revitalization Plan for the
City is on file in the office of the Clerk.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
778           May 19, 2014      Orange City Urban Revitalization Area
782           July 28, 2014     Industrial Centrum 5th Addition Urban
                                Revitalization Area
815           November 5, 2018  Puddlejumper No. 9 Urban Revitalization
822           October 5, 2020   Urban Revitalization Area Nos. 8-92, 9-92, and
                                10-92 and Urban Revitalization Area No. 10-92
832           December 20, 2021 Orange City Urban Revitalization Area 1
 
 
Notes
  EDITOR’S NOTE:  Ordinance No. 832 adopted by the City on December 20, 2021
1 repealed previous ordinance Nos. 778, 779, 782, 815, and all other previously
  adopted ordinances of the City designating Urban Revitalization Areas within
  the City.
CHAPTER 12
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
 
12.01 Definitions 12.03 Effective Date
12.02 Tax Rate    12.04 Payment of Tax
 
12.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings in this section:
1.   “Hotel” and “motel” mean any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house,
rooming house, mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist
court, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient
guests for rent, whether with or without meals; except the renting of sleeping
rooms in dormitories and in memorial unions at all universities and colleges in
the State of Iowa and the guests of a religious institution if the property is
exempt under Section 427.1(8) of the Code of Iowa, and the purpose of renting
is to provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for
transient guests generally.
2.   “Renting” and “rent” mean any kind of direct or indirect charge for such
sleeping rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters, or their use.
12.02   TAX RATE.
A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all
rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel as defined in
this chapter at the rate of seven percent of such gross receipts derived from
the renting of a room, apartment, or sleeping quarter while rented by the same
person for a period of not more than 31 consecutive days.
12.03   EFFECTIVE DATE.
The tax herein above established shall be imposed after the election of
November 5, 2013, at which 69.54 percent of those voting on the question
favored the imposition of such tax. The tax shall be imposed on January 1,
2014.
12.04   PAYMENT OF TAX.
Such tax shall be paid as is provided in Chapter 423A, Code of Iowa, 2013, as
amended, and the proceeds of such tax shall be used for the purposes stated in
Subsection 1 thereof, as follows: The revenue derived from any hotel and motel
tax authorized by this chapter shall be used as follows:
1.   Each County or City which levies the tax shall spend at least 50 percent
of the revenues derived therefrom for the acquisition of sites for, or
constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or
maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities
including but not limited to memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic
center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or
facilities located at those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment
facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or
other evidence of indebtedness issued by the County or City for those
recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities; or for the
promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the County or
City and surrounding areas.
2.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the County or City which levies the
tax for any County or City operations authorized by law as a proper purpose for
the expenditure within statutory limitations of County or City revenues derived
from ad valorem taxes.
3.   Any County or City which levies and collects the hotel and motel tax
authorized by this chapter may pledge irrevocably an amount of the revenues
derived therefrom for each of the years the bonds remain outstanding to the
payment of bonds which the County or City may issue for one or more of the
purposes set forth in Subsection A of this section. Any revenue pledged to the
payment of such bonds may be credited to the spending requirement of Subsection
A of this section.
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give
direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons
for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into
in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City
where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance,
or Council direction.
7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of
the City.
8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such
specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In
executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with this
Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
9.   Licenses and Permits.
   A.   Sign all licenses and permits that have been granted by the Council,
except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by another municipal
officer.
   B.   Upon order of the Council, revoke permits or licenses granted by the
Council when the terms of the permit or license, this Code of Ordinances, or
State laws are violated by the permit or license holder.
10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
1.   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   A.   Mayor Pro Tem
   B.   Fire Chief
   C.   Police Chief
2.   The Mayor shall recommend individuals to the City Council for the
following boards and commissions:
   A.   Library Board of Trustees
   B.   Dutch Front Committee
   C.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   D.   Board of Adjustment
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is $7,800.00 per year, payable quarterly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for terms of four
years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 and 384.38[1])
3.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
4.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
5.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
6.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected
City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become
effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall
not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer
during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City
election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for
all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected
at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective
in one of the following ways:
   A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
   B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
   C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
   D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution,
a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the
ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the first and
third Monday of each month at 4:30 p.m. at Council Chambers at City Hall. If
such day falls on a legal holiday, the meeting is held the following day at the
same time unless a different day or time is determined by the Council.
2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
6.   Tentative Agenda. The Clerk shall prepare and post a tentative agenda for
each meeting at a place, or places, designated by the Council, one of which
shall be near the place of meeting at City Hall. The posting shall be made at
least 24 hours before the meeting except as permitted under State law in case
of emergencies.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
1.   City Administrator
2.   City Attorney
3.   City Clerk
4.   City Treasurer
5.   Zoning Administrative Officer
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is $2,600.00 per year, payable quarterly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
At its first meeting in January following the regular City election, the
Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of two
years. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by resolution
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has
the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, and
the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the total
expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of general
circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include a list
of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross
amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 18.03 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances
or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse
thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices
in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which is
the word “SEAL” and around the margin of which are the words “THE INCORPORATED
CITY OF ORANGE CITY, IOWA.”
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
 
19.01   APPOINTMENT.
The City Administrator is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of
the position of Treasurer.
19.02   COMPENSATION.
The City Administrator receives no additional compensation for performing the
duties of the Treasurer.
19.03   DUTIES OF TREASURER.
The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the
City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the
Treasurer from special assessments.
6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books
and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each
fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
10.   Reconciliation with Clerk. Reconcile the Treasurer’s books with the
Clerk’s every month.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation   20.08 Prepare Documents
20.02 Attorney for City              20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.03 Power of Attorney              20.10 Certify Bonds
20.04 Ordinance Preparation          20.11 Condemnation Proceedings
20.05 Review and Comment             20.12 Report
20.06 Provide Legal Opinion          20.13 Other Duties
20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a term
of two years. The City Attorney shall be paid an hourly rate as established by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, City Council, Municipal Boards, and City Department Heads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms,
and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09   REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee
before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of said officer or
employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the Council, appear
to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or
in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office or
employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
20.10   CERTIFY BONDS.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court; and when so signed, the City shall be bound upon the
same.
20.11   CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS.
The City Attorney shall manage and conduct all condemnation proceedings where
the private property is taken for public use.
20.12   REPORT.
The City Attorney shall submit reports to the Council as requested.
20.13   OTHER DUTIES.
The City Attorney shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as
may be required by the Council, the provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or
the laws of the State, and shall transmit to his successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents, and property belonging to the City, together with
an invoice of the same, in his custody or appertaining to his office.
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
21.01 Creation of Office      21.03 Compensation
21.02 Duties of Administrator
 
21.01   CREATION OF OFFICE.
There is hereby created the position of City Administrator to be appointed by a
majority of the Council.
21.02   DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
The duties of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
1.   Serve as the Chief Administrative Officer and Treasurer for the City,
fulfilling all of the statutory duties of those offices.
2.   Supervise and give direction to all City department heads concerning
departmental functions. The Administrator may examine all department functions
and records and call for special reports from department heads at any time.
3.   Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Mayor.
4.   Recommend to the Council such measures as the Administrator may deem
necessary or expedient for the good government and welfare of the City.
5.   Have the general supervision of and direction of the administration of the
City government, and may appoint, with approval of the Council, such
administrative assistants as shall be deemed advisable.
6.   Supervise and direct the official conduct of all officers of the City whom
the City Administrator has power to appoint.
7.   Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done for the
City. Make all purchases of material and supplies and see that such material
and supplies are received and are of the quality and character called for by
the contract.
8.   Authority to recommend employment, reclassification, or discharge of all
employees of the City, subject to the provisions of the Soldier’s Preference
Law (Chapter 70 of the Code of Iowa) and the Civil Service Law (Chapter 365 of
the Code of Iowa), except the City Clerk, Fire Chief, and Chief of Police, all
subject to approval of the Council.
9.   Cooperate with any administrative agency.
10.   The Administrator or any person appointed for this purpose, may,
summarily and without notice, investigate the affairs and conduct of any
department, agency, officer, or employee under his supervision.
11.   Keep the Council fully informed of the financial and other conditions of
the City and its future needs.
12.   Prepare and submit to the Council, annually, the required budgets.
13.   Supervise the enforcement and execution of all City laws.
14.   Have charge and control of the police and fire departments.
15.   Sign payroll and voucher checks.
16.   Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance, and
management of all City property, capital improvements, and undertakings of the
City, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications, and estimates for capital improvements.
17.   During any period of temporary or extended absence of the City
Administrator, or until such time as the Administrator may in the event of
death or disability be replaced by the Council, each department head shall be
responsible for and accountable to the City Council for their several areas of
expertise and their departmental responsibilities as specified by their
individual job descriptions.
21.03   COMPENSATION.
The Administrator shall receive such annual salary as the Council shall from
time to time determine by resolution, and payment shall be made bi-weekly from
the treasury of the City, in the manner provided for paying other officers and
employees.
CHAPTER 23
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
23.01 Public Library                   23.09 Expenditures
23.02 Library Trustees                 23.10 Annual Report
23.03 Qualifications of Trustees       23.11 Injury to Books or Property
23.04 Organization of the Board        23.12 Theft
23.05 Powers and Duties                23.13 Notice Posted
23.06 Definitions                      23.14 Open Meetings
23.07 Contracting with Other Libraries 23.15 Detention and Search
23.08 Nonresident Use
 
23.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The public library for the City is known as the Orange City Public Library. It
is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
23.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.
23.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City.
Members shall be over the age of 18 years.
23.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for four years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. No more than
three Trustees’ terms shall expire in any one year.
2.   Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if such member is
absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case
of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be
filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new
Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary.
2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, and authorize the Librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the Librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees
for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject however, to the
provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents
and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for
the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the business of
the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of
the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
23.06   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter:
1.   “Library equipment” means audio, visual, or audiovisual machines,
computers, machinery, or equipment belonging to, on loan to, or otherwise in
the custody of, one of the institutions or agencies listed in Subsection 2 of
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 702.22(2))
2.   “Library materials” means books, plates, pictures, photographs,
engravings, paintings, drawings, maps, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets,
broadsides, manuscripts, documents, letters, public records, microforms, sound
recordings, audiovisual materials in any format, magnetic or other tapes,
electronic data processing records, artifacts, and written or printed materials
regardless of physical form or characteristics, belonging to, on loan to, or
otherwise in the custody of, any of the following:
   A.   A public library.
   B.   A library of an educational, historical, or eleemosynary institution,
organization, or society.
   C.   A museum.
   D.   A repository of public records.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 702.22(1))
23.07   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of
free public libraries, with any other City, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
23.08   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
23.09   EXPENDITURES.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
23.10   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
23.11   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface,
mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical,
book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to the Library
or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
23.12   THEFT.
No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the
intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
23.13   NOTICE POSTED.
There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing
the public of the following:
1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
23.14   OPEN MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Library Board shall comply with the regulations stated in
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
23.15   DETENTION AND SEARCH.
1.   Persons concealing property as set forth in Section
23.12 may be detained and searched by a peace officer, person employed in a
facility containing library materials, merchant, or merchant’s employee,
provided that the detention is for a reasonable length of time and that the
search is conducted in a reasonable manner by a person of the same sex and
according to Subsection 2 of this section.
2.   No search of the person under this section shall be conducted by any
person other than someone acting under the direction of a peace officer except
where permission of the one to be searched has first been obtained.
3.   The detention or search under this section by a peace officer, person
employed in a facility containing library materials, merchant or merchant’s
employee does not render the person liable, in a criminal or civil action, for
false arrest or false imprisonment provided the person conducting the search or
detention had reasonable grounds to believe the person detained or searched had
concealed or was attempting to conceal property set forth in Section
23.12
CHAPTER 24
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
24.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 24.04 Compensation
24.02 Term of Office                 24.05 Powers and Duties
24.03 Vacancies
 
24.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
24.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.03   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as
the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.04   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related
matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivisions
or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or
plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be
dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission
and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 25
HOSPITAL TRUSTEES
 
25.01 Board of Trustees 25.04 Powers
25.02 Term of Office    25.05 Cooperation and Consent
25.03 Qualification
 
25.01   BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
The Board of Hospital Trustees of the Orange City Area Health System shall
consist of seven Hospital Trustees, six of which will be elected at large by
the entire Orange City electorate and one of which will be elected at large by
the entire Alton electorate.
25.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office for Hospital Trustees shall be four years. The Board shall
be appointed so that the term of no more than four members shall expire in one
year.
25.03   QUALIFICATION.
The trustees shall within 10 days after their election, qualify by taking the
oath of office and organize as a Hospital Board by the election of one of their
number as Chairperson and one as Secretary.
25.04   POWERS.
The Board of Hospital Trustees are vested with authority to provide for the
management, control, and government of such City Hospital as they shall cause
to be constructed or purchased and shall provide all needed rules and
regulations for the economic conduct thereof.
25.05   COOPERATION AND CONSENT.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective only upon a
showing of approval by the City Councils of both Alton, Iowa and Orange City,
Iowa.
CHAPTER 26
DUTCH FRONT COMMITTEE
 
26.01 Dutch Front Committee Established 26.02 Duties and Authority
 
26.01   DUTCH FRONT COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created an advisory committee, to be known as the Dutch Front
Committee, which shall consist of five members. The five members shall include
the Zoning Compliance Officer, the Chamber of Commerce Director, one City
Council member, and two at-large members. The two at large members shall be
selected by the Mayor with approval by the City Council. The members of the
committee shall choose from among themselves a person to act as chairperson.
All members of the committee shall serve without pay. The committee shall meet
as needed to carry out the intent of this chapter.
26.02   DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity only, and shall have no power
to bind the City by contract or otherwise. It shall be the function of the
committee to advise the Council concerning all applications for matching funds
within the Orange City Business District and other corridor areas and to act in
an advisory capacity to the Council and the Mayor in all matters pertaining to
the development of the Dutch themes in the Orange City Business District and
corridor areas.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.02 Organization                 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.04 Required Training            30.10 Taking Weapons
30.05 Compensation                 30.11 Removal, Demotion, and Suspension
30.06 Police Chief Appointed
 
30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
30.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06   POLICE CHIEF APPOINTED.
The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief to a two-year term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the
State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
9.   Reports.
   A.   Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as well as
such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   B.   Prepare annually a traffic report which shall be filed with the Mayor
and Council. The report shall contain information on the number of traffic
accidents, the number of persons killed and injured, the nature of violations,
and other pertinent traffic data including plans and recommendations for future
traffic safety activities.
10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work, and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and
materials of the department.
11.   Public Peace. Cause the public peace to be preserved, enforce all laws
and provisions of this Code of Ordinances, and when any violation thereof shall
come to his knowledge or be reported to him on reliable information, he shall
cause the requisite complaint to be made and see that the evidence is procured
for the successful prosecution of the offender.
12.   Disturbances. Suppress all riots, disturbances, and breaches of the
peace; apprehend any person in the act of committing an offense against the
laws of the State or the provisions of this Code of Ordinances and forthwith
bring such person or persons before the proper authority for examination and
trial. He shall examine into all violations of this Code of Ordinances and the
criminal laws of the State and all nuisances within the corporate limits of the
City, and report the same to the City Administrator.
13.   Nuisances. The Chief of Police shall serve or cause to be served notice
upon the owner, agent, or occupant of any private property where a nuisance
exists, or upon any person causing or responsible for any nuisance existing on
any street, alley, or public ground, requiring such owner, agent, or occupant,
or person causing or responsible for such nuisance, to abate or remove the
same, and if the same is not abated or removed, to remove or abate the same as
shall be necessary.
14.   Attend Council Meetings. The Chief of Police shall be the sergeant-at-
arms of the Council Chamber and shall, when requested, attend meetings of the
Council and do such other things the Mayor and Council shall from time to time
direct.
15.   Record of Receipts. Keep a correct account in a book, provided for that
purpose, of all money or property belonging to the City coming into his hands
from whatever source, stating from whom or on what account the same was paid,
and shall, when not otherwise provided, pay over monthly to the Clerk all money
and securities in hand belonging to the City and take the Clerk’s receipt
therefore.
16.   Arrests. Make monthly reports to the Council, and more often if required
by them, of his acts and doings as Chief of Police, and shall submit his books
to the inspection of the City Administrator.
17.   Other Powers. The Chief of Police shall have such others powers and
perform such other duties as may be provided by the Council, the provisions of
this Code of Ordinances, or the laws of the State, and shall transmit to his
successor in office all books, papers, records, documents, and property,
together with an invoice of the same, in his custody or appertaining to his
office.
30.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for
the operation of the department.
30.09   SUMMONING AID.
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items that
are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within
such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11   REMOVAL, DEMOTION, AND SUSPENSION.
A police officer may be removed, demoted, or suspended for violation of the
rules or regulations as provided by the terms of the collective bargaining
agreement in effect between the City and police officers.
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose          35.10 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization                       35.11 Constitution
35.03 Firefighters: Minimum Requirements 35.12 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Training                           35.13 Liability Insurance
35.05 Compensation                       35.14 Calls Outside Fire District
35.06 Appointment of Fire Chief and      35.15 Mutual Aid
Election of Officers
35.07 Duties of Officers                 35.16 Authority to Cite Violations
35.08 Duties of Fire Chief               35.17 Private Use of Fire Equipment
35.09 Duties of Members Generally        35.18 Fire Service Fees
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires, to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention
and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
The Fire Department consists of one company comprised of regular members, and
who are persons of good moral character and good, strong physical condition,
and not less than 18 years of age. All command officers and full-time employees
of the Fire Department must be residents within the Fire District. Vacancies in
the company, from whatever cause, shall be filled by persons who can
satisfactorily pass the entry qualifications and other job requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03   FIREFIGHTERS: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
In no case shall any person be recruited, selected, or appointed as a member of
the Fire Department unless they meet the following minimum requirements:
1.   Are a resident citizen of the United States.
2.   Are at least 18 years of age.
3.   Have a current valid Iowa driver’s license.
4.   Are not a drug addict or substance abuser.
35.04   TRAINING.
All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06   APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The Fire Chief shall be recommended by the Fire Department to the Mayor, and,
after Council approval, said appointment will be for a period of two years. The
nomination and election of officers, which shall be by ballot requiring a
simple majority, shall be held on the regular meeting night in December. If
four ballots fail to yield an election, a candidate will be randomly drawn in
front of all members present. Officers will take office on the first meeting
night of January. The Fire Chief may remove any person from officer duties.
35.07   DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
1.   Chief. During the time of a fire, the Chief shall be in command of the
department and shall direct the efforts of the individual members of the
department in the use of all apparatus and equipment in such manner as shall
seem to such officer most efficient. The Chief shall also be responsible for
holding training sessions, as needed, for the supervision and control over the
department’s apparatus and equipment, and for reporting to the Council, as
frequently as deemed necessary by the Council, all matters pertaining to the
department or its activities. Additional duties of the Fire Chief are
enumerated in Section
35.09.
2.   Assistant Chiefs. The Assistant Chiefs shall assist the Chief, and in all
matters connected with the department obey the Chief’s orders, and in the
absence of the Chief shall be vested with all powers and shall perform all
duties of the Chief.
3.   Captains. It is the duty of the Captains to report to the Chief or
Assistant Chiefs at fires or drills and assist them in their duties. In the
absence of the Chief and Assistant Chiefs, the Captains shall assume the duties
of the Chief. Captains shall assist the Chief with other duties as assigned.
35.08   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes, and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to the
Fire Department.
8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10
days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire
incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and
as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.09   DUTIES OF MEMBERS GENERALLY.
It is the duty of all members of the company to immediately answer all alarms
of fire and rescue and shall further their best efforts of extinguishing fires
under order and direction of the Chief, the Assistant Chiefs, or Captains.
35.10   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.11   CONSTITUTION.
The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
35.12   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.13   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
35.14   CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.15   MUTUAL AID.
Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into
mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.16   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2
of the Code of Iowa, may issue citations in accordance with Chapter 805 of the
Code of Iowa, for violations of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2 of the Code
of Iowa or a violation of a local fire safety code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
(Section 35.16 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
35.17   PRIVATE USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT.
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any of the fire apparatus
or equipment belonging to the City to allow or permit the same to be used for
private benefit.
35.18   FIRE SERVICE FEES.
The Council shall annually review fees and, when changed, set those by
resolution for fire protection services provided to citizens of the City and
surrounding townships. Said fees shall be based upon such factors and in such
amounts as recommended by the Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
 
36.01   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent,
or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the
land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates an
immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwaters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied
by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or
loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of
the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by
that person.
36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and
the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Department shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.
36.07   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Disorderly House
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
No person shall commit harassment.
1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
   A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement
authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the
information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act,
knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall do any of the following:
1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in
or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to
disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a
report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report
to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
   A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
   B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
   C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
   D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
   E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
   F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
   A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
   B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person
knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by
another.
   C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   DISORDERLY HOUSE.
1.   Definition. “Disorderly house” means any structure or any room therein, or
any part of the premises adjacent therefrom, in or upon which occurs any
disorderly conduct as defined in Section
40.03 or any of the following prohibited activities:
   A.   The open storage, use, or consumption of a controlled substance, as
defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, under which possession of such
substance would be an offense;
   B.   Gambling, in violation of Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa;
   C.   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in
violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa;
   D.   Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering, as defined in Chapter 725
of the Code of Iowa; or
   E.   Engaging in a massage therapy business without a license.
2.   Keeping a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
keep a disorderly house as defined in this section. For purposes of this
section, “keep” means ownership or having the control of a structure or a room
therein or any part of the adjacent premises.
3.   Frequenting or Being Found in a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any
person to frequent or be found in a disorderly house as defined in this
section.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.10 Barbed Wire and
Safety Entities                                          Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Drug
Device                                                   Paraphernalia
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators              41.16 Failure to
                                                         Assist
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
Any person who distributes samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive,
caustic, poisonous, or other injurious substance, commits a simple misdemeanor
unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or
otherwise takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by
children or animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a
law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A of
the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer,
or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the
Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the
lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns, or
other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
   A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
      (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
         a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
         b.   Chasers;
         c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
         d.   Firecrackers;
         e.   Mine and shell devices;
         f.   Missile-type rockets;
         g.   Roman candles;
         h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
         i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph which are manufactured
in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
      (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
         a.   Cone fountains;
         b.   Cylindrical fountains;
         c.   Flitter sparklers;
         d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple tube
ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance with
APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
         e.   Ground spinners;
         f.   Illuminating torches;
         g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties pursuant
to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
         h.   Wheels;
         i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
   B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or combination
of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or
detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
   C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the APA
Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator, but no such permit shall be required for the display of display
fireworks at the Iowa State Fairgrounds by the Iowa State Fair Board, at
incorporated County fairs, or at district fairs receiving State aid.. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
   A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
   B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
   C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
3.   Consumer Fireworks.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to use or explode consumer fireworks on
days other than June 15 through July 8 and December 10 through January 3 of
each year, all dates inclusive.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to use or explode consumer fireworks at
times other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except that on
the following dates consumer fireworks shall not be used at times other than
between the hours specified:
      (1)   Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on July 4 and the
Saturdays and Sundays immediately preceding and following July 4.
      (2)   Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. on December 31 and 12:30 a.m. on the
immediately following day.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to use consumer fireworks on real
property other than that person’s real property or on the real property of a
person who has consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that property.
   D.   No person under the age of 18 shall discharge a DOT 1.4 class consumer
firework without parental supervision.
   E.   Consumer fireworks shall not be discharged by person showing visible
signs of, or determined to be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug or
narcotic.
   F.   Any person discharging a consumer fireworks device assumes all
responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. No person shall
discharge a consumer fireworks device in a reckless manner or manner likely to
cause death, injury, fire, or property damage.
   G.   It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or discharge components of a
consumer fireworks device from its intended method of discharging.
   H.   Sky lantern open flame devices are not permitted to be released within
the City limits, except if tethered by a retrievable rope so long as the person
discharging has control over the sky lantern.
4.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties. Novelties, including
snakes, sparklers, or caps, can be discharged on a public place so long as all
trash, wrappers, and wires are properly disposed of.
41.15   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 124.414)
1.   As used in this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products
or materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination with a
controlled substance, except those items used in combination with the lawful
use of a controlled substance, to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do
any of the following:
   A.   Manufacture a controlled substance.
   B.   Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance.
   C.   Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
   D.   Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if
manufactured, delivered, sold, or possessed for a lawful purpose.
2.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture,
deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia.
41.16   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
   A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle,
or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
   B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the
Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of the
Code of Iowa.
   C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
   D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person owning,
leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
   E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property owned,
leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
   F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
      (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
      (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
      (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of
unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
      (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom,
altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate
or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession.
      (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
      (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
   A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
   B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
1.   
Chapter 23 – Library
   A.   Section
23.11 – Injury to Books or Property
   B.   Section
23.12 – Theft of Library Property
2.   
Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
   A.   Section
105.07 – Littering Prohibited
3.   
Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
   A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
   B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
   C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
   D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
   E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
   F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
   G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4.   
Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
   A.   Section
136.10 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
   B.   Section
136.14 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
   C.   Section
136.15 – Defacing
   D.   Section
136.16 – Debris on Sidewalks
   E.   Section
136.17 – Merchandise Display
   F.   Section
136.18 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.
1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any
liquor control licensee or wine or beer permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
   A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa
and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
   B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
   D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor
in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A
person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public
school property or while attending any public or private school-related
function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication
under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person
may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a
person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section
62.01(49) and (50) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01   CURFEW.
The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically
to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for
minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
1.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
   A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss
of life.
   B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should reasonably
be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible
adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful or careless
adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult responsibility
through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an adult responsible
for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of the minor.
   C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
   D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside,
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility
where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s
parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but
not for longer than six hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
   E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also includes such
parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned,
that are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is
considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
   F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
2.   Curfew Established.
   A.   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 to be or remain upon
any of the alleys, streets, or public places or to be in places of business and
amusement in the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
   B.   It is unlawful for any minor ages 16 years or 17 years to be or remain
upon any of the alleys, streets, or public places or to be in places of
business and amusement in the City between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
of the following day.
3.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
   A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
   B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on
either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for
the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
   C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
      (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in
which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of work;
      (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
      (3)   Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
      (4)   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity;
      (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or meeting
of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or
cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment of
the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity.
   D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
   E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning,
ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult
knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City
within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence
falls within one of the above exceptions.
5.   Enforcement Procedures.
   A.   Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the
absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license,
a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance, use his
or her best judgment in determining age.
   B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are that
the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in
violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to
identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s
own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who
arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in
a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not
place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor
physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into
custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
   C.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody,
the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as
soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the
minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at such
time as the court may direct.
   D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer
determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law
enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person
legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the
law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative
of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person
who is known to the child.
6.   Penalties.
   A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation
by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail, send to the
adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning
that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable
penalties.
   B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as defined
in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor
to violate any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a municipal
infraction with applicable penalties including a maximum fine of $200.00 for
each violation.
   C.   Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor,
the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning, which
states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the
curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable
penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may issue the minor
a citation for a first violation.
   D.   Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction with applicable penalties including a maximum fine of
$200.00 for each violation.
   E.   Business Establishment Violation. Any business establishment, including
any owners, agents, or employees of the business, in violation of any
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a simple misdemeanor and subject to a
maximum fine of $200.00 for each violation.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age to
commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires                  47.07 Alcoholic Beverages
47.04 Littering
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any car, cycle, or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.03   FIRES.
No fire shall be built, except in a place designated for such purpose, and such
fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.
47.04   LITTERING.
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.05   PARKS CLOSED.
No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain
within any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
47.06   CAMPING.
No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or
designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause. The exception to the
prohibition of camping is within Dunlap Wildlife Area.
47.07   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
No person shall bring into, use, consume, or have in his possession any
alcohol, wine, or beer in any City park at any time, except in the designated
campground areas of Veteran’s Memorial Park and the Dunlop Wildlife Area.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.03 Other Conditions       50.08 Prohibition Against Further Violations
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited   50.09 Adult Establishments
50.05 Nuisance Abatement
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected
and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such
as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation
in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard. (See also
Chapter 52)
10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
11.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
12.   Obstruction of Drainage. Any article or substance placed upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, public ground, or in any ditch, waterway, or gutter so as to
obstruct the same.
13.   Obstruction of View. All trees, hedges, or other obstructions which
prevent persons from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection
from cross street in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a
reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.
14.   Trash Piles. Accumulation of rubbish or trash tending to harbor vermin or
rodents and creating the hazard of fire.
15.   Septic Effluent. Effluent from a septic tank or drainage field running or
ponding on the ground in the open, including in ditches.
16.   Ponding Water. An accumulation of water until it becomes stagnant.
17.   Construction Site Maintenance. The maintenance of a construction site in
such a manner that litter will not be prevented from being carried by the
elements to adjoining premises.
18.   Compost Pile. Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or
harbor disease, emit unpleasant odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents,
vermin, or other disease carrying pests, animals, or insects.
19.   Storage of Materials. Storing or permitting the storage of material, such
as, but not limited to, sand, gravel, rock, earth, coal, and grain in piles
with side slopes in excess of the angle of repose of said material, the angle
of repose being the angle that the surface of free standing material makes with
the horizontal plane without slipping, sliding, or collapse of the material.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
2.   Noise (See
Chapter 53)
3.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
4.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
5.   Trees (See
Chapter 151)
6.   Construction and Repair of Buildings (See
Chapter 155)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section
50.07.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall contain: †
4   
   A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
   B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
   C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
   D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
   E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the property
owner.
2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent
by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required
action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The
itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the
notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid
within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and
such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the assessment
to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and
with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall
fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required
and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
4 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
50.08   PROHIBITION AGAINST FURTHER VIOLATIONS.
   A person who commits an infraction of a City ordinance subject to the
provisions of this chapter may be ordered by the Court to cease further
violations of the same provisions of the ordinance. Failure of the person to
adhere to this order will result in contempt proceedings being initiated by the
City.
50.09   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including but not limited to
public rights-of-way, adjacent to the premises:
   A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as defined
in Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts injury
or death.
   B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in Section
702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
   C.   Engages in a riot as defined in Section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on
three or more dates within a 12-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12)
(Section 50.09 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
   A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window,
headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
   B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
   C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
   D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
   E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
   F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of its
defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated within
the City.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement procedures as
outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 52
WEEDS
 
52.01 Purpose          52.04 Responsibility of Owner or Occupants
52.02 Definition       52.05 Notification and Assessment of Costs
52.03 Removal of Weeds
 
52.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens, and safety of property of, the City by providing for the cutting
of weeds.
52.02   DEFINITION.
As used in this chapter, the term “weeds” means unattended vines, brush and
scrub bushes, grass, and other similar vegetation, whether noxious or
otherwise.
52.03   REMOVAL OF WEEDS.
All weeds growing on lots and parcels of ground within the City limits shall
automatically be deemed a health, safety, and fire hazard after the dates set
forth below, and shall be cut no later than said date shown below for each
cutting. In cases of a second or third growth of said weeds, the owners or
occupants shall again cut or otherwise destroy the growth before the required
cutting date. The dates by which all cutting shall be done are the first and
fifteenth of each month and at all times when weeds or grass reach the
following heights:
 
Maximum Vegetation Height Land Uses
8 inches                  Developed residential, commercial, and industrial
                          zoned areas
12 inches                 Undeveloped residential, commercial, and industrial
                          zoned areas
18 inches                 Unplatted property and agriculture-owned property
                          unless planted for farm cropping purposes
 
52.04   RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANTS.
The property owner or occupants shall also be jointly or severally responsible
for the cutting of such growths on the abutting space between the lot line and
the curb line or edge of the traveled way within the street right-of-way,
whether in front of or along the side of the lot or parcel of ground, and one-
half of any alley abutting the property.
52.05   NOTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
The Mayor shall notify the property owner or occupant when the weeds are taller
than the limits set out herein. If the weeds are not cut within seven days,
then the City will have the weeds or growth cut and assess the costs against
the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
CHAPTER 53
NOISE CONTROL
 
53.01 Scope of Regulations         53.05 Excluded Sounds
53.02 Definitions                  53.06 Sound Equipment Permit
53.03 Noise Disturbance Prohibited 53.07 Other Laws and Ordinances
53.04 Included Sounds
 
53.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
This chapter applies to the control of all noise originating within the limits
of the City, except in the following cases:
1.   A State or federal agency has adopted a different standard or rule than
that prescribed within this chapter which preempts the regulation of noise from
a particular source so as to render this chapter inapplicable; or
2.   The Council has determined that, by reason of public acceptance of the
activity producing a particular noise or noises, such noise is deemed
acceptable to the residents of the City.
53.02   DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms have the following meanings. Definitions of
technical terms used in this chapter which are not herein defined shall be
obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI):
1.   “Application” means the permit application discussed in Section
53.06 of this chapter.
2.   “Emergency” means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands
immediate action.
3.   “Emergency work” means any work performed for the purpose of alleviating
or resolving an emergency.
4.   “Motorcycle” means any two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle.
5.   “Motor vehicle” means any motor-powered vehicle designed to carry at least
one passenger or driver and of the type typically licensed for use on the
public highways. (Note: “motor vehicle” includes most motorcycles.)
6.   “Noise” means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
7.   “Noise disturbance” means those sounds defined as “noise disturbances” in
Section
53.04 of this chapter which have not otherwise been excepted and excluded from
said Section
53.04 under any of Sections
53.01,
53.05, or
53.06 of this chapter.
8.   “Powered model vehicle” means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or
land-borne model plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry
persons, including but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or
rocket.
9.   “Public right-of-way” means the traveled portion of any street or alley or
similar place which is owned or controlled by the City or other governmental
entity.
10.   “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by
one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building
real property division.
11.   “Recreational vehicle” means any motor-powered vehicle designed to carry
at least one passenger or driver and equipped for use in racing or other
recreational events or uses off of public right-of-way on public or private
property; except, however, for the purposes of this chapter, any such vehicle
which is licensed for use on the public highways is deemed a “motor vehicle”
(or “motorcycle” if two- or three-wheeled) and not a “recreational vehicle.”
(Examples of recreational vehicles are a snowmobile, a minibike, a stock car,
or motorboat.)
12.   “Residential property” means any property on which is located a building
or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.
13.   “Sound” means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
14.   “Sound equipment” means any radio, record player, tape deck or player,
loud speaker, amplifier, sound track, or other device for producing,
reproducing, or amplifying sound, except, however, “sound equipment” does not
include:
   A.   Sirens and other equipment used to alert persons to the existence of an
emergency;
   B.   Equipment used by law enforcement and other public safety officials in
the performance of their official duties;
   C.   Church carillons, bells, or chimes;
   D.   Mobile radio or telephone signaling devices; and
   E.   Automobile and truck radios, tape decks, or players or other such
standard equipment used and intended for the use and enjoyment of the occupants
provided that the sound emitted therefrom is not audible for more than 50 feet
from such automobile or truck.
53.03   NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause or allow
to be made or continued any noise disturbance within the City.
53.04   INCLUDED SOUNDS.
Except for sounds excluded under any of Sections
53.01,
53.05, or
53.06 of this chapter, the term “noise disturbance” means any of the following
sounds:
1.   Injurious or Disturbing Sounds Generally. Any sound which endangers or
injures the welfare, safety, or health of a human being or disturbs a
reasonable human being of normal sensitivities or causes or tends to cause an
adverse physiological or physical effect on human beings or devalues or injures
property.
2.   Selling by “Hawking” or “Barking.” The sound of selling by shout or outcry
when made within the areas of the City zoned residential or commercial.
3.   Loading and Unloading. The sound made by outdoor loading, unloading,
opening, closing, or handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any area
of the City zoned residential. The sound made by the outdoor loading,
unloading, opening, closing, or handling of trash cans, trash containers, trash
receptacles, trash dumpsters, or similar objects which is received between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential
property.
4.   Engine Repairs and Testing. The sound made by the repairing, rebuilding,
modifying, or testing of a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle which is
received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property
boundary of residential property.
5.   Powered Model Vehicles. The sound made by the operation of a powered model
vehicle which is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the
real property boundary of residential property.
6.   Musical Instruments. The sound made by a drum, horn, reed instrument,
string instrument, or other musical instrument or device which is received
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property boundary of
residential property.
7.   Off-road Motorcycle and Recreational Vehicle Noise. The sound made on
private property or on City-owned property other than a public right-of-way by
a motorcycle or recreational vehicle and received between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential property;
provided, however, the sound made by a motorcycle when traveling from private
property to a public right-of-way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal
ingress or egress for purposeful transportation is not a noise disturbance
unless made so by some provisions of this section other than this Subsection 7.
8.   Construction Noise. The sound made by tools or equipment in erection,
demolition, excavation, drilling, or other such construction work which is
received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at the real property
boundary of residential property.
9.   Sound Equipment. The sound made by sound equipment operated upon the
public right-of-way or in any building or upon any premises, public or private,
if plainly audible from any public right-of-way within the City between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., unless the person using, operating, or
causing to be used or operated the sound equipment possesses a current sound
equipment permit and the actual use or operation of such sound equipment is not
inconsistent with the statements made in the application or the conditions
imposed in the sound equipment permit.
10.   Racing. The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on
private property or public right-of-way during any racing event or time trial,
whether organized or unorganized.
11.   Screeching Tires. The sound made by the intentional screeching or
squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle in areas of the City zoned
residential or commercial.
12.   Noisy Exhaust System. The sound made by a motor vehicle or a recreational
vehicle whose exhaust system has been modified by the installation of a muffler
cut-out or bypass or the sound made by such vehicle whose exhaust system emits
an excessive or unusual sound as compared to the sound emitted by its original
exhaust system, whether caused by modification, substitution, age, injury, or
deterioration of its original exhaust system. For the purposes of this section
the sound made by a vehicle’s original exhaust system may be determined by the
observation of the sound made by the original exhaust system of another similar
vehicle.
13.   Animal or Bird Noises. The frequent or habitual sound made by a
domesticated animal or bird, other than livestock owned or possessed for
agricultural purposes, which is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m. at the real property boundary of residential property.
53.05   EXCLUDED SOUNDS.
Any other provision of Section
53.04 or other section of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the
term “noise disturbance,” as used in this chapter, does not mean or include the
following sounds:
1.   Lawn and Garden Equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered muffler-
equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
2.   Chain Saws. The sound emitted by motor-powered tree-trimming equipment
operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
3.   Snow Removal Equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered, muffler-
equipped snow removal equipment operated between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m. and the sound emitted by City-owned or hired snow removal equipment.
4.   Emergencies. The sound emitted in the performance of emergency work or to
alert persons to the existence of an emergency.
5.   Alarms. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors of any
fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary
emergency signaling device for emergency purpose or for the essential testing
of such device.
6.   Church Bells. The sound emitted by church carillons, bells, or chimes.
7.   Automobile Radios. The sound emitted by an automobile or truck radio, tape
deck or player, or other such standard equipment used and intended for the use
and enjoyment of such vehicle’s occupants while such vehicle is on the public
right-of-way, provided that the sound emitted therefrom is not audible for more
than 50 feet.
8.   Certain Signaling Devices. The sound emitted by mobile radio or telephone
signaling devices.
9.   Religious Ceremonies. The sound emitted in conjunction with a religious
celebration.
10.   Law Enforcement. The sounds made or caused to be made by law enforcement
officials in the performance of their official duties.
11.   Construction Noise. The sound emitted by construction work (erection,
demolition, excavation, drilling, etc.) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., which is being performed pursuant to a proper and current building
permit.
12.   Mosquito Spraying Equipment. The sound made by the City-owned or hired
mosquito spraying equipment.
13.   City and School Events. The sound made by City or school sponsored
events.
53.06   SOUND EQUIPMENT PERMIT.
No person shall use, operate, or cause to be used or operated any sound
equipment upon the public rights-of-way or in any building or upon any
premises, public or private, if the sound emitted thereby is plainly audible
from the public right-of-way within the City, unless such person has obtained a
sound equipment permit in accordance with this chapter, and the actual use or
operation of such sound equipment is not inconsistent with the statements made
in the application or the conditions imposed in the sound equipment permit.
1.   Application for Permit. Applications for sound equipment permits shall be
made in writing to the Clerk or Building Official and shall contain the
following information:
   A.   Name and address of applicant.
   B.   The type of event for which the sound equipment will be used.
   C.   The location where the sound equipment will be used.
   D.   The proposed date and duration of the event and the hours of operation
of the sound equipment.
   E.   A general description of the sound equipment, including whether the
sound source will be located inside a building or outside as well as the
license number of any motor vehicle upon which said sound equipment is to be
operated if applicable.
   F.   Any other information as may be required by the Clerk or Building
Official.
2.   Permit Fee. The fee for a sound equipment permit is $25.00 for up to seven
days. No permit is required for sound equipment used by the City, the State or
the federal government at events sponsored by the governmental subdivision or
agency thereof.
3.   Issuance of Permit. Permits may be issued by the Clerk or Building
Official. Except as hereinafter provided, if the application contains the
required information and is accompanied by the required fee, the sound
equipment permit shall be issued with reasonable dispatch.
4.   Limitations. A sound equipment permit shall not be issued if the sound to
be emitted by the sound equipment would be a noise disturbance under Section
53.04 (other than Section
53.04(9)) of this chapter. A sound equipment permit issued in violation of this
Subsection 4 is void and of no force and effect.
5.   Conditions. The Building Official or the Council may impose reasonable
conditions and requirements to be met or fulfilled by the sound equipment
permit holder preliminary to or at the time of the use or operation of the
sound equipment. Such conditions and requirements shall be those conditions and
requirements necessary or advisable to protect the health, welfare, and quality
of life of the residents of the City and may include, without limitation,
restrictions on the time of day the sound equipment can be used or operated,
restrictions on the level of the sound to be produced, and restrictions on the
number of minutes or consecutive minutes that the sound equipment may be used
or operated during any one hour or day.
6.   Permissibility. Any other language to the contrary in this chapter
notwithstanding, sound made by sound equipment for which a valid sound
equipment permit has been issued under this Section
53.06 shall be permissible hereunder and shall not constitute a violation of
this chapter regardless of the fact that said sound equipment may be operated
upon the public right-of-way or in a building or upon premises, public or
private, that is plainly audible from a public right-of-way within the City.
53.07   OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
No provisions of this chapter should be construed to legalize or permit sounds,
devices, or activities made unlawful by other ordinances of the City or State
or federal statutes.
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.12 Unhealthful or Unsanitary Conditions
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.13 Dead Animal
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.14 Owner’s Duty
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.15 Confinement
55.05 Livestock                    55.16 At Large: Impoundment
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.17 Disposition of Animals
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.18 Feeding Animals
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.19 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.09 Vicious Dogs                 55.20 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.10 Rabies Vaccination           55.21 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
55.11 Number of Animals Limited
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium, including
(but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag, or
articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain dogs
or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a
veterinary hospital or kennel.
5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
   B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
   C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
   D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
   C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
8.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section
99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
9.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an animal’s
health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or organ, or
the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
10.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
11.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
12.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
13.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
14.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine, veterinary
medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital, diagnostic
or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific establishment
situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or instruction
concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the cause,
prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human beings
or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
15.   “Stray” or “feral” means an animal that is unowned, unclaimed, or a cat
or dog that does not possess a collar, harness, or identification.
16.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169 of
the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
   A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
   B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably sufficient
to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered. Access to snow or ice does not satisfy this
requirement.
   C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
   D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate protection
from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species, and
physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of
good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is endangered. The
shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun and have adequate
bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and dampness. A shelter
may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
   E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent adverse
health effects or suffering.
   F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
      (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s welfare
as described in this section.
      (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal to
suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part of
the commercial establishment’s operation.
      (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as described
in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care requirements
provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any applicable
rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship applying
to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section 162.10A
[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant to
Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or renewed
a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions within the
scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the research
facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to
fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership
and custody of the cat or dog.
2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or that has been issued
or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by written
consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning
regulations.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   VICIOUS DOGS.
It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious dog within the City.
A dog is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked or bitten any person without
provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons exists and is known
or ought reasonably to be known to the owner.
55.10   RABIES VACCINATION.
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is
unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept
in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not
subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11   NUMBER OF ANIMALS LIMITED.
It is unlawful for an owner to harbor or house on the same premises more than
three animals over the age of three months unless such animals are in a kennel
licensed by the Council, or a pet shop, veterinary hospital, or animal grooming
shop.
55.12   UNHEALTHFUL OR UNSANITARY CONDITIONS.
1.   An owner shall keep all structures, pens, coops or yards wherein animals
are confined clean, devoid of vermin and free of odors arising from feces.
2.   No owner or walker of any animal shall permit the animal to discharge
feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner
of the animal. The owner or walker shall be deemed to permit the animal’s
discharge of feces if the owner does not immediately thereafter take steps to
remove and clean up the feces from the property.
3.   All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in an airtight container
and shall be stored in a sanitary manner in an appropriate refuse container
until it is removed pursuant to refuse collection procedures or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner.
4.   An owner may, as an alternative to Subsection 3 above, collect the feces
and turn it under the surface of the owner’s soil in any manner that prevents
odor or collection of vermin.
55.13   DEAD ANIMAL.
The owner of any deceased animal shall properly bury or dispose of the animal
within 24 hours of the animal’s death.
55.14   OWNER’S DUTY.
It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten or
attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.15   CONFINEMENT.
If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.16   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City, or at the
discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear
before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.17   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by
the owner upon payment of impounding costs established by the impoundment
facility owner, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately
vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven days from the
date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven
days, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by
euthanasia. Animal owners shall be responsible for all associated fines and
fees whether or not they claim their impounded animal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.18   FEEDING ANIMALS.
It shall be illegal for any person to feed and water any stray or feral animal.
Owners shall only put out food and water sufficient to meet the needs of the
animals under their care. This section shall not apply to the feeding of wild
birds or squirrels.
55.19   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
   A.   A prize for participating in a game.
   B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
   C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
   D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
   B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.20   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag if
all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies vaccination
tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.21   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
   B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached to
an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness, or
vest.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
56.01 Definitions                  56.04 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition
56.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 56.05 Exceptions
Prohibited
56.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals
Prohibited
 
56.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Dangerous animal” means the following animals: † 5
   A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink.
   B.   Raccoons.
   C.   Bats.
   D.   Scorpions.
   E.   Opossums.
   F.   Piranhas.
2.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal as listed
above, that has attacked, bitten or clawed a person while running at large and
the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious tendencies
in present or past conduct, including such that said animal: (i) has bitten or
clawed a person or persons on two separate occasions within a 12-month period;
or (ii) did bite or claw once causing injuries above the shoulders of a person;
or (iii) could not be controlled or restrained by the owner at the time of the
attack to prevent the occurrence; or (iv) has attacked any domestic animal or
fowl on three separate occasions within a 12-month period.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Certain other dangerous animals, listed in Chapter 717F.1,
5 Paragraph 5a, of the Code of Iowa, are specifically prohibited and regulated by
  the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship.
56.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act
as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such
animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
56.03   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the Mayor or peace officer that a
guard dog is on duty at said premises.
56.04   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.
1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at large
and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons
or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or peace officer,
be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or vicious
animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such
animal prior to its destruction.
2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering
or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in the City, the
Mayor or peace officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after
investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in the City, the
Mayor or peace officer shall order the person named in the complaint to safely
remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal within three days of the
receipt of such an order. Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove
the dangerous or vicious animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the
person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dangerous animal or vicious
animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and
notice to remove the dangerous animal or vicious animal shall not be required
where such animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any
person, in which case the Mayor or peace officer shall cause the animal to be
immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not
possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
Mayor or peace officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such
order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or
vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute
a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the Mayor or peace officer.
4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or peace officer. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with
the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor or peace officer, the
Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering,
harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from
the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon
the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal.
If the original order of the Mayor or peace officer is not appealed and is not
complied with within three days or the order of the Council after appeal is not
complied with within three days of its issuance, the Mayor or peace officer is
authorized to seize, impound or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal.
Failure to comply with an order of the Mayor or peace officer issued pursuant
to this chapter and not appealed (or of the Council after appeal) constitutes a
simple misdemeanor.
56.05   EXCEPTIONS.
The following exceptions shall be applied to this chapter on dangerous and
vicious animals:
1.   Animals that are under the control of a law enforcement or military
agency.
2.   Guard dogs, when they are kept within a structure of fixed enclosure at
all times, and where the premises is clearly marked with signage containing the
wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog,” or words of similar import along all sides
where the property is adjacent to public right-of-way and where it is
reasonably expected that a person or persons would approach the property.
3.   An animal who is deemed to be defending or protecting its owner from an
unjustified attack or physical assault or if it is defending itself from an
unprovoked attack from another animal.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.08 Parades Regulated
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters
60 through
70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Orange City
Traffic Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are hereby adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
   The areas of the City described on the City’s Zoning Map as General
Commercial.
2.   “Municipal parking lot” means the entire portion of all parcels of
property owned by the City and improved and designated for vehicular parking.
3.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
4.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
5.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
6.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
7.   “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51A))
8.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
9.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
10.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
11.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
12.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
13.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
14.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
15.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. Vehicle does not include:
   A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric
bicycle.
   B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of the
Code of Iowa.
   D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is mounted
on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind the cab
and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which cannot be
drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
   E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(90))
(Section 60.02 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES REGULATED.
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
1.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Mayor. Such permit shall state the time and date for
the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written
permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be
permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have
been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be required
for such permit.
2.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
3.   Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the
performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
4.   Parade Permits Denied. Parade permits denied can be appealed to the
Council.
5.   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to regularly
scheduled events sponsored by community schools, colleges, or the Tulip
Festival Steering Committee.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or
emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency
or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or
warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Milling
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle      62.08 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial vehicles.
15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits, and
chauffeur’s instruction permits.
17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle rental.
30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals; unlawful
possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited; vehicle
damage only; removal of vehicles.
40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal injury
accident.
41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
60.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
61.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
62.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
63.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
64.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
65.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
66.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
67.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
68.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
69.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
70.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
71.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
72.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
73.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
74.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
75.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
76.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
77.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
78.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
79.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
80.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
81.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
82.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
83.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
84.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
85.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
86.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
87.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
88.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
89.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
90.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
91.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
92.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
93.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
94.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
95.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully controlled-access facilities.
96.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
97.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
98.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
99.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
100.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
101.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements; penalties.
102.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
103.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
104.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
105.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
106.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
107.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
108.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
109.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
110.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
111.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
112.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
113.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
114.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
115.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
116.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
117.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
118.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
119.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
120.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
121.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
122.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
123.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
124.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
125.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
126.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
127.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
128.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
129.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
130.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
131.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
132.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
133.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
134.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
135.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
136.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
137.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
138.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
139.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
140.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
141.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
142.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
143.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
144.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
145.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
146.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
147.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
148.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
149.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
150.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while operating a
commercial motor vehicle.
151.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
152.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
153.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
154.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
155.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
156.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
157.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
158.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
159.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
160.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
161.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
162.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall
drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   MILLING.
It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others, in
any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the
interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any
person.
62.08   ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate within the City
any engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to
aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle, which results in excessive,
loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle, except in the case of an
emergency to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with others, in any
processional milling or repeated movement over any street to the interference
with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of any person.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1.   Business District – 20 miles per hour.
2.   Residence or School District – 25 miles per hour.
3.   Suburban District – 45 miles per hour.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any public park, cemetery, or parking
lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   On Industrial Way, from HWY 10 to Albany Place SE.
   B.   On Frankfort Place, from 14th Street SE to 460th Street.
   C.   On St. Paul Avenue, from 7th Street NE to HWY 10.
   D.   On 8th Street (Highway 10) from Iowa Avenue to Florida Avenue and from
Albany Avenue to 1,340 feet east of Jay Avenue/St. Paul Avenue (Orange City
Limits).
(Paragraph D – Ord. 859 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
2.   Special 30 MPH Speed Zone. A speed in excess of 30 miles per hour is
unlawful on 8th Street (Highway 10) from Florida Avenue to Albany Avenue.
(Subsection 2 – Ord. 859 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Through Streets 65.05 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.02 Stop Required   65.06 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.03 Yield Required  65.07 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
65.04 School Stops    65.08 Official Traffic Controls
 
65.01   THROUGH STREETS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through
streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
For specific locations, please reference the City street map maintained at City
Hall.
65.02   STOP REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
For specific locations, please reference the City street map maintained at City
Hall.
65.03   YIELD REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
For specific locations, please reference the City street map maintained at City
Hall.
65.04   SCHOOL STOPS.
At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching
said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have
passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
For specific locations, please reference the City street map maintained at City
Hall.
65.05   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.06   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.07   PEDESTRIANS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
(Section 65.07 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
65.08   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS.
Every driver shall observe and comply with the directions provided by official
traffic control signals at the following intersections:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
For specific locations, please reference the City street map maintained at City
Hall.
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.1)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
- NONE -
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers
of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTE.
Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1.   Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing five tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and
none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
- NONE -
2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing five tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite
stop within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over
or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of
its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and
return by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated
route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner or any other person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate
signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
- NONE -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb             69.09 All Night Parking Prohibited
69.02 Parking on One-Way Streets        69.10 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Angle Parking                     69.11 Snow Removal
69.04 Manner of Angle Parking           69.12 Snow Routes
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes      69.13 Winter Overnight Parking
Illegal                                 Prohibited
69.06 Parking Prohibited                69.14 Parking of Nuisance Vehicles
69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking 69.15 Parking of Recreational Vehicles
69.08 No Parking Zones
 
69.01   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1.   Central Avenue, on both sides, from 3rd Street S to 5th Street N.
2.   Arizona Avenue, on both sides, from 4th Street SW to mid-block 4th/5th
Street SW.
3.   Arizona Avenue, on the east side, from 3rd Street SW to 2nd Street SW.
4.   Arizona Avenue, on both sides, from 2nd Street SW to 1st Street W.
5.   Arizona Avenue, on the east side, from 1st Street W to 2nd Street NW.
6.   Albany Avenue, on both sides, from 1st Street E to 3rd Street NE.
7.   2nd Street SW, on the south side, from Central Avenue SW to Arizona Avenue
SW.
8.   1st Street on both sides, from Albany Avenue to Central Avenue.
9.   2nd Street N, on both sides, from Albany Avenue NE to Arizona Avenue NW.
10.   3rd Street N, on both sides, from Albany Avenue NE to Arizona Avenue NW.
11.   Georgia Avenue SW, on the east side, from 8th Street SW to 7th Street SW.
69.04   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
5.   Non-self-Propelled Vehicles or Equipment. No person shall park or store a
trailer, camper, boats, or other non-self-propelled vehicle or equipment on any
street or municipal parking lot in the City.
69.06   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
14.   Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is hereby
reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel
having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab stand, bus
depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are being
held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall
be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging
passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary
for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley
which is 18 feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is parked to deliver goods
or services. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no vehicle shall park in an alley
in the Central Business District for more than 30 minutes in a 60-minute period
between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part
of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
18.   State Highway. On the minor street approach for a distance of 35 feet in
advance of the stop sign, or on the exit side of the minor street for a
distance of 35 feet from the State highway.
69.07   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
   A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
   B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
   C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8
of the Code of Iowa.
3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
   A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply
with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when utilizing
a wheelchair parking cone.
   B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.08   NO PARKING ZONES.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the specifically
designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic
control signal. A list of all no parking zones in the City is maintained by the
City Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.09   ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a
vehicle on any of the following named streets overnight from August 15 to May
15 annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   7th Street SW on the south side, from Colorado Avenue SW to Delaware
Avenue SW.
2.   6th Street SW on the north side, from Colorado Avenue SW to Delaware
Avenue SW.
3.   6th Street SW on the south side, from Colorado Avenue SW to Albany Avenue
SW.
4.   Colorado Avenue SW on the east side, from 5th Street SW to 7th Street SW.
5.   Arizona Avenue SW on the west side, from 5th Street SW to 7th Street SW.
69.10   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached weighting five tons or more, loaded or empty on any street
within the City.
69.11   SNOW REMOVAL.
No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during snow removal
operations unless the snow has been removed or plowed from said street, alley
or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
69.12   SNOW ROUTES.
The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.13   WINTER OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No motor vehicle shall be permitted to be parked on any street between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily beginning October 15 and ending on April
1 annually. The following exceptions shall be allowed:
1.   Vehicles parked immediately adjacent to the place of employment of the
operator when they are engaged in their employment.
2.   Attended disabled vehicles.
3.   Emergency vehicles.
69.14   PARKING OF NUISANCE VEHICLES.
Vehicles which emit offensive, noisome, or dangerous odors or fumes and vehicle
which are loaded with volatile, poisonous, or otherwise dangerous substances
shall not be parked on the public right-of-way. This provision shall not apply
to vehicles parked near service areas for the purpose of loading and unloading,
refueling, meals, or
69.15   PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
1.   It is unlawful to park a boat trailer, utility trailer, or unoccupied
motor home, travel trailer, or camping trailer, on any public street, alley or
place for a period of time in excess of 48 hours. Upon application to the City
Council, emergency or temporary parking for occupied travel trailers, campers
and motor homes may be permitted at designated locations on public streets,
alleys, or any other public or private place for a three-day period, subject to
extended time of up to three days upon reapplication, and subject to any other
prohibitions or regulations imposed by traffic and parking ordinances of the
City.
2.   Occupied recreational vehicles may be parked and occupied on private
property no longer than 14 consecutive days of continuously occupying, living
in, or using a recreational vehicle, only if the property is already developed,
with a maximum of 28 days total in the calendar year. Only one occupied
recreational vehicle and one tent shall be allowed at one time on a residential
lot. When recreational vehicles are occupied, the property owner shall notify
the City Clerk of period of occupancy. If complaints are received by the City
arising from the use of a recreational vehicle or tent, the City reserves the
right to restrict occupancy of recreational vehicles or tents.
3.   Recreational vehicles shall not be used for business purposes in any
zoning district.
4.   Motor vehicles and trailers of any kind or type without current license
plates shall not be parked or stored on any lot other than in a completely
enclosed building for a period in excess of 48 hours.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk. The fine for each violation charged under a simple
notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $10.00 for all violations except
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not
paid within 30 days, it shall be increased by $5.00. The fine for improper use
of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose             75.06 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.02 Definitions         75.07 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.03 General Regulations 75.08 Negligence
75.04 Permits             75.09 Accident Reports
75.05 Street Restrictions
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than
four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a
seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the
operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road utility
vehicle” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
   B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than Type
1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
   C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of
this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48
inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed
for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle
that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or
treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   PERMTS.
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 840 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
75.05   STREET RESTRICTIONS.
No ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be operated on State HWY 10. ATVs, UTV, or
snowmobiles may cross State HWY 10 at Lincoln, Frankfort, Albany, and Iowa
Avenues. No snowmobile shall be operated on State HWY 10. Snowmobiles may cross
State HWY 10 at Lincoln, Frankfort, Albany, and Iowa Avenues.
(Ord. 840 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
75.06   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon City streets except for
the most direct route from the point of origin to outside the City limits. (See
also Section
75.05)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under
the following circumstances:
   A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency
during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
   B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited
street provided all of the following occur:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
      (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
4.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property. A snowmobile shall not be
operated on any City land without a snow cover of at least two inches.
5.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.07   OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
The operators of ATVs shall comply with the following restrictions as to where
ATVs may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 840 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
2.   Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
4.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk
or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
5.   Direct Crossing. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 840 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
75.08   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage
only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate
the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.09   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging From Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or
by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Whenever
such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article that
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
1.   Downtown Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the Business District, as defined in Section
60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   TOWING.
It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other
vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for
such use.
76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.
No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.11   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a distance of at
least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except that a red reflector on
the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 77
SKATEBOARDS, SKATES, AND SCOOTERS
 
77.01 Purpose     77.04 Rules Applicable To Operation
77.02 Definitions 77.05 Penalties
77.03 Prohibition
 
77.01   PURPOSE.
The City Council hereby determines that restrictions for the operation and use
of roller-skates, skateboards, and scooters within the downtown Central
Business District of the City is necessary and proper for promoting public
safety and protection of property, all for the common good.
77.02   DEFINTIONS.
1.   “Downtown Central Business District” means the area of the City bounded by
the following streets:
   A.   East: Alley between Albany and Boston
   B.   South: South 3rd Street
   C.   West: Arizona Avenue
   D.   North: North 4th Street
2.   “Electric scooter” means an electrically driven scooter equipped with two
or more wheels and designed so that the rider or operator stands on the vehicle
while the same is in motion and having a top attainable speed of less than 25
MPH.
3.   “Motorized scooter” means a motor driven scooter equipped with two or more
wheels and designed so that the rider or operator stands on the vehicle while
the same is in motion and having a top attainable speed of less than 25 MPH.
4.   “Operator” means a person who operates or is in actual control of a
skateboard, roller skates, or scooter.
5.   “Roller skates” means a shoe with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe and commonly known as “roller
skates” or “in-line skates.”
6.   “Scooter” means a motor driven or non-motor driven scooter equipped with
two or more wheels and designed so that the rider or operator stands on the
vehicle while in motion and having a top attain able speed of less than 25 MPH.
7.   “Skateboard” means a wheeled device designed to transport a rider in a
standing position, which device is not otherwise secured to a rider’s feet or
shoes.
77.03   PROHIBITION.
No person shall ride a skateboard, roller-skates, in-line skates, or scooters
on any public sidewalk in front of business or professional establishments
anywhere within the City. Nothing in this section shall be meant to prohibit
the use of skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, or scooters in a safe
manner upon other public ways including bike paths or specially marked usage
zones.
77.04   RULES APPLICABLE TO OPERATION.
No person shall operate any electric scooter or motorized scooter upon any
public street designate for such use unless such person fully complies with and
operates such vehicle in accordance with the following rules:
1.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any electric scooter or
motorized scooter unless such person has a valid driver’s license.
2.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any motorized scooter or
electric scooter vehicle except during daylight hours, or such more restrictive
hours as may be prescribed by the Council for each street or portion of street
over which the operation of such vehicles is permitted.
3.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any motorized scooter or
electric scooter except in complete compliance with rules of the road and all
other applicable traffic laws relating to the operation of motor vehicles and
pedestrian traffic.
4.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any motorized scooter or
electric scooter in any manner except a safe and courteous manner, having due
regard for the conditions of the street, weather conditions, and the safety of
others.
5.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any motorized scooter or
electric scooter with more passengers than the designed capacity of the
vehicle, including the driver.
6.   No person shall drive or otherwise operate any motorized scooter or
electric scooter on any property within the City, including private property,
while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
77.05   PENALTIES.
1.   Violation by Adult - Warning or Simple Misdemeanor. Violation of this
chapter by an adult shall, for the first offense, result in a warning; and upon
a second violation, the adult shall be charged with a simple misdemeanor. Upon
conviction, the adult shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00.
2.   Violation by Minor - Warning or Simple Misdemeanor. Violation of this
chapter by a minor shall, for the first offense, result in a warning; and, upon
a second violation, the minor shall be charged with a simple misdemeanor. Upon
conviction, the minor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. As an
alternative, the Court may order the minor to perform community service if the
minor presents an acceptable plan of community service prearranged with a
willing public or nonprofit private agency or otherwise as the Court may deem
best.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] and Sec. 321.90)
1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
   A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
   B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours.
   C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 24 hours.
   D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
   E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to
create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
   F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a County or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of
any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may
employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or
disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the
abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police
authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police
authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the
registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been taken
into custody no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle. Notice
shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant
to the vehicle.
2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all of
the following:
   A.   A description of the year, make, model, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
   B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
   C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
   D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
   E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is
deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the vehicle
at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to dispose of
the personal property by sale or destruction.
3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or
by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or personal property by the
police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges
provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police
authority to contest those matters.
5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day reclaiming
period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have any right,
title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property.
6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title,
claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the expiration
of the 10-day reclaiming period.
7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identities
and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles but shall be published within the same time
requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice
in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
80.04   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received
notice under Section
80.03 shall present to the police authority or private entity, as applicable,
the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of financial liability coverage
as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.05   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as
established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of
the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the
amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                   90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties     90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections         90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections         90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit                        90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Connection Charge             90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required              90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                   90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from
the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
3.   “Superintendent” means the Water Treatment Foreman of the City or any duly
authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and
their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to
water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall
apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new
ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or
used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public
water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new
tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off
at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the permit
is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an
extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit
may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06   CONNECTION CHARGE.
Before any permit is issued, the person who makes the application shall pay a
connection charge in the amount of $350.00, plus the cost of the water meter
(see Section
91.06), to the Clerk to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in
making water service available to the property served.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises shall
be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the
Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or
premises may be shut off independently of the other.
2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter shall
receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six inches
in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall
be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be either Type K
copper or polyethylene pipe that is CTS Class 200 minimum AWWA C901. Pipes
shall be a minimum of three fourths of an inch inside diameter and all
polyethylene shall be installed with No. 12 solid copper tracer wire. Tracer
wire shall start at the water main, surface at the curb stop, and continue
until the water meter. Connections to the polyethylene service pipe shall be
with brass compression style fittings with stainless steel insert stiffeners.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe shall be borne by the owner as follows:
1.   From the curb stop to the building, for services one inch or less.
2.   From the main to the building, for services greater than one inch.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water
service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.14   CURB VALVE.
There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve
on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The
shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or
ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved by the Superintendent before they are covered. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours after
the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner
or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs
before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of
any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected, a $25.00 service
restoration fee has been paid, and the Superintendent has ordered the water to
be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the
curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall
open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Accuracy Test
91.05 Meter Setting
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by the City.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of
a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER COSTS.
The cost of any meter shall be determined by the City and paid by the property
owner or customer at the time of application for a permit as outlined in
Section
90.06.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent, or designee, shall be permitted to enter the premises of
any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09   ACCURACY TEST.
The Superintendent shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter at any
time when requested in writing, but not more often than once in six months. If
the meter is found to overrun to the extent of two percent or more, the cost of
the test shall be paid by the City and a refund shall be made to the customer
for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy but not for
longer than three months, plus the meter test deposit. If the meter is found to
be accurate or slow, or less than two percent fast, the customer deposit shall
be forfeited as the reasonable costs of the test, and the customer shall be
liable for any deficiency over two percent up to three months.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Rates Outside the City    92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.09 Customer Deposits
92.05 Service Discontinued      92.10 Temporary Vacancy
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in
Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
Water service shall be furnished at the following rates within the City:
 
RESIDENTIAL WATER SERVICE RATES
Effective July 7, 2022             Effective January 5, 2023
Customer Charge             $18.00 Customer Charge                   $20.00
Volume Charge per 100 cubic        Volume Charge per 100 cubic feet:
feet:                       $4.08  Summer (June-September)           $4.70
Summer (June-September)     $3.03  Winter (October-May)              $3.65
Winter (October-May)
Meters are read and billed monthly.
 
 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WATER SERVICE RATES
Effective July 7, 2022             Effective January 5, 2023
Customer Charge             $24.00 Customer Charge                   $26.00
Volume Charge per 100 cubic        Volume Charge per 100 cubic feet:
feet:                       $4.08  Summer (June-September)           $4.70
Summer (June-September)     $3.03  Winter (October-May)              $3.65
Winter (October-May)
Meters are read and billed monthly.
 
 
HIGH VOLUME WATER SERVICE RATES
(average monthly usage over 100,000 cubic feet)
Effective July 7, 2022              Effective January 5, 2023
Customer Charge:             $75.00 Customer Charge:                    $78.00
Volume Charge (per 100 cubic $3.01  Volume Charge (per 100 cubic feet): $3.44
feet):
Meters are read and billed monthly.
(Section 92.02 - Ord. 838 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
92.03   RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the corporate
limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve. No such customer,
however, will be served unless the customer shall have signed a service
contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations applying
to water service established by the Council. Water service shall be furnished
at the following rates outside the corporate limits of the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 and 384.84)
 
WATER SERVICE RATES OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY
Effective July 7, 2022             Effective January 5, 2023
Customer Charge:            $29.50 Customer Charge                   $30.50
Volume Charge per 100 cubic        Volume Charge per 100 cubic feet:
feet:                       $4.86  Summer (June-September)           $5.20
Summer (June-September)     $3.81  Winter (October-May)              $4.15
Winter (October-May)
Meters are read and billed monthly.
The rate for customers outside the corporate limits shall apply to all users in
metered connections existing outside the corporate boundaries of the municipal
corporation of Orange City, Iowa.
(Section 92.03 - Ord. 838 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined service
accounts on or before 10 days following the close of the billing cycle. Close
of billing cycle is the eighteenth day of each month.
2.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by the fifteenth day of the month.
3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 1.5 percent of the amount due
shall be added to each delinquent bill.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will
be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the
notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut
off, the City Clerk or Public Works Director shall conduct an informal hearing
and shall make a determination as to whether the discontinuance or
disconnection is justified. The customer has the right to appeal the City Clerk
or Public Works Director’s decision to the Council, and if the Council finds
that discontinuance or disconnection is justified, then such discontinuance or
disconnection shall be made, unless payment has been received.
4.   Fees. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a
delinquent customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips
in the regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to
the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for nonpayment
of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall not
be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured
home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is owned by a
tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and
the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the
account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is
responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the
account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.
A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
There shall be required from every customer not the owner of the premises
served a $100.00 deposit intended to guarantee the payment of bills for
service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and shut
off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time. There is no fee charged for shutting the water off at
the curb valve; however the owner shall be charged a $25.00 fee for restoring
service. During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as provided
herein there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not drain pipes
or pull meters for temporary vacancies.
CHAPTER 93
WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
 
93.01 Water Main Extension Policy 93.03 Water Main Construction Standards
93.02 Main Extension Charges      93.04 Inspection and Approval
 
93.01   WATER MAIN EXTENSION POLICY.
A water main extension will be made by the City upon application by any person
desiring service to his or her property who signs a contract for such service
and pays the cost thereof through a connection charge or otherwise as required
by this chapter.
1.   No water main will be extended beyond the City limits for commercial or
residential purposes unless the applicant agrees to voluntarily petition for
annexation simultaneously with such extension where the applicant’s property is
contiguous to the corporate limits, or agrees to so petition as soon as the
applicant’s property becomes contiguous to the City limits and files for future
use such petition so conditioned.
2.   Water mains will be extended beyond the City limits for any industrial
establishment which will employ 10 employees or more within one year of the
extension over the above existing employment in the community, without
annexation being required if it is shown that the industry needs the tax
benefit, or if it is on property not contiguous to the City limits.
3.   If the Public Works Director determines that no foreseeable need will
occur for a public water main, and so recommends to the Council upon Council
approval, an applicant for service may be permitted to construct a private main
in an undeveloped public right-of- way (i.e. no traveled way or no more than a
graded or traveled vehicular way), provided the work shall meet the City
requirements for installations in the public way, including placement in the
standard location, protection of work, quality of construction, and
backfilling. Such main shall originate in a meter and be the property of the
owner who shall be responsible for maintenance in the same manner as with water
service pipes. It shall be a condition of the contract for connection that the
City will not reimburse the owner for such a main if it has to be replaced with
a public main after five years or more use.
93.02   MAIN EXTENSION CHARGES.
Water service shall be provided through an extension of a water main in the
following cases:
1.   For distances up to 50 feet beyond existing end of a City-owned main, upon
request of a person who contracts to immediately tap the main upon the
completion of the extension and who can be expected to use water service upon
the completion of construction of the residence or commercial building or
facility to be served, there shall be no connection charge.
2.   Where two applicants, one on each side of a street, make application at
the same time under the same contract conditions as in Subsection 1 above,
extension will be made for 100 feet with no connection charge.
3.   Where a single tap is contemplated by an applicant for an extension
exceeding 50 feet and it is not foreseeable that other customer taps will be
applied for before construction is begun, the applicant shall deposit with the
City Clerk a sum equal to the estimated cost of the extension required, as
determined by the Superintendent, and enter into a contract providing for the
deposit and any future rebates in accordance with the following provisions:
   A.   The City will refund any excess of deposit over the actual cost for the
extension.
   B.   For each customer later connected to the main, the City will rebate the
proportional share (by feet of frontage) as set out in the contract, the cost
of the extension to the original applicant, but not in excess of the final
payment by that applicant, provided such connections are made within five
years, after which time no rebates shall be paid. However, the applicant shall
be entitled to a refund of the unpaid balance of the full amount deposited with
the City whenever the revenue derived from the sale of water to customers
directly connected to the extension is equal in each of two consecutive 12-
month periods within the five years following application to 10 percent of the
total actual cost of the main extension. Customer is defined as the occupant of
a one-unit dwelling, a one-residence portion of a two-unit dwelling, or as a
single commercial establishment contracting for water in its own name (and from
its own meter).
4.   The main extension shall be built to City standards and become the
property of the City as it is installed. If the applicant hires the
construction, the City shall inspect the work for compliance with City
standards and may enforce the specifications.
93.03   WATER MAIN CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
No water tap will be allowed for service to a property except when a public
water main runs along the street in front of the property (unless an alley or
easement is determined by the City to be the best approach to serving the
property) and at least 10 feet beyond the side property line, extended, nearest
to the supply side of the main. The tap must be at least four feet beyond that
property line, extended, of the abutting property. No public main shall be less
than six inches in diameter, but no such six-inch main shall be extended more
than 200 feet, and only if no foreseeable and feasible user can be served
beyond said 200 feet. The City reserves the right to put in the size of main
required for an adequate system of mains in the future to provide fire flow and
adequate pressure for reasonably foreseeable customer service. The main shall
be installed and of the quality required by specifications adopted by the
Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent.
93.04   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved by the Superintendent. If approval is refused, the
plumber or property owner must immediately proceed to correct the work in order
to meet approval.
CHAPTER 94
WATER CONSERVATION
 
94.01 Water Conservation Plan          94.08 Water Watch
94.02 Potential for Water Conservation 94.09 Water Warning
94.03 Uses Subject to Limitation       94.10 Water Emergency
94.04 Authority                        94.11 Reduction in Flow of Water
94.05 Notice                           94.12 Exceptions to Water Conservation
94.06 Exceptions                       94.13 Penalty
94.07 Declaration
 
94.01   WATER CONSERVATION PLAN.
The City Administrator or Public Works Director is authorized to manage the
City’s water supply and to take special measures to preserve the water supply
in the event of a shortage.
94.02   POTENTIAL FOR WATER CONSERVATION.
The City may from time to time have a need to implement water conservation
measures, both on a voluntary and mandatory basis to ensure that an adequate
supply of water is available for essential and emergency uses. Water
conservation measures may be implemented for any reason determined by the City
to be critical enough where the short- or long-term availability of water for
public health, safety and protection is such that the general public’s use of
water should be limited to ensure an adequate supply for the benefit of the
community as a whole. The implementation of water conservation measures shall
be as outlined in this article.
94.03   USES SUBJECT TO LIMITATION.
The City Administrator shall monitor water uses and in consultation with the
City of Orange City, review conditions regarding the available water supplies,
condition of water sources, and overall usage of the water system. If it is
determined by the City Administrator or their designee that conditions are
present that water conservation, either voluntary or mandatory, will be
beneficial to the overall water system they shall declare the implementation of
water conservation measures as outlined in article.
94.04   AUTHORITY.
The City Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to implement water
conservation measures by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of
the use of water for certain nonessential purposes for the duration of the
water shortage in the manner hereinafter set out. In exercising this
discretionary authority, and making the determinations set forth in Section
94.05 below, the City Administrator shall give due consideration to water
levels, available and usable storage on hand, draw down rates, and the
projected supply capability at the well head; supply capacity, rate of usage
and projected supplies of wells in the water system; system purification and
pumping capacity; daily water consumption and consumption projections of the
system’s customers; prevailing and forecast weather conditions; fire service
requirements; pipeline conditions including breakage, stoppages, and leaks;
supplementary source data; and safety and such other data pertinent to the
past, current, and projected water demands.
94.05   NOTICE.
The City Administrator shall provide notice of the declaration of a water
watch, water warning, or water emergency as hereinafter set forth in Section
94.07 below by whatever means may be reasonably available to notify all person
in the City of the water conversation efforts to be imposed. However, no
penalties for violation of the declared water alert or water emergency shall be
imposed until the declaration shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City; but upon such publication, all person in the City
shall be required to comply with the terms and conditions of the water alert or
emergency declaration until said declaration is terminated by the City
Administrator or resolution of the Council. For the purposes of this section,
the terms “person” and “in the City” shall have the meaning as set forth above
in this code, and in addition shall mean all persons using water from the City
water system.
94.06   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter, or regulations promulgated hereunder which are
hereby authorized, shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution,
business, or industry, upon a proper showing to be necessary for the public
health, safety, and welfare or the prevention of severe economic hardship or
the substantial loss of employment. The request for exemption shall be directed
to the City Administrator, and the City Administrator shall rule on each such
request as soon as is practicable. Any activity, institution, business, or
industry aggrieved by decision of the City Administrator, may appeal said
decision to the City Council.
94.07   DECLARATION.
The City Administrator may declare a “Water Watch,” “Water Warning,” or “Water
Emergency,” collectively known as water conservation measures, as outlined in
this article. The declaration of water conservation measures shall result in
immediate notification of businesses and residents through all available means
and methods available to the City.
94.08   WATER WATCH.
A water watch shall be declared when the City’s water system experiences water
shortages due to a depleted water supply, equipment failure, or a significant
increase in demand, any of which may pose a threat to the water system’s
ability to meet the demand and needs of the customers. This includes any
condition where the water system is overstressed or is operating at 75 percent
or greater of pumping capacity. Under a water watch the following conservation
measures shall be undertaken by water users:
1.   General. Users are encouraged to employ prudent restraint on water usage
and to conserve water voluntarily utilizing any and all methods available to
them.
2.   Lawn Watering. Lawn watering shall be limited to a maximum of two times
per week within the hours identified in Section 94.08(3) for commercial and
residential users and according to the following schedule:
   A.   Residential users with an even numbered address shall limit watering of
lawns to even numbered calendar dates.
   B.   Residential users with an odd numbered address shall limit watering of
lawns to odd numbered calendar dates.
   C.   Commercial, industrial, governmental, and educational users shall limit
watering of lawns and fields in staggered schedules.
3.   Outdoor Watering Time Limitation. All outdoor water use, including
watering of lawns, flowers, gardens, shrubs, and trees is not allowed between
the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 5:00 p.m. in an amount not to exceed up to
one inch per week, except for those uses identified in Subsection 7 below.
4.   Washing Vehicles. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and
other types of mobile equipment is permitted only with a hand-held bucket, or a
hand-held hose equipped with an automatic positive shut-off nozzle for quick
rinses.
5.   Cleaning of Outdoor Surfaces. The washing or cleaning of outdoor surfaces
including buildings, sidewalks, driveways, porches, or any other outdoor
surface is strongly discouraged.
6.   Commercial and Industrial Equipment. Nonessential cleaning of commercial
and industrial equipment, machinery, and interior space is strongly
discouraged.
7.   Exceptions. The following exceptions shall be allowed:
   A.   Watering of flower and vegetable gardens, trees, and shrubs less than
four years old, and newly seeded or sodded areas that were placed prior to the
issuance of a water watch shall be allowed to be watered.
   B.   Washing of cars within commercial establishments is allowed without
regulation.
94.09   WATER WARNING.
A water warning shall be declared when the City’s water system experiences
water shortages due to a depleted water supply, equipment failure, or a
significant increase in demand, any of which may pose a serious threat to the
water system’s ability to meet the demand and needs of the customers. This
includes any condition where the water system is experiencing moderate to
serious water shortages or is operating at 85 percent or greater of pumping
capacity. Under a water warning the following conservation measures shall be
undertaken by water users:
1.   General. Users are encouraged to employ prudent restraint on water usage
and to conserve water voluntarily utilizing any and all methods available to
them.
2.   Lawn Watering. Lawn watering shall be limited to a maximum of one time per
week according to the following schedule:
   A.   Residential users with an address ending in zero or one shall water
lawns on Mondays only.
   B.   Residential users with an address ending in two or three shall water
lawns on Tuesdays only.
   C.   Residential users with an address ending in four or five shall water
lawns on Wednesdays only.
   D.   Residential users with an address ending in six or seven shall water
lawns on Thursdays only.
   E.   Residential users with an address ending in eight or nine shall water
lawns on Fridays only.
   F.   Commercial, industrial, governmental, and educational users shall limit
watering of lawns and fields in staggered schedules.
3.   Outdoor Watering Time Limitation. All outdoor water use, including
watering of lawns, flowers, gardens, shrubs, and trees is not allowed between
the hours of 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 5:00 p.m. in an amount not to exceed up to
one inch per week.
4.   Pools. Filling and refilling of private pools is not allowed except for
the replacement of water loss due to evaporation or overflow caused by use.
Such replacement is limited to 75 gallons in a 24-hour period.
5.   Outdoor Vegetation. Watering of all outside vegetation is limited to one
once per week, except for those types of vegetation identified in Subsection 10
below.
6.   Washing Vehicles. The washing of of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats,
and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only with a hand-held bucket,
or a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic, positive shut-off nozzle for
quick rinses and is limited to Saturday and Sunday.
7.   Cleaning of Outdoor Surfaces. The washing or cleaning of outdoor surfaces
including buildings, sidewalks, driveways, porches, or any other outdoor
surface is prohibited.
8.   Commercial and Industrial Equipment. Nonessential cleaning of commercial
and industrial equipment, machinery, and interior space is prohibited.
9.   Tank load water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
10.   Exceptions. The following exceptions shall be allowed:
   A.   Watering of flower and vegetable gardens, trees, shrubs less than four
years old, and newly seeded or sodded areas that were placed prior to the
issuance of a water watch shall be allowed to be watered.
   B.   Washing of cars within commercial establishments is allowed without
regulation.
94.10   WATER EMERGENCY.
A water emergency shall be declared when the City’s water system experiences
water shortages due to a depleted water supply, equipment failure, or a
significant increase in demand, any of which may pose a severe threat to the
water system’s ability to meet the demand and needs of the customers. This
includes any condition where the water system is experiencing moderate to
serious water shortages or is operating at 95 percent or greater of pumping
capacity. Under a water emergency the following conservation measures shall be
undertaken by water users:
1.   General. Users are required to employ prudent restraint on water usage and
to conserve water utilizing any and all methods available to them.
2.   Lawn Watering. Lawn watering of any residential, commercial, industrial,
educational, or governmental facility is prohibited.
3.   Pools. Filling and refilling of private pools is prohibited.
4.   Outdoor Vegetation. Watering of all outside vegetation prohibited, except
for those types of vegetation identified in Subsection I below.
5.   Washing Vehicles. The washing of vehicles is prohibited except for washing
which occurs within a commercial car or truck was facility, as outlined in
Subsection 9 below.
6.   Cleaning of Outdoor Surfaces. The washing or cleaning of outdoor surfaces
including buildings, sidewalks, driveways, porches, or any other outdoor
surface is prohibited.
7.   Commercial and Industrial Equipment. Cleaning of equipment, surfaces, or
areas not essential to the production of goods or providing of services for any
commercial and industrial use is prohibited.
8.   Tank load water sales shall be eliminated.
9.   Exceptions. The following exceptions shall be allowed:
   A.   Watering of vegetable gardens, flowers, and shrubs less than four years
old shall only be watered by watering can between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m. each day.
   B.   Washing of cars within commercial establishments is allowed without
regulation.
94.11   REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER.
The City reserves the right to restrict flow to any customer who has been
determined to be using water in any manner in violation of these water
conservation measures following the City providing written notice to the
customer and providing the customer an opportunity for a hearing.
94.12   EXCEPTIONS TO WATER CONSERVATION.
Reclaimed or recycled water including water that has been used for washing or
cooling, may be used without restriction. Additionally, water derived from
sources other than the municipal water supply may be collected and used without
restriction.
94.13   PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any of
the conservation regulations issued hereunder or under any declaration issued
pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
provided in
Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances; and in addition, shall be suspended from
water service. If such water service is suspended, the person shall pay a
reconnection fee as set forth in this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20?, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.
7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial
waste.
14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
22.   “Superintendent” means the Wastewater Treatment Foreman.
23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or
in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 60 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 200 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice
to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section
95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of
this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                  96.07 Sewer Tap
96.02 Connection Charge       96.08 Inspection Required
96.03 Plumber Required        96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.04 Excavations             96.10 Abandoned Connections
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.11 Abatement of Violations
96.06 Interceptors Required
 
96.01   PERMIT.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall
set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60 days after the
issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient
showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship,
such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to
comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit
may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02   CONNECTION CHARGE.
Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay a
connection charge in the amount of $350.00 to the Clerk to reimburse the City
for costs borne by the City in making sewer service available to the property
served.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall
be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances. The plumber must maintain the affected
area in good repair to the satisfaction of the Council for three months after
refilling. No excavation shall be made within six feet of any laid water pipe
while the ground is frozen, and no water or sewer pipe shall be exposed to
frost, except by special written permission of the Superintendent.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and
applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer. The building sewer or building drain may
be placed in the same trench with the water service pipe provided the following
conditions are met:
   A.   Water Service Pipe Above Sewer Line. The bottom of the water service
pipe, at all points, shall be at least 12 inches above the top of the sewer
line at its highest point.
   B.   Water Service Pipe On Shelf. The water service pipe shall be placed on
a solid shelf excavated at one side of the common trench. Where ground
conditions do not permit a shelf, the pipe may be laid on a solidly tamped
backfill.
   C.   Number of Joints. The number of joints in the water service pipe shall
be kept to minimum.
   D.   Pressure Prohibited. No part of the building sewer or building drain
shall be under pressure.
5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line
to meet the following:
   A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
   B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
   C.   Minimum velocity of two feet per second with the sewer half full.
   D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written
approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved fittings.
7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain
shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits,
or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code except
that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall
comply with the current edition of one of the following:
   A.   Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
   B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
   C.   Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
   D.   P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any residence,
business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the
basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl
space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to the
foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
14.   Watercourse Crossings. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is
exposed when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must be crossed
and where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe
or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required
for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches on all
sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm,
solid material at either end and be adequately supported if more than one pipe
length is used.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service
stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as
specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all
times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y,” or similarly manufactured
fitting for such purpose, shall be installed at the location specified by the
Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a
saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued or attached with
a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building
sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless special written permission
is received from the Superintendent and in accordance with the Superintendent’s
direction if such connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing sewer service is abandoned or is to be unused, it shall be
plugged or capped. A building sewer shall be considered abandoned or unused
unless a building permit for a new structure which requires sewer service has
been applied for. If a building sewer is to be reused, it shall be temporarily
disconnected at the property line or in a manner approved by the
Superintendent. This procedure shall be required at the same time the
demolition permit is issued. All lines that are to be plugged or capped must be
inspected by the Superintendent or their designee before they are covered or
buried.
96.11   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of
official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater               97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of
                               Superintendent
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges    97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges    97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to be
in the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
   A.   Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more than 350
parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an average
daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the City,
shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
   B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150? (65?).
2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32? and 150? (0? to 65?).
4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such
a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
   A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
   B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
   C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
   D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs”
as defined herein.
11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the
owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required               98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required             98.08 Disposal of Septage
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.05 Payment of Bills
99.02 Special Rates                  99.06 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Special Surcharge              99.07 Special Agreements Permitted
99.04 Private Water Systems
 
99.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
Each customer shall pay sewer service charges for the use of and for the
service supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount
of water consumed as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Residential Rates. Residential rates are calculated based on water
consumption for the winter quarter to eliminate sewer charges for water
consumed for outdoor uses such as sprinkling, gardening, trees, and other uses
where the water consumed does not contribute to the volume of flow to the
wastewater treatment system.
   A.   Residential Base Charge: $26.93
   B.   Residential Usage Charge: $2.92 per 100 cubic feet
2.   Commercial/Light Industrial Rates.
   A.   Commercial/Light Industrial Base Charge: $42.47
   B.   Commercial/Light Industrial Usage Charge: $2.92 per 100 cubic feet
In no case shall the minimum service charge be less than $26.93 per month for
residential usage, or $42.47 for commercial/light industrial usage, which is
necessary to retire the indebtedness, operating and maintenance, and reserve
necessary for maintaining the sanitary sewer facility.
99.02   SPECIAL RATES.
Where, in the judgment of the Superintendent and the Council, special
conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges
provided in Section
99.01 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or the customer, a
special rate shall be proposed by the Superintendent and submitted to the
Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.03   SPECIAL SURCHARGE.
The Council reserves the right to apply a sewer surcharge to any user whose
discharge strength of waste water is proven to be excessive. Said surcharge to
be determined by resolution of the Council. It is recommended that said
surcharge be employed where the volumes of BOD and suspended solids exceed 300
mg/L each, where grease exceeds 150 mg/L, and where ammonia exceeds 25 mg/L.
The monthly surcharge could then be calculated as follows:
Monthly Surcharge = (8.33/106)VX[(BOD-300)+SS-300)+Grease-150)+NH3-N-25)]
8.33 = lb./gallon
V = volume in gallons per month
X = cost per pound of treated pollutants
106 = conversion factor
99.04   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer
charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense. Any negotiated or agreed-upon sales or charges shall be
subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.05   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued or
disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.07   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 100
SUMP PUMP AND GROUNDWATER STANDARDS
 
100.01 Intent                              100.04 Inspections
100.02 Prohibited Water                    100.05 Removal of Connections
100.03 Sump Pump and Rigid Pipe: Method of 100.06 Surcharge
Installation
 
100.01   INTENT.
The intent of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations governing the
installation, use, and discharge of sump pumps or other groundwater conveyance
systems, and to establish the penalty structures required to enforce said rules
and regulations. The rules and regulations governing the use of sump pumps or
other groundwater conveyance systems are being established:
1.   To set forth uniform requirements for the installation, use, and discharge
of sump pumps or groundwater conveyance systems.
2.   To prevent the introduction of clean surface water, including but not
limited to, water from roof or cellar drains, springs, basement sump pumps, and
French drains.
100.02   PROHIBITED WATER.
1.   It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, or user of any premises to direct
into or allow any storm water, surface water, groundwater, well water, or water
from industrial or commercial air conditioning systems (residential properties
may have a 20 gallon per day maximum discharge from air conditioning systems)
to drain into the wastewater collection system. No rainspout, or other form of
surface drainage, and no foundation drainage or sump pump shall be connected or
discharged into any wastewater collection system.
2.   Any new or existing construction in which a sump pump has been or will be
installed shall be required to install a rigid pipe connection discharge in
accordance with this chapter. It is unlawful to maintain any connection with
the sanitary sewer carrying roof water, groundwater, surface water, or any
other natural precipitation.
3.   Exemptions.
   A.   Seasonal Waiver. Exemptions may be granted in the form of a seasonal
waiver, which would allow the property owner to temporarily discharge directly
into the wastewater collection system between the dates of October 15 and April
15. The seasonal waiver shall allow a City employee or designated
representative to certify that, prior to April 15 of each subsequent year,
their discharge water connection has been removed from the City wastewater
collection system. Failure to provide such certification shall place the
seasonal waiver holder in violation and subject to the surcharge penalty as
required under Section
100.06. Seasonal waiver requests shall be submitted on the official form
provided by the City.
      (1)   The owner of the property may place a pipe connecting the sump pump
to the sanitary sewer, which must have a shut-off valve.
      (2)   City employees or designated representatives, on or around April 15
of each year will have right of entry to inspect the system to verify that the
valve is closed so no prohibited water is discharged into the sanitary sewer.
      (3)   The owner has granted permission for City employees or designated
representatives to inspect the connection at any time between October 15 and
April 15 to verify compliance with this section. Such inspections shall be made
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and only when a
resident of the premises is on site.
      (4)   Failure to allow such an inspection or to allow City employees or
designated representatives entry for verification of compliance shall result in
the surcharge penalty pursuant to Section
100.06.
   B.   Non-Seasonal Waiver. Exemptions may be granted in the form of
nonseasonal waiver for a particular property owner who can demonstrate undue
hardship because of unique or extenuating circumstances. A non-seasonal waiver
would allow the property owner to discharge directly into the sanitary sewer
system without seasonal restrictions. The non-seasonal waiver request shall be
submitted to the City in writing and, at a minimum, identify the property for
which the waiver is being requested, the name of the property owner or
applicant, and detailed description of the circumstances justifying the
request. Non-seasonal waiver requests shall be submitted on the official form
provided by the City.
100.03   SUMP PUMP AND RIGID PIPE: METHOD OF INSTALLATION.
1.   A discharge pipe shall be installed through the outside foundation wall of
the building with rigid pipe (plastic, copper, or galvanized), one inch inside
diameter minimum, without valves or quick connections that would alter the path
of discharge. The discharge shall be directed away from the foundation wall.
2.   No discharge shall be directed so as to impact neighboring properties.
3.   Where a sump pit exists in any building, it shall have a pump installed
with rigid piping as specified above.
4.   Any plumber who knowingly installs a sump pump or piping that is not in
conformance with this chapter will be subject to a fine amount set by
resolution of the Council.
100.04   INSPECTIONS.
Property owners shall allow a City employee or a designated representative to
inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the wastewater collection system. The City may periodically re-
inspect any building or premises to determine compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
100.05   REMOVAL OF CONNECTIONS.
1.   Any property owner who previously made any connection or installation in
violation of this chapter shall immediately remove such connection or correct
such an installation. If not removed or corrected within 30 calendar days after
notice of the violation has been delivered personally or by certified mail to
the owner, the City shall impose a surcharge in the amount provided in Section
100.06. Such a surcharge shall also be imposed upon any property owner, after a
30-calendar day notice has been delivered, if the owner refuses to allow his
property to be inspected.
2.   The owner of a building or premises found to not be in conformance with
this chapter during periodic re-inspections shall be subjected to a surcharge
as provided in Section
100.06 starting from the previous date of inspection.
100.06   SURCHARGE.
A surcharge per month is hereby imposed on every sewer bill to property owners
for the following conditions:
1.   Not in compliance with this chapter - $100.00 per month.
2.   Refusal of property inspection - $100.00 per month.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                    105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard     105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted    105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.06 Storage of Yard Wastes
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1.   “Approved incinerator” means equipment facilities for the enclosed burning
of refuse having a stack adequate to maintain a draft sufficient for efficient
combustion and equipped with a screen sufficiently fine to prevent ejection of
particles of burning materials as approved by the City based on recommendations
of the Environmental Protection Commission (EPC) of the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR).
2.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
3.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
4.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
5.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from
all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
6.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
7.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
8.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing
in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in any
premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
9.   “Recyclable materials” means solid waste determined from time to time by
the City to be recyclable, including, but not limited to, plastics, newsprint,
corrugated cardboard, tin cans, or glass.
10.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
11.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-
family dwelling up to and including two separate dwelling units.
12.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
13.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
14.   “Salvage operation” means any business, industry, or trade engaged wholly
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but
not limited to chemicals, drums, metals, motor vehicles, or shipping
containers.
(567 IAC 20.2)
15.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
16.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
17.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of
Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
   B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
   C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
   D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
   E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
   F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A of
the Code of Iowa.
   G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
      (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
      (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing to
ensure production is not interrupted.
18.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) paint, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics,
pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste
that requires special handling and careful disposal to conserve the environment
and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
19.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, weeds, leaves,
seed, seed pods, garden waste, brush, and trees (including brush or tree
trimmings, branches, shrubbery, or other yard trimmings). Yard waste does not
include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse
accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such
accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 21 days shall
be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(567 IAC 23.2 and 100.2)
1.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“c”)
2.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“e”)
3.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training
of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“g”)
4.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[2])
105.06   STORAGE OF YARD WASTES.
Yard waste shall be timely removed to the City’s provided disposal site.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the disposal or composting solely
of yard waste on the same premises from which it originated.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13[2] and 400 IAC 27.14[2])
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the
following specifications:
   A.   Residential. Residential customers shall be provided with a toter or
toters from the City’s contracted garbage hauler. Use of these toters is
mandatory. If a residential customer desires to set out additional containers
for pick-up, the containers shall:
      (1)   Be made of galvanized metal, rubber, fiberglass, or of plastic
which does not become brittle in cold weather.
      (2)   Have a minimum capacity of 10 gallons and a maximum capacity of 35
gallons.
      (3)   Be of lightweight and sturdy construction, with the total weight of
any individual container, fully loaded, not to exceed 65 pounds.
      (4)   Be of the type manufactured for storage of residential wastes with
tapered sides for easy emptying and suitable lifting devices such as handles or
bails.
      (5)   Be waterproof and leak-proof.
      (6)   Be fitted with a fly tight lid, which shall remain in place except
for the deposit or removal of wastes.
   B.   No more than two containers, as described in this section, per
residential unit, shall be collected at the normal rate of charge for
collection. All additional containers placed for collection must be marked with
identifying tags for single use with the rates set for single use collection
tags and other solid waste disposal services annually or at such other times as
deemed reasonable by the City Council.
   C.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premise where excessive amounts of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored
upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be
stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid
waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb or alley line by the
owner or occupant of the premises served. Containers or other solid waste
placed at the curb line shall not be so placed more than 24 hours in advance of
the regularly scheduled collection day and shall be promptly removed (within 24
hours) from the curb line following collection.
4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will be collected together with
their contents and disposed of after due notice to the owner.
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for
high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3.   Private Sanitary Disposal Project. Establish and operate a private
sanitary disposal project within the City without approval of the Council.
4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
5.   Separate Waste. Fail to separate yard wastes from solid wastes or
recyclable materials for collection.
6.   Unlawful Collection. Engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing, or disposing of refuse within the City without a contract with the
City or possessing a City solid waste hauler permit.
7.   Unlawful Disposal. Dispose of refuse at any facility or location which is
not an approved sanitary disposal project.
8.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers
not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such
containers.
105.11   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Northwest Iowa Landfill are hereby
designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal
of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service                   106.07 Bulky Rubbish
106.02 Collection Vehicles                  106.08 Right of Entry
106.03 Loading                              106.09 Contract Requirements
106.04 Frequency of Collection              106.10 Collection Fees
106.05 Commercial and Industrial Collection 106.11 Lien for Nonpayment
106.06 Recycling
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
The City shall provide by contract for the collection of all solid waste except
bulky rubbish as provided in Section
106.05 within the City.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair.
(567 IAC 104.9)
106.03   LOADING.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid
waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss
of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each
week.
106.05   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL COLLECTION.
Commercial and industrial establishments shall contract individually with a
garbage hauler to provide for removal of rubbish and solid waste at least
weekly or more often as necessary so that accumulation of trash, debris,
rubbish, and solid waste shall not become a nuisance.
106.06   RECYCLING.
The City shall provide for collection of recyclables from residential
properties by contract with a private contractor. Collection of recyclable
materials shall be provided two times per month.   
(Ord. 841 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
106.07   BULKY RUBBISH.
Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner
of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
106.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for
the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter; however,
solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.09   CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing,
or disposing of solid waste for the City without first entering into a contract
with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid
waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied, or used by such owner,
provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal
project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or
disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities,
provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks, or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being
transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.10   COLLECTION FEES.
The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees for the same, in accordance with the
following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449 [Iowa 1970])
1.   Schedule of Fees. The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, used or available, are:
   A.   Standard residential rates
 
EFFECTIVE MARCH 1, 2025      EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2026
1 - 65 gallon toter  $18.64  1 - 65 gallon toter  $19.20
2 - 65 gallon toters $29.15  2 - 65 gallon toters $30.02
1 - 95 gallon toter  $23.84  1 - 95 gallon toter  $24.56
2 - 95 gallon toters $38.68  2 - 95 gallon toters $39.84
 
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2027
1 - 65 gallon toter  $19.78
2 - 65 gallon toters $30.92
1 - 95 gallon toter  $25.30
2 - 95 gallon toters $41.04
 
(Paragraph A – Ord. 855 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
   B.   In addition to the rates charged in Subparagraph A the following
adjustments shall be charged depending on current conditions:
      (1)   A $0.10 increase in the monthly rate shall occur for every $0.25
increase in the average diesel fuel price in the City above $3.50 per gallon.
      (2)   A $0.10 decrease in the month rate shall occur for every $0.25
decrease in the average diesel fuel price in the City below $2.50 per gallon.
      (3)   Adjustments will be made to the changes above at the following
rate: a $.15 increase for every $1.00 increase in the tonnage fee at the NW
Iowa Landfill Agency.
(Subparagraph (3) – Ord. 841 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
2.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.11   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS UTILITY
 
110.01 Establishment and Purpose     110.06 Other Services and Charges
110.02 Definitions                   110.07 Disconnection Procedures
110.03 Service Rules                 110.08 Categories of Service
110.04 Right to Enter and Read Meter 110.09 Rates Uniform
110.05 Shutting Off Gas              110.10 Natural Gas Rate Schedule
 
110.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A Municipal Gasworks is established as authorized by vote of the election on
September 29, 1998. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation
of said municipal gas utility. The provisions of this chapter, including
service rules and regulations adopted in accordance with these provisions,
shall apply to customers both inside and outside the City, whether or not such
customer has a contract for gas service with the City.
110.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter:
1.   “Btu” or “British Thermal Unit” means a measure of energy representing the
heat necessary to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one degree
Fahrenheit.
2.   “Consumer” or “customer” means, in addition to any person or legal entity
receiving gas service from the municipal gas utility, the owner of the property
served, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities,
and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
3.   “Gas utility” means all facilities of the municipal gas utility for
transmitting, and distributing gas.
4.   “Mcf” means a volumetric measure of gas equal to 1,000 cubic feet. (On
average, an Mcf contains 1.031 million Btu.)
5.   “Therm” means a volume of gas containing one million Btu.
110.03   SERVICE RULES.
The Council shall adopt, by resolution, appropriate operating rules governing
the municipal gas utility, which shall be entitled Service Rules of the
Municipal Gas Utility.
110.04   RIGHT TO ENTER AND READ METER.
The City reserves the right for its department personnel, employees, or agents
to enter upon the premise of any gas utility customer served hereunder between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of making routine
inspections, reading meters, or removing the gas meter, or changing said meter
in the pursuit of maintenance and safety programs, and for any special or
emergency inspection which might be required without advanced notice to such
user.
110.05   SHUTTING OFF GAS.
The Gas Foreman or an authorized employee may shut off the gas supply to a
customer when said customer may be affecting the safety or proper operation of
the system.
110.06   OTHER SERVICES AND CHARGES.
The City may purchase or furnish and establish charges for such services in
connection with the natural gas system as the Council, by resolution, may
approve from time to time.
110.07   DISCONNECTION PROCEDURES.
Failure to pay rate charges and billings according to the rules and regulations
of the Iowa Utilities Board may subject a natural gas customer to a
disconnection of service. The penalty for reconnection after disconnection by
reason of delinquency shall be $25.00 and shall be paid prior to any such
reconnection of service required after delinquency disconnection. A temporary
disconnection (two days or less) and subsequent reconnection of gas service
will be done at the request of the customer at no charge. Disconnections for
more than two days will be charged $25.00 for reconnection.
110.08   CATEGORIES OF SERVICE.
The Council, by resolution, shall from time to time establish various rate
categories according to cost, service, amount, whether interruptible or
standby, as well as provide for minimum charges, late payment penalty, and
connection or reconnection charges.
110.09   RATES UNIFORM.
Within the various categories, all charges made and established shall be of
uniform application to all users within said category.
110.10   NATURAL GAS RATE SCHEDULE.
EFFECTIVE JUNE 1, 2024
1.   Small Volume Firm/Small Transport (SVF/STS).
   A.   Applicable to any customer with less than 500 therms/day peak.
   B.   Minimum Monthly Charge: $9.00 per month
   C.   Local Delivery Charge: 0.3000 per therm
2.   Medium Volume Firm/Medium Transport (MVF/MT).
   A.   Applicable to any customer with 500 - 2000 therms/day peak.
   B.   Minimum Monthly Charge: $150.00 per month
   C.   Local Delivery Charge: 0.17832 per therm
3.   Small Volume Interruptible (SVI).
   A.   Applicable to any customer with less than 2000 therms/day peak.
   B.   Minimum Monthly Charge: $100.00 per month
   C.   Local Delivery Charge: 0.14848 per therm
4.   Large Volume Interruptible/Large Transport (LVI/LT).
   A.   Applicable to any customer with more than 2000 therms/day peak.
   B.   Minimum Monthly Charge: $400.00 per month
   C.   Local Delivery Charge: 0.05662 per therm
(Section 110.10 – Ord. 849 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC UTILITY
 
111.01 Purpose                  111.06 Purchased Power Adjustment Clause
111.02 Definitions              111.07 Power Factor Adjustment Clause
111.03 Service Rules            111.08 Aggregation of Retail Customer Demand
                                Response
111.04 Disconnection Procedures 111.09 Ancillary Services Provided by Demand
                                Response Resources
111.05 Electric Rate Schedule
 
111.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the Municipal
Electric Utility, and to establish rates to be paid by users of the Municipal
Electric Utility. The provisions of this chapter, including service rules and
regulations adopted in accordance with these provisions, shall apply to
customers both inside and outside the City, whether or not such customer has a
contract for electric service with the City.
111.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposed of this chapter:
1.   “Consumer” or “customer” means, in addition to any person or legal entity
receiving electric service from the Municipal Electric Utility, the owner of
the property served, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
2.   “Electric Utility” means all facilities of the Municipal Electric Utility
for producing, transmitting, and distributing electricity.
111.03   SERVICE RULES.
The Council shall adopt, by resolution, appropriate operating rules governing
the Municipal Electric Utility, which shall be entitled Service Rules of the
Municipal Electric Utility.
111.04   DISCONNECTION PROCEDURES.
Failure to pay rate charges and billings according to the rules and regulations
of the Iowa Utilities Board may subject an electrical customer to a
disconnection of service. The penalty for reconnection after disconnection by
reason of delinquency shall be $25.00 and shall be paid prior to any such
reconnection of service required after delinquency disconnection. A temporary
disconnection (two days or less) and subsequent reconnection of electrical
service will be done at the request of the customer at no charge.
Disconnections for more than two days will be charged $25.00 for reconnection.
111.05   ELECTRIC RATE SCHEDULE.
1.   Residential Rates. Residential rates 1001 and 1005 (effective September
15, 2014) are as follows:
   A.   Customer Charge   $10.00
   B.   June – August
All KWH      @ $0.105 per KWH
   C.   September – May
First 1,200 KWH   @ $0.086 per KWH
Over 1,200 KWH   @ $0.067 per KWH
   D.   Purchased Power Adjustment – See Section
111.06  
Minimum per month - $10.00
Applicable to any residential customer.
2.   Commercial Rates. Commercial rates 1011 and 1111 (effective September 15,
2014) are as follows:
   A.   Customer Charge   $16.00
   B.   June – August
All KWH   @ $0.106 per KWH
   C.   September – May
All KWH   @ $0.088 per KWH
   D.   Purchased Power Adjustment – See Section
111.06  
Minimum per month - $16.00
Applicable to all commercial customers for lighting and small power and heating
purposes.
Monthly peak demand must be under 30 KW for a majority of the months in a year.
3.   Industrial Rates. Industrial rates 1021 and 2021 (effective October 18,
2009) are as follows:
   A.   Customer Charge   $30.00
   B.   All KWH   @ .040 per KWH
   C.   Demand Charge
June – August   @ 18.90 per KWH
September – May   @ 13.50 per KWH
Minimum per month - $200.00
   D.   Purchased Power Adjustment – See Section
111.06  
Power Factor Adjustment – See Section
111.07
Applicable to non-residential customers for power, heating, and lighting use.
Monthly peak demand must be over 30 KW for a majority of the months in a year.
4.   Security Lighting. Security lighting rates 7001, 7011, 7021, 7201, 7211,
and 7221 are as follows:
   A.   150 Watt $7.00
   B.   175 Watt $7.00
   C.   300 Watt $12.00
   D.   400 Watt $14.50
   E.   1,000 Watt $30.00
111.06   PURCHASED POWER ADJUSTMENT CLAUSE.
All electric rate schedules are subject to a Purchased Power Adjustment Clause
(PAC) factor applied uniformly to all KWHs. The PAC factor will increase or
decrease based on the cost of purchasing electricity during the previous month.
The utility reserves the right to adjust for the difference between the
previous month and the current month’s average cost of purchased power on
subsequent bills.
111.07   POWER FACTOR ADJUSTMENT CLAUSE.
If it is determined by recorded measurement that a customer’s power factor is
less than 95 percent during the period of the customers maximum demand, the
demand shall be increased by the ratio of 95 percent to the actual power
factor.
111.08   AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE.
The Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the
Municipal Electric Utility directly into any Commission-approved independent
system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized electric
markets. Retail customers served by the Municipal Electric Utility wishing to
bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized electric markets
may do so by participating in the program established by the Municipal Electric
Utility or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to
participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the
express prior authorization of the Municipal Electric Utility.
111.09   ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES.
The Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the
Municipal Electric Utility directly into any Commission-approved independent
system operator’s or regional transmission organization’s organized markets for
energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power, and
voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or
its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system
operator’s or regional transmission organization’s tariff).
Retail customers served by the Municipal Electric Utility wishing to bid their
demand response into a Commission-approved independent system operator’s or
regional transmission organization’s organized markets for energy imbalance,
spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power, and voltage control,
or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator’s or regional
transmission organization’s tariff) may do so by participating in the program
established by the Municipal Electric Utility or its authorized designee.
Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response
program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the
Municipal Electric Utility.
CHAPTER 112
FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS
 
112.01 Purpose            112.04 Granting of Franchise
112.02 Franchise Required 112.05 Utility Systems Prohibited
112.03 User Fee           112.06 Violation
 
112.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to regulate utility
services delivered within the City and, to that end, franchise agreements are
required.† 6
 
Notes
6 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 714, adopting franchise requirements for the
  City, was passed and adopted on September 9, 2002.
112.02   FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
No person or other entity shall erect, maintain, and operate plants and systems
for electric light and power, heating, telegraph, cable television, district
telegraph and alarm, communication systems of any type, public transit systems,
waterworks, or gasworks within the City without a franchise from the City.
112.03   USER FEE.
Any person or other entity operating under a franchise or without a franchise
shall pay to the City a user fee of five percent of the gross revenues derived
from any sales through the distribution system within the City. Said payment is
a form of rent and grants no rights to any person or other entity. Any person
or entity (whether paying a user fee or not) may be ejected from public
property if operating without a franchise, and in addition, the City reserves
all rights and remedies it may have at law, in equity, or otherwise against
such persons or other entities.
112.04   GRANTING OF FRANCHISE.
No franchise or permit giving or granting to any person or entity the right or
privilege to erect, construct, operate, maintain, or use any natural gas
pipeline, natural gas system, electric light and power system, waterworks, or
communications system of any type within the City for the purpose of selling,
distributing, or providing non-municipal natural gas, electrical power and
energy, or communications to any user or consumer within the City, or using the
streets or alleys of the City for such purpose, or interconnecting any
building, structure, or facility of any kind to any natural gas pipeline or
system, or electrical line or system, other than to the natural gas or
electrical system of the City, shall be given or granted, except by ordinance.
No such ordinance shall be considered until after the question of the granting
of the necessary franchise shall be submitted to and approved by a majority of
the qualified electors of the City at an election held for such purposes at the
expense of the applicant for such franchise (unless such election is prohibited
by State or federal law).
112.05   UTILITY SYSTEMS PROHIBITED.
Unless a franchise has been granted under the provisions of this chapter, no
person shall erect, construct, operate, maintain, or use any natural gas
pipeline, natural gas system, electric light and power system, waterworks, or
communications system within the City in order to sell or distribute or provide
non-municipal natural gas, electrical power and energy, or communications to
any user or consumer within the City, or use the streets or alleys of the City
for such purpose, or interconnect any building, structure, or facility of any
kind to any natural gas pipeline or system, electrical line or system, or
communication other than to a system of the City.
112.06   VIOLATION.
If any person, firm, or corporation constructs, operates, or maintains any
natural gas pipeline, natural gas system, electric light and power system,
waterworks, cable communication system, or other communications system, or
sells or distributes any natural gas, electricity, or communications within the
City, or makes any connection with gas or electrical lines or communication
systems contrary to the provisions of this chapter, then the City Attorney may
commence an action in the name of and on behalf of the City for suitable and
appropriate legal, equitable, or other relief, including, but not limited to an
order ejecting said person or other entity from the public right-of-way and
directing the removal of all personal property from said public right-of-way at
the sole cost of said person or entity.
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
ORANGE CITY COMMUNICATIONS
113.01 Short Title                      113.09 General Financial and Insurance
                                        Provisions
113.02 Definitions                      113.10 Revocation, Sale, Receivership,
                                        and Transfer of Franchise
113.03 Grant of Authority and General   113.11 Protection of Individual Rights
Provisions
113.04 Construction Standards           113.12 Unauthorized Connections and
                                        Modifications
113.05 Operations Provisions            113.13 Miscellaneous Provisions
113.06 Services Provisions              113.14 Exhibit A: Service To Public
                                        Buildings
113.07 Community Programming Provisions 113.15 Exhibit B: Consumer Protection
                                        Standards
113.08 Operation and Administration
Provisions
 
113.01   SHORT TITLE.
The franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as
the Cable Communications Ordinance.
113.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
1.   “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by State or federal
law to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein
shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1993).
2.   “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V
1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as
may, from time to time, be amended.
3.   “Cable Board” or “Board” means the Cable Board of the City of Orange City,
Iowa, appointed by the Council.
4.   “Cable service” means:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
5.   “Cable television system”, “system,” or “cable system” means a facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-
way;
   C.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility whether on a common
carrier basis or otherwise is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers; or
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
6.   “Channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic spectrum which is used in
a cable system and which is capable of delivering either one standard video
signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or some
combination of such signals.
7.   “Class IV Cable Communications Channel” means a signaling path provided by
a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber
terminal to another point in the system.
8.   “Complaint” means any written allegation or assertion of noncompliance
with, or nonperformance of, the terms and conditions of this franchise made by
a subscriber which is received by the Grantee.
9.   “Converter” means an electronic device which converts signals to a
frequency acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an
appropriate selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals
included in the service.
10.   “Drop” means the cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber’s
residence to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
11.   “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
12.   “Franchise fee” means the fee set forth in Section
113.08 of this chapter.
13.   “Grantee” is Orange City Communications, its agents and employees, lawful
successors, transferees, or assignees.
14.   “Grantor” or “City” means the City of Orange City, acting through its
Council.
15.   “Gross revenues” means all revenue received from the provision of cable
service, as defined, received directly or indirectly by the Grantee, its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which Grantee has financial
interest of five percent or more from the operation of its system within City
including but not limited to basic cable service fees, cable programming
service fees, pay television fees, installation and reconnection fees, upgrade
and downgrade fees, advertising revenues, converter rental and lockout device
fees and on which a franchise fee has not previously been paid. The term gross
revenues shall not include late fees or any taxes or fees on services furnished
by Grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any municipality,
State, or other governmental unit and collected by Grantee for such
governmental unit nor shall include revenues for signals originating in or
passing through the franchise area unless Grantee receives revenue for such
signal which has not already otherwise been directly or indirectly subject to a
franchise fee or similar tax, in which case said revenues will be considered
gross revenues for the purpose of this franchise.
16.   “Installation” means the connection of the system from feeder cable to
the point of connection, including standard installations and custom
installations.
17.   “Lockout device” means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to
a subscriber’s terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program,
certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication
system.
18.   “Normal business hours” means those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal
business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week
and/or some weekend hours.
19.   “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions which are
within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay-per-view events, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance
or upgrade of the system.
20.   “Pay television” means the delivery over the system of pay-per-channel or
pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
21.   “Person” is any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for
profit or not for profit.
22.   “Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area
within the City as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted.
23.   “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels on the system.
24.   “Standard installation” means any residential installation which can be
completed using a drop of 150 feet or less.
25.   “Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or
drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City.
26.    “Subscriber” means any person who or which lawfully subscribes to cable
service provided by the Grantee by means of or in connection with the cable
system.
113.03   GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
operate, or maintain a cable system in the franchise area unless such person or
the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and
shall currently hold a franchise granted pursuant to a valid franchise
ordinance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide cable
communications service in the City unless such person obtains and currently
holds a franchise granted pursuant to a valid franchise ordinance. Any
franchise granted by the City shall impose the burdens and obligations that are
comparable in the aggregate to those imposed by the franchise ordinance
codified in this chapter; provided, however, that the City may impose
additional and/or higher standards in other franchises. Such additional and/or
higher standards, however, to the extent they affect the material provisions of
the franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall not apply to this
chapter.
2.   Grant of Franchise. This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and
conditions contained herein.
3.   Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
   A.   The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the
streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated and
all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in City, poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures
necessary for the maintenance and operation in City of a cable system as herein
defined to provide cable services and internet and related services to the
extent considered a cable service or otherwise permitted by applicable State
and federal law. The cable communications system constructed and maintained by
Grantee or its agents shall not interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee
shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to Grantee to
the extent it is technically and economically feasible to do so.
   B.   Notwithstanding the above grant to use streets, no street shall be used
by Grantee if City, in its reasonable opinion, determines that such use is
inconsistent with the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such street was
created or dedicated, or with the present use of the street.
   C.   This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right to
grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways, and places, to any
person at any time, provided, however, that any additional franchise granted
shall contain the same substantive terms and conditions as this franchise.
   D.   Grantee shall have the authority to use City easements, public rights-
of-way, streets and other conduits for the distribution of cable communications
services. The City shall require all developers of future subdivisions to allow
and accommodate the construction of the system as part of any provisions for
utilities to serve such subdivisions.
   E.   Grantee shall construct and maintain the system so as not to interfere
with other uses of streets. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other
facilities available to Grantee where feasible. Grantee shall use reasonable
means to publicize any proposed construction work prior to commencement of that
work. The verbal or written notice required under this chapter shall include
reference to the Grantee’s telephone number and the responsible employee of
Grantee to whom questions or comments can be directed.
4.   Franchise Term. This franchise shall expire on or about September 23,
2014, unless renewed, revoked, or terminated sooner as herein provided. † 7
5.   System. All programming decisions remain the sole discretion of Grantee,
provided that Grantee complies with federal law regarding notice to City and
subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions, or realignments, and
further subject to Grantee’s signal carriage obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§§ 531-536, and subject to City’s rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545. Grantee
shall conduct programming surveys from time to time to obtain input on
programming decisions from subscribers.
6.   Compliance with Applicable Laws, Resolutions, and Ordinances. The Grantee
shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power, statutory rights, and the right of eminent domain
by City.
7.   Territorial Area Involved. Grantee shall provide service to the franchise
area. This franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of City, as it
exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by City, or as development
occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered; provided,
however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its
present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of seven homes per cable
quarter-mile adjacent to the existing cable system. Access to cable service
shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides.
Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate
cable plant to service annexed or newly developed areas as required by this
chapter.
8.   Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in
writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered
personally to any officer of Grantee or City’s administrator of this franchise
or 48 hours after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed
to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows. Either party may change
the address to which notices are to be sent by providing written notice of the
change to the other party.
   A.   If to City:
City of Orange City
City Administrator
125 Central Avenue SE
Orange City, IA 51041
   B.   If to Company:
Orange City Communications
501 Fourth Street
Sergeant Bluff, IA 51054
9.   Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other
party given as provided in this chapter.
10.   Drops to Public Buildings. Grantee shall provide installation of one
cable drop connection and any required terminal equipment and the highest level
of cable service, excluding internet services, pay-per-view, and pay-per-
channel programming, free of charge to each public building listed in Exhibit A
with no installation charges or monthly service charges throughout the term of
this franchise. Grantee shall, in any public building hereinafter built,
provide all materials, design specifications, and technical advice for any one
cable outlet to be installed up to 300 feet of the system from Grantee’s then-
existing cable system during the construction of such building, without cost to
the City, and Grantee shall provide the same service to such new public
building as required in this chapter. The right to provide service to public
buildings shall not include any used for residential purposes, either temporary
or permanent, including hospitals and nursing homes.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 725, adopting a cable television franchise for the
7 City, was passed and adopted on June 16, 2004. Ordinance No. 785, passed and
  adopted on August 25, 2014, extended the franchise term until September 23, 2024.
113.04   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
1.   Construction Codes and Permits.
   A.   Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from City before commencing
any construction upgrade or extension of the system, including the opening or
disturbance of any street, or private or public property, within City. Grantee
shall strictly adhere to all State and local laws and building and zoning codes
currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation, or maintenance of
the system in City and give due consideration at all times to the aesthetics of
the property.
   B.   The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and to
make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms
of the franchise and applicable provisions of local, State, and federal law.
   C.   Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to give Grantee
the authority to enter upon, or work on, private property in areas not
encumbered with public easements without the permission of the property owner.
2.   Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all streets or public property or
private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of
the system shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee, at its expense, to
a condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee’s work, as reasonably
approved by City in the case of streets and other public property. If Grantee
shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required herein, City shall have
the right to put the streets, public, or private property back into a condition
as good as that prevailing prior to the commencement of the construction by
Grantee; provided, however, that City shall be required to give Grantee at
least 30-days’ prior written notice of its intent to repair property pursuant
to this section. The City reserves its rights to pursue reimbursement for such
restoration from Grantee.
3.    Conditions on Street Use.
   A.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent City from
constructing, maintaining, repairing, or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating, and/or altering any street; constructing,
laying down, repairing, maintaining, or relocating any water mains; or
constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other
public work; provided, however, that City shall use all reasonable means of
avoiding damage to Grantee’s property.
   B.   All system transmission and distribution structures, lines, and
equipment erected by the Grantee within City shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public
ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property
owners who abut any of the said streets, alleys, and other public ways and
places, and not to interfere with existing public utility facilities. The
Grantee shall furnish to and file with City Administrator the maps, plats, and
permanent records of the location and character of all facilities constructed,
including underground facilities, and Grantee shall file with City updates of
such maps, plats, and permanent records annually if changes have been made in
the system.
   C.   The Grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures of
system above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures, and all such poles,
conduits, or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to
comply with all lawful and reasonable requirements of City.
   D.   Grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any
street in an existing aerial utility system without the advance written
approval of the City, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Grantee
shall exercise its best efforts to negotiate the lease of pole space and
facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction.
   E.   If any such property of Grantee shall interfere with the construction
or relocation, maintenance or repair of any street or public improvement,
whether it be construction, repair, maintenance, removal or relocation of a
sewer, public sidewalk, or water main, street or any other public improvement,
30-days’ notice shall be given to Grantee by the City and all such poles,
wires, conduits or other appliances, and facilities shall be removed or
replaced by Grantee.
   F.   With the prior approval of the City, the Grantee shall have the
authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public easements of City so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee. The City
reserves the right to accompany Grantee’s tree trimming crews.
   G.   Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring Grantee’s facilities.
4.   Undergrounding of Cable. All new installations of Grantee’s cable and
conduit shall be installed underground at Grantee’s expense where both the
existing telephone and electrical utilities are already underground. Grantee
shall place cable underground in newly-platted areas in concert with both the
telephone and electrical utilities to the extent feasible and provided that
Grantee has sufficient prior notice of such construction, unless this
requirement is waived by the City. Further, at such time as telephone and
electrical utilities change from overhead to underground, Grantee, at its
expense, shall place its cable underground and provided Grantee has at least
30-days’ prior written notice of such construction. Amplifier boxes and
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing
technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall
be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe.
5.   Erection, Removal, and Joint Use of Poles. No poles, conduits, or other
wire holding structures shall be erected or installed by the Grantee without
prior approval from the City with regard to placement, location, height,
weight, appearance, safety, and other pertinent factors.
6.   Safety Requirements.
   A.   The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and
shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods
and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
   B.   The Grantee shall install and maintain its system wires, cables,
fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements
of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, State, and local regulations,
and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of City
or of any public utility serving City.
   C.   All system structures and all system lines, equipment, and connections
in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways and
places of City, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person.
   D.   All construction on the cable system shall be performed by experienced
maintenance and construction personnel and shall not unnecessarily interfere
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
113.05    OPERATIONS PROVISIONS.
1.   Operation and Maintenance of System. The Grantee shall render effective
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible,
shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Subsection
113.03(8) herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
2.   Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the
system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by
the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal
Communications Commission’s rules and regulations and found in Title 47,
Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time,
which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.
3.   Special Testing. City may require special testing of a location or
locations within the system if there is a particular matter of controversy or
unresolved complaints pertaining to such locations. Demand for such special
tests may be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence
indicating an unresolved controversy or noncompliance. Such tests shall be
limited to the particular matter in controversy or unresolved complaints. The
City shall endeavor to so arrange its request for such special testing so as to
minimize hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the subscribers caused by
such testing. Before ordering such tests, Grantee shall be afforded 30 days to
correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The City shall
meet with Grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such
and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of
concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, City wishes to commence
special tests and the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a
qualified engineer selected by City. In the event that special testing is
required by City to determine the source of technical difficulties, the cost of
said testing shall be borne by the City if the testing reveals that the system
meets the minimum technical performance standards set forth in this chapter. If
the testing reveals that Grantee’s system does not meet the minimum technical
performance standards set forth in this chapter, then the cost of said test
shall be borne by Grantee.
4.   FCC Reports. The results of tests required to be filed by Grantee with the
FCC shall also be copied to City .
5.   Nonvoice Return Capability. Grantee is required to use cable having the
technical capacity for nonvoice return communications.
6.   Lockout Device. Upon the request of a subscriber, Grantee shall provide by
sale or lease a lockout device.
113.06   SERVICES PROVISIONS.
1.   Regulation of Service Rates.
   A.   The City may regulate rates for the provision of cable service,
equipment, or any other communications service provided over the system to the
extent allowed under federal or State laws. In exercising its jurisdiction to
regulate any such rates, City will adhere to regulations adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission at 47 C.F.R., 76.900 et seq. as they may be amended
from time to time.
   B.   A list of Grantee’s current subscriber rates and charges shall be
maintained on file with City and shall be available for public inspection.
Grantee shall give City and subscribers written notice of any change in a rate
or charge no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the change.
2.   Sales Procedures. Grantee shall not exercise deceptive sales procedures
when marketing its cable communications services within City. Grantee shall
have the right to market its cable services door-to-door during reasonable
hours consistent with local ordinances and regulation.
3.   Customer Service Standards. Grantee will at all times fully comply with
any customer service standards adopted by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309. At a
minimum, Grantee will at all times during the term of this franchise comply
with the standards attached hereto as Exhibit B regardless of whether the FCC
amends or repeals its customer service standards at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309.
4.   Complaint Log. Subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et
seq., Grantee shall prepare and maintain written records of all written
complaints made to it and the resolution of such complaints, including the date
of such resolution. Such written records shall be on file at the office of
Grantee. City agrees to make good faith efforts to promptly inform Grantee of
all legitimate complaints it receives.
5.   Subscriber Contracts. Grantee shall submit any subscriber contract
utilized to City. If no written contract exists, Grantee shall file with the
City Clerk a document completely and concisely stating the terms of the
residential subscriber contract offered to customers, specifically including
the length of the subscriber contract. The length and terms of any subscriber
contract shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
6.   Emergency Alert System. Grantee agrees to provide emergency alert override
capabilities in a manner consistent with the FCC’s Emergency Broadcast System
(EBS) rules and consistent with any State and regional emergency alert system
plans adopted in response to the FCC’s EBS rules which are applicable to the
franchise area and the City of Orange City.
113.07   COMMUNITY PROGRAMMING PROVISIONS.
1.   Public, Educational, and Government Access.
   A.   Grantee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive some or
all of the services offered on the system reception on at least one specially
designated access channel. Grantee shall make two specially designated access
channels available.
   B.   City shall establish rules pertaining to the administration of the
specially designated access channels required in this section.
   C.   Grantee shall provide reasonable levels of technical assistance
regarding the access channels.
   D.   Grantee shall make available its buying power by selling equipment used
by the City in the operation of the access channels at Grantee’s cost.
   E.   Upon acceptance of this franchise, Grantee shall remit to City payment
in the amount of $4,000.00 in support of the City’s acquisition of equipment to
be used for the production of public, educational, and governmental access
programming.
   F.   Grantee shall provide and maintain throughout the term of this
franchise a return line from both Northwestern College and City Hall to
Grantee’s headend which will enable these two institutions to cablecast live
programming and/or to locate playback equipment in one or both of these
facilities to handle playback for the designated access channels.
   G.   Grantee specifically agrees that any costs associated with satisfying
the obligations outlined in this section shall be entirely Grantee’s
responsibility and shall be provided free of charge to the City with no
associated pass-through to subscribers. Grantee further agrees that it will not
identify as a separate line item on subscriber’s monthly cable bills or
otherwise assess subscribers any costs associated with meeting the obligations
of this section.
2.   Leased Commercial Access. Grantee shall offer leased commercial access
programming to the public on reasonable terms and conditions and in conformance
with 47 C.F.R. Chapter 76, subpart L, as from time to time may be amended.
113.08   OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Fee.
   A.   Grantee shall pay to City a franchise fee in an annual amount equal to
five percent of its annual gross revenues.
   B.   Payments due to City under this provision shall be payable quarterly.
Payments shall be made within 30 days of the end of each of Grantee’s fiscal
quarters together with a report showing the basis for computation.
   C.   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by City
and acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
2.   Open Books and Records. Subject to the privacy provisions of the Cable Act
and the confidentiality of Grantee’s information, the City shall have the right
to inspect, upon 72-hours’ written notice pursuant to Subsection
113.03(8) herein, at a time mutually agreed to by Grantee and City, all books,
records, maps, plans, financial statements, complaint logs, performance test
results, records of requests for service, and other like materials of Grantee
which are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this
franchise.
3.   Additional Reports. Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City, at the
times and in the form prescribed, such reports with respect to its operation,
affairs, transactions, or property, which Grantee and City agree are reasonably
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this franchise.
4.   Maps. Upon request Grantee shall provide the City with a current map
showing any changes in the location of the system in streets and other public
places.
5.   Periodic Evaluation and Renegotiation Sessions. The field of cable
communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing one which may see many
regulatory, technical, financial, marketing, and legal changes during the term
of this franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of
flexibility in this franchise, and to help achieve a continued advanced and
modem system, the following evaluation provisions will apply:
   A.   The City reserves the right to adopt rules and regulations controlling
the procedures as set forth below and the subjects for evaluation and
renegotiation sessions. In the absence of any City action taken to exercise
these rights, Grantee shall be subject to at least the procedures and subjects
described in this section.
   B.   The City may require, at its sole discretion, evaluation sessions at
any time during the term of this franchise; provided, however, there shall not
be more than one evaluation session every three years.
   C.   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session include, but
are not limited to, channel capacity, system technical performance,
programming, access, municipal uses of cable, subscriber complaints, judicial
rulings, FCC rulings, and any other topics the City or Grantee deems relevant.
   D.   During an evaluation session, Grantee shall fully cooperate with the
City and shall provide such information and documents as the City may request
to perform the evaluation subject to federal privacy requirements and Grantee’s
need for confidentiality of certain information.
   E.   If at any time during its evaluation, the City determines that
reasonable evidence exists of failure to meet FCC technical specifications, 47
C.F.R. 76.601 et seq., the City may proceed in accordance with Subsection
113.09(2) herein.
   F.   As a result of an evaluation session held pursuant to this section, the
City or Grantee may determine that a change in the terms of the franchise may
be required, that the system or franchise requirements should be updated,
changed, or that additional services should be provided.
113.09   GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
1.   Letter of Credit.
   A.   At the time the franchise becomes effective and at all times
thereafter, until the Grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with City,
the Grantee shall furnish a letter of credit to City in the amount of
$10,000.00 in a form as reasonably acceptable to City. This bond will be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Grantee according to the terms
of the franchise and upon the further condition that in the event the Grantee
shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance, or regulation governing the
franchise, there shall be recoverable any damages or loss suffered by City as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost
of removal or abandonment of any property of the Grantee, plus a reasonable
allowance for attorneys’ fees and costs, up to the full amount of the letter of
credit, and further guaranteeing payment by the Grantee of claims, liens, and
taxes due City which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or
maintenance of the system. The rights reserved by City with respect to the
letter of credit are in addition to all other rights City may have under the
franchise or any other law. City may, from year to year, in its sole
discretion, reduce the amount of the letter of credit.
   B.   The time for Grantee to correct any violation or liability shall be
extended by City if the necessary action to correct such violation or liability
is of such a nature or character as to require more than 30 days within which
to perform, provided Grantee provides written notice that it requires more than
30 days to correct such violations or liability, commences the corrective
action within the 30 days period, and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to
correct the violation or liability.
   C.   In the event this franchise is canceled by reason of default of Grantee
or revoked, City shall be entitled to collect from the letter of credit that
amount which is attributable to any damages sustained by City pursuant to said
default or revocation. Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of
such performance bond, or portion thereof, as remains at the expiration of the
term of the franchise.
   D.   The rights reserved to City with respect to the letter of credit are in
addition to all other rights of City whether reserved by this franchise or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to the performance bond shall affect any other right City may have.
   E.   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by Grantee to the City or
damages to the City as a result of any acts or omissions by Grantee pursuant to
the franchise, the City in its sole discretion may charge to and collect from
the letter of credit the following penalties:
      (1)   For failure to complete any required construction upgrade, unless
the City approves the delay, the penalty shall be $200.00 per day for each day,
or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      (2)   For failure to comply with any of the provision of this franchise
for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided pursuant to this
section, the penalty shall be $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof,
such failure occurs or continues.
      (3)   For failure to provide the services Grantee has proposed,
including, but not limited to, the implementation and the utilization of the
access channels, the penalty shall be $100.00 per day for each day, or part
thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      (4)   Each violation of any provision of this franchise shall be
considered a separate violation for which a separate penalty can be imposed.
2.   Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations.
   A.   Upon discovery of a violation of this franchise, the City shall first
notify Grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery, registered, or
certified mail, state with specificity the violation alleged to have occurred
and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 10
days in the case of the failure of the Grantee to pay any sum or other amount
due the City under this franchise, and 30 days in all other cases. If Grantee
fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if Grantee fails
to commence corrective action within the time prescribed and diligently remedy
such violation thereafter, the Grantee shall then be given a written notice of
a public hearing to be held before the Council. Such written notice shall
provide for a reasonable opportunity for Grantee to attend and submit evidence
related to the alleged non-performance or cure.
   B.   At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant
evidence, and thereafter render written findings of fact and its decision.
   C.   In the event the Council finds that Grantee has corrected the violation
or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof
from the City and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or
that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no
penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. In determining whether a violation
is material, the City shall take into consideration the reliability of the
evidence of the violation, the nature of the violation and the damage, if any,
caused to the Grantor thereby, whether the violation was chronic, and any
justifying or mitigating circumstances and such other matters as the Grantor
may deem appropriate. In the event that the City attempts to revoke the
franchise, after the public hearing and upon written determination by City to
revoke the franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an appropriate
State or federal court or agency. During the review of the appeal by an
appropriate State or federal court or agency, the franchise shall remain in
full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
   D.   If Grantee remains in non-compliance with the requirement of this
franchise, then the Grantor may pursue any available remedy.
3.   Indemnification of City.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, Grantee shall indemnify, hold
harmless, release, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees
from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, actions, demands, damages,
disability, losses, expenses (including attorney’s fees and other defense
costs), or liabilities of any nature that may be asserted by any person or
entity arising out of the activities of Grantee, its subcontractors, employees,
and agents hereunder, except claims arising from or related to PEG access
programming or operation of PEG facilities or equipment. Grantee shall be
solely responsible and save the City harmless from all matters relative to
payment of Grantee’s employees including compliance with social security and
income tax laws and regulations.
   B.   This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a
limitation of the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for
Grantee under Workers’ Compensation, disability, or other employee benefit
acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this franchise, or
the terms, applicability, or limitations of any insurance held by Grantee;
provided, however, that City shall be obligated to promptly notify Grantee of
any claim or action for which it is seeking indemnification ..
   C.   Grantee shall not be required to indemnify the City under this section
for negligence or misconduct solely attributable to the act or omission of the
City, its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees.
4.   Insurance.
   A.   On the effective date of this franchise, Grantee shall file with the
City, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole
expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including
contractual liability coverage, in protection of City in its capacity as such,
its officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents, and employees.
The policy or policies shall name as additional insured City, its officers,
agents, and employees. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not
less than $300,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person, and
$1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one
occurrence, $300,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $1,000,000.00
for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.
   B.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by Grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of
insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not
cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of Grantee or for other
reasons, except after 30-days’ advance written notice have been provided to
City.
113.10   REVOCATION, SALE, RECEIVERSHIP, AND TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
1.   City’s Right to Revoke.
   A.   In addition to all other rights which City has pursuant to law or
equity, City reserves the right to revoke, terminate, or cancel this franchise,
and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after following the
procedure outlined in Subsection
113.09(2) herein and has determined that:
   B.   Grantee has violated any material provision of this franchise and
failed to cure on a timely basis; or
   C.   City may revoke this franchise without the hearing required by
Subsection
113.09(2) herein if Grantee is adjudged a bankrupt.
2.   Receivership. The City shall have the right to revoke this franchise
subject to this section of this chapter and any applicable provisions of
federal or State law, including the Bankruptcy Act, 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action
or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
   A.   Within 120 days after election or appointment, such receiver or trustee
shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this franchise and
remedied all defaults thereunder; and,
   B.   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed an
agreement, duly approved by the Court having competent jurisdiction, whereby
such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every
provision of this franchise.
3.   Sale or Transfer of Franchise.
   A.   No sale, transfer, or change of control of this franchise or the
Grantee shall take place until the parties to the sale, transfer, or change of
control file a written request with City and obtain City’s approval in
accordance with all applicable laws, provided, however, that said approval
shall not be required where Grantee grants a security interest in its franchise
and assets to secure an indebtedness.
   B.   In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be
approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this franchise and
assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights
and obligations of the transferor to the City.
   C.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the Grantee or its assets
for the advancement of money for the construction or operation of the franchise
shall have the right to notify the City that it or its designee satisfactory to
the City shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a
Grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial
institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within 30 days of
assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with
all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the City in
its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to
petition the City to transfer the franchise to another Grantee.
113.11   PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.
1.   Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. Grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal, State, and City laws,
and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
2.   Subscriber Privacy.
   A.   No signals, including signals of a Class IV channel, may be transmitted
from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing
patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber.
The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with
a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full
knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited
period of time not to exceed one year which shall be renewed at the option of
the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to
provide or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at
any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such
permission shall be required for each type or classification of Class IV
channel activity planned for the purpose of monitoring individual viewing
patterns or practices.
   B.   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a signal
from a subscriber terminal, or any other means including but not limited to
lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers or any lists that identify
the viewing habits of subscribers, shall be sold or otherwise made available to
any party other than to Grantee and its employees for internal business use,
and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless Grantee has
received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make such data
available.
   C.   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for the
conducting of system-wide or individually-addressed electronic sweeps for the
purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing.
Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to Section
113.11 of this franchise.
113.12   UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
1.   Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or
agency, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make or possess, or
assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically, or otherwise,
with or to any segment of the system.
2.   Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm,
person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or
segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever.
3.   Penalty. Any firm, person, group, company, or corporation found guilty of
violating this section may be fined not less than $20.00 and the costs of the
action nor more than $500.00 and the costs of the action for each and every
subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a
separate occurrence.
113.13   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this franchise shall be done in
accordance with applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
2.   Work Performed by Others. All provisions of this franchise shall apply to
any subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant to the
provisions of this franchise. Grantee shall provide notice to City of the names
and addresses of any entity, other than Grantee, which performs substantial
services pursuant to this franchise.
3.   Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and City may mutually agree,
from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made
subsequent to a review session pursuant to Subsection
113.08(5) or at any other time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment
will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required due to
changes in federal, State, or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law
pertaining to the ordinance amendment process.
4.   Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Laws.
   A.   If any federal or State law or regulation shall require or permit City
or Grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit City or Grantee from
performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the terms of this
franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, either party
shall notify the other of the point in conflict believed to exist between such
law or regulation. Grantee and City shall conform to State laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to federal laws and
regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
   B.   If any term, condition, or provision of this franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of
such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected
thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions, and conditions
hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and complied with
provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does not substantially
alter the agreement between the parties. In the event such law, rule, or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed
so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with the law, rules, and regulations then in effect, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on Grantee and City.
5.   Nonenforcement by City. Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligations
to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by reason of any failure
or delay of City to enforce prompt compliance. Any waiver by City of a breach
or violation of any provision of this franchise shall not operate as or be
construed to be a waiver of any subsequent breach or violation.
6.   Administration of Franchise. The City shall have continuing regulatory
jurisdiction and supervision over the system and the Grantee’s operation under
the franchise.
7.   Grantee Acknowledgment of Validity of Franchise. Grantee acknowledges that
it has had an opportunity to review the terms and conditions of this franchise
and that under current law Grantee believes that said terms and conditions are
not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that Grantee believes City has the power to
make the terms and conditions contained in this franchise.
8.   Captions. The captions to sections throughout this franchise are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of
this franchise. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of
this franchise.
9.   No Joint Venture. Nothing herein shall be deemed to create a joint venture
or principal-agent relationship between the parties, and neither party is
authorized to act, nor shall either party act toward third persons or the
public, in any manner which would indicate any such relationship with the
other.
10.   Entire Agreement. This franchise and all attachments represent the entire
understanding and agreement between the City and Grantee and supersede all
prior agreements between the parties or franchises granted to the Grantee.
Unless expressly provided otherwise by this franchise, this franchise and all
attachments can be modified only by a written agreement signed by both the City
and Grantee.
11.   Construction. This franchise shall be construed and enforced in
accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Iowa.
12.   Calculation of Time. Where the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, payment, or thing is required hereunder and the period of time or
duration for the performance or during thereof is prescribed and fixed herein,
the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day
of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the
period falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted
from the computation.
113.14   EXHIBIT A: SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
1.   City Hall
2.   Library
3.   All accredited public and private K-12 schools located in the City.
4.   Northwestern College
5.   Fire Station
6.   Adult activity center
113.15   EXHIBIT B: CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
Consumer Protection and Service Standards. Grantee shall maintain a convenient
local customer service and bill payment location in the City for receiving
subscriber payments, handling billing questions, and equipment replacement.
Grantee shall also provide the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel
to comply with the following consumer protection standards under normal
operating conditions:
1.   Cable System Office Hours and Telephone Availability.
   A.   Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free, or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven
days a week.
   B.   Grantee representatives will be available to respond to customer
telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
   C.   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained Grantee representative on the next business day.
   D.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the
connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall
not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of
the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
   E.   Grantee shall acquire equipment and/or perform surveys to measure
compliance with the telephone answering standards above.
   F.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three percent of the time.
   G.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours. Payments at Grantee’s drop-box location
shall be deemed received on the date such payments are picked up by Grantee
which shall occur no less than 24 hours after each and every due date for
subscriber bills.
2.   Installations, Outages, and Service Calls. Under Normal Operating
Conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95
percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis:
   A.   Standard installations will be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are
located up to 150 feet from the existing distribution system.
   B.   Barring situations that are outside the control of Grantee (i.e.,
physical damage to the system caused by third parties not under the control of
Grantee, weather related restrictions, etc.), Grantee will begin working on
service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known. Grantee must begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service problem.
Grantee shall resolve all service interruptions within 48 hours under normal
operating conditions.
   C.   The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls,
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (Grantee may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
   D.   Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close
of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
   E.   If Grantee’s representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient
for the customer.
3.   Communications Between Grantee and Subscribers.
   A.   Notifications to Subscribers. Grantee shall provide written information
on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
      (1)   Products and services offered;
      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
      (5)   Channel positions of the programming carried on the system; and
      (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the Grantee’s office within the service area.
   B.   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming,
services, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the
changes are within the control of the Grantee. In addition, the Grantee shall
notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other
information required by this chapter. Grantee shall not be required to provide
prior notice of any rate changes as a result of a regulatory fee, franchise
fee, or other fees, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any
federal agency, State, or franchising authority on the transaction between the
operator and the subscriber.
4.   Billing. Bills will be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee must respond to
a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
5.   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
   A.   The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the request
or 30 days, whichever is earlier, or
   B.   The return of the equipment supplied by Grantee if service is
terminated.
6.   Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer’s
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
Grantee shall provide City with a quarterly customer service compliance report
specific to the system serving City in the form mutually agreed upon, which
report shall, at a minimum, describe in detail Grantee’s compliance with each
and every term and provision of this chapter and any additional customer
service requirements contained in Grantee’s franchise and shall outline and
summarize all subscriber complaints received by Grantee during the preceding
quarter.
CHAPTER 114
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
ZYLSTRA COMMUNICATIONS
114.01 Short Title                      114.09 General Financial and Insurance
                                        Provisions
114.02 Definitions                      114.10 Revocation, Sale, Receivership,
                                        and Transfer of Franchise
114.03 Grant of Authority and General   114.11 Protection of Individual Rights
Provisions
114.04 Construction Standards           114.12 Unauthorized Connections and
                                        Modifications
114.05 Operations Provisions            114.13 Miscellaneous Provisions
114.06 Services Provisions              114.14 Exhibit A: Service To Public
                                        Buildings
114.07 Community Programming Provisions 114.15 Exhibit B: Consumer Protection
                                        Standards
114.08 Operation and Administration
Provisions
 
114.01   SHORT TITLE.
The franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as
the Cable Communications Ordinance.
114.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
1.   “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by State or federal
law to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein
shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1993).
2.   “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V
1987)) as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as
may, from time to time, be amended.
3.   “Cable Board” or “Board” means the Cable Board of the City of Orange City,
Iowa appointed by the Council.
4.   “Cable service” means:
   A.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other
programming service; and
   B.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or
use of such video programming or other programming service.
5.   “Cable television system”, “system,” or “cable system” means a facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable
service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
   A.   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
   B.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-
way;
   C.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system to the extent such facility whether on a common
carrier basis or otherwise is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers; or
   D.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility system.
6.   “Channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic spectrum which is used in
a cable system and which is capable of delivering either one standard video
signal, a number of audio, digital or other non-video signals, or some
combination of such signals.
7.   “Class IV Cable Communications Channel” means a signaling path provided by
a cable communications system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber
terminal to another point in the system.
8.   “Complaint” means any written allegation or assertion of noncompliance
with, or nonperformance of, the terms and conditions of this franchise made by
a subscriber which is received by the Grantee.
9.   “Converter” means an electronic device which converts signals to a
frequency acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an
appropriate selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals
included in the service.
10.   “Drop” means the cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber’s
residence to the nearest feeder cable of the system.
11.   “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
12.   “Franchise fee” means the fee set forth in Section
114.08 of this chapter.
13.   “Grantee” is Zylstra Communications Corporation, its agents and
employees, lawful successors, transferees, or assignees.
14.   “Grantor” or “City” means the City of Orange City, acting through its
Council.
15.   “Gross revenues” means all revenue received from the provision of cable
service, as defined, received directly or indirectly by the Grantee, its
affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, or person in which Grantee has financial
interest of five percent or more from the operation of its system within City
including but not limited to basic cable service fees, cable programming
service fees, pay television fees, installation and reconnection fees, upgrade
and downgrade fees, advertising revenues, converter rental and lockout device
fees and on which a franchise fee has not previously been paid. The term gross
revenues shall not include late fees or any taxes or fees on services furnished
by Grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any municipality,
State, or other governmental unit and collected by Grantee for such
governmental unit nor shall include revenues for signals originating in or
passing through the franchise area unless Grantee receives revenue for such
signal which has not already otherwise been directly or indirectly subject to a
franchise fee or similar tax, in which case said revenues will be considered
gross revenues for the purpose of this franchise.
16.   “Installation” means the connection of the system from feeder cable to
the point of connection, including standard installations and custom
installations.
17.   “Lockout device” means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to
a subscriber’s terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program,
certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication
system.
18.   “Normal business hours” means those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal
business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week
and/or some weekend hours.
19.   “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions which are
within the control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or
unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the
control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay-per-view events, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance
or upgrade of the system.
20.   “Pay television” means the delivery over the system of pay-per-channel or
pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.
21.   “Person” is any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or other legal entity, private or public, whether for
profit or not-for profit.
22.   “Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area
within the City as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted.
23.   “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels on the system.
24.   “Standard installation” means any residential installation which can be
completed using a drop of 150 feet or less.
25.   “Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or
drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City.
26.    “Subscriber” means any person who or which lawfully subscribes to cable
service provided by the Grantee by means of or in connection with the cable
system.
114.03   GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
operate, or maintain a cable system in the franchise area unless such person or
the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and
shall currently hold a franchise granted pursuant to a valid franchise
ordinance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide cable
communications service in the City unless such person obtains and currently
holds a franchise granted pursuant to a valid franchise ordinance. Any
franchise granted by the City shall impose the burdens and obligations that are
comparable in the aggregate to those imposed by the franchise ordinance
codified in this chapter; provided, however, that the City may impose
additional and/or higher standards in other franchises. Such additional and/or
higher standards, however, to the extent they affect the material provisions of
the franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall not apply to this
chapter.
2.   Grant of Franchise. This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and
conditions contained herein.
3.   Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
   A.   The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the
streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated and
all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in City, poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures
necessary for the maintenance and operation in City of a cable system as herein
defined to provide cable services and internet and related services to the
extent considered a cable service or otherwise permitted by applicable State
and federal law. The cable communications system constructed and maintained by
Grantee or its agents shall not interfere with other uses of streets. Grantee
shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to Grantee to
the extent it is technically and economically feasible to do so.
   B.   Notwithstanding the above grant to use streets, no street shall be used
by Grantee if City, in its reasonable opinion, determines that such use is
inconsistent with the terms, conditions, or provisions by which such street was
created or dedicated, or with the present use of the street.
   C.   This franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right to
grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways, and places, to any
person at any time, provided, however, that any additional franchise granted
shall contain the same substantive terms and conditions as this franchise.
   D.   Grantee shall have the authority to use City easements, public rights-
of-way, streets and other conduits for the distribution of cable communications
services. The City shall require all developers of future subdivisions to allow
and accommodate the construction of the system as part of any provisions for
utilities to serve such subdivisions.
   E.   Grantee shall construct and maintain the system so as not to interfere
with other uses of streets. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other
facilities available to Grantee where feasible. Grantee shall use reasonable
means to publicize any proposed construction work prior to commencement of that
work. The verbal or written notice required under this chapter shall include
reference to the Grantee’s telephone number and the responsible employee of
Grantee to whom questions or comments can be directed.
4.   Franchise Term. The term of this franchise shall be 10 years , unless it
is extended pursuant to Subsection 5 of this section.† 8
5.   Upgrade of System.
   A.   No later than December 31, 2000, Grantee shall upgrade the system
capacity to a minimum of 750 MHz. Following completion of the upgrade of the
system, the franchise term shall automatically be extended for a total term of
15 years from the effective date. The provisions of Section
114.04 shall apply to any construction undertaken pursuant to this subsection.
   B.   All programming decisions remain the sole discretion of Grantee,
provided that Grantee complies with federal law regarding notice to City and
subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions, or realignments, and
further subject to Grantee’s signal carriage obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§§ 531-536, and subject to City’s rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545. Grantee
shall conduct programming surveys from time to time to obtain input on
programming decisions from subscribers.
6.   Compliance with Applicable Laws, Resolutions, and Ordinances.
   A.   Upon acceptance by Grantee, this franchise shall supersede and replace
any previous ordinance or agreement granting a franchise to Grantee to own,
operate, and maintain a cable communications system within the City. Ordinance
No. 600 is hereby expressly repealed.
   B.   The Grantee shall at all times during the life of this franchise be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power, statutory rights, and the
right of eminent domain by City.
7.   Territorial Area Involved. Grantee shall provide service to the franchise
area. This franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of City, as it
exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by City, or as development
occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered; provided,
however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its
present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of seven homes per cable
quarter-mile adjacent to the existing cable system. Access to cable service
shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides.
Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate
cable plant to service annexed or newly developed areas as required by this
chapter.
8.   Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in
writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered
personally to any officer of Grantee or City’s administrator of this franchise
or 48 hours after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed
to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows. Either party may change
the address to which notices are to be sent by providing written notice of the
change to the other party.
   A.   If to City:
City of Orange City
City Administrator
125 Central Avenue SE
Orange City, IA 51041
   B.   If to Company:
Zylstra Communications Corporation
The Depot
Post Office Box 178
Yankton, SD 57078
ATTN: Mr. Brian Stewart
9.   Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other
party given as provided in this chapter.
10.   Drops to Public Buildings. Grantee shall provide installation of one
cable drop connection and any required terminal equipment and the highest level
of cable service, excluding internet services, pay-per-view, and pay-per-
channel programming, free of charge to each public building listed in Exhibit A
with no installation charges or monthly service charges throughout the term of
this franchise. Grantee shall, in any public building hereinafter built,
provide all materials, design specifications, and technical advice for any one
cable outlet to be installed up to 300 feet of the system from Grantee’s then-
existing cable system during the construction of such building, without cost to
the City, and Grantee shall provide the same service to such new public
building as required in this chapter. The right to provide service to public
buildings shall not include any used for residential purposes, either temporary
or permanent, including hospitals and nursing homes.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 688, adopting a cable television franchise for the
8 City, was passed and adopted on September 23, 1999. Ordinance No. 785, passed and
  adopted on November 17, 2014, extended the franchise term until September 23,
  2024.
114.04   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
1.   Construction Timetable.
   A.   Grantee shall give written notice to the City 60 days prior to the
anticipated commencement date of construction pursuant to Subsection
114.03(5) herein (the “system upgrade”). Grantee shall also notify the City
when a system upgrade is completed. Notice shall be delivered to the City
within 10 days of completion of a system upgrade.
   B.   Upon receipt of notice that all construction on a system upgrade has
been completed, the City shall have 90 days to obtain a written report from an
independent engineer confirming the completion of construction in accordance
with the terms and conditions of this franchise, the cost of such report to be
borne by the City; provided, however, that if the City fails to obtain such a
written report within said 90 days, the construction shall be deemed completed,
unless the failure to obtain such a report is due to unforeseen events, acts of
God, or events beyond the reasonable control of the City.
   C.   Grantee shall furnish the City, upon request of the City, regular
progress reports, on a timeframe and in a format mutually acceptable to Grantee
and City, detailing the progress of a system upgrade.
2.   Construction Codes and Permits.
   A.   Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from City before commencing
any construction upgrade or extension of the system, including the opening or
disturbance of any street, or private or public property, within City. Grantee
shall strictly adhere to all State and local laws and building and zoning codes
currently or hereafter applicable to construction, operation, or maintenance of
the system in City and give due consideration at all times to the aesthetics of
the property.
   B.   The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or
installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and to
make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms
of the franchise and applicable provisions of local, State, and federal law.
   C.   Nothing contained in this franchise shall be construed to give Grantee
the authority to enter upon, or work on, private property in areas not
encumbered with public easements without the permission of the property owner.
3.   Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all streets or public property or
private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of
the system shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee, at its expense, to
a condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee’s work, as reasonably
approved by City in the case of streets and other public property. If Grantee
shall fail to promptly perform the restoration required herein, City shall have
the right to put the streets, public, or private property back into a condition
as good as that prevailing prior to the commencement of the construction by
Grantee; provided, however, that City shall be required to give Grantee at
least 30-days’ prior written notice of its intent to repair property pursuant
to this section. The City reserves its rights to pursue reimbursement for such
restoration from Grantee.
4.    Conditions on Street Use.
   A.   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent City from
constructing, maintaining, repairing, or relocating sewers; grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating, and/or altering any street; constructing,
laying down, repairing, maintaining, or relocating any water mains; or
constructing, maintaining, relocating, or repairing any sidewalk or other
public work; provided, however, that City shall use all reasonable means of
avoiding damage to Grantee’s property.
   B.   All system transmission and distribution structures, lines, and
equipment erected by the Grantee within City shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public
ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights of property
owners who abut any of the said streets, alleys, and other public ways and
places, and not to interfere with existing public utility facilities. The
Grantee shall furnish to and file with City Administrator the maps, plats, and
permanent records of the location and character of all facilities constructed,
including underground facilities, and Grantee shall file with City updates of
such maps, plats, and permanent records annually if changes have been made in
the system.
   C.   The Grantee shall not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures of
system above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas,
electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures, and all such poles,
conduits, or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to
comply with all lawful and reasonable requirements of City.
   D.   Grantee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any
street in an existing aerial utility system without the advance written
approval of the City, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Grantee
shall exercise its best efforts to negotiate the lease of pole space and
facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction.
   E.   If any such property of Grantee shall interfere with the construction
or relocation, maintenance or repair of any street or public improvement,
whether it be construction, repair, maintenance, removal or relocation of a
sewer, public sidewalk, or water main, street or any other public improvement,
30-days’ notice shall be given to Grantee by the City and all such poles,
wires, conduits or other appliances, and facilities shall be removed or
replaced by Grantee.
   F.   With the prior approval of the City, the Grantee shall have the
authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public easements of City so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee. The City
reserves the right to accompany Grantee’s tree trimming crews.
   G.   Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring Grantee’s facilities.
5.   Undergrounding of Cable. All new installations of Grantee’s cable and
conduit shall be installed underground at Grantee’s expense where both the
existing telephone and electrical utilities are already underground. Grantee
shall place cable underground in newly-platted areas in concert with both the
telephone and electrical utilities to the extent feasible and provided that
Grantee has sufficient prior notice of such construction, unless this
requirement is waived by the City. Further, at such time as telephone and
electrical utilities change from overhead to underground, Grantee, at its
expense, shall place its cable underground and provided Grantee has at least
30-days’ prior written notice of such construction. Amplifier boxes and
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing
technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall
be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe.
6.   Erection, Removal, and Joint Use of Poles. No poles, conduits, or other
wire holding structures shall be erected or installed by the Grantee without
prior approval from the City with regard to placement, location, height,
weight, appearance, safety, and other pertinent factors.
7.   Safety Requirements.
   A.   The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and
shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods
and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
   B.   The Grantee shall install and maintain its system wires, cables,
fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements
of the National Electric Safety Code and all FCC, State, and local regulations,
and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of City
or of any public utility serving City.
   C.   All system structures and all system lines, equipment, and connections
in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways and
places of City, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person.
   D.   All construction on the cable system shall be performed by experienced
maintenance and construction personnel and shall not unnecessarily interfere
with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
114.05    OPERATIONS PROVISIONS.
1.   Operation and Maintenance of System. The Grantee shall render effective
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible,
shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Subsection
114.03(8) herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
2.   Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the
system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by
the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal
Communications Commission’s rules and regulations and found in Title 47,
Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time,
which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.
3.   Special Testing. City may require special testing of a location or
locations within the system if there is a particular matter of controversy or
unresolved complaints pertaining to such locations. Demand for such special
tests may be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence
indicating an unresolved controversy or noncompliance. Such tests shall be
limited to the particular matter in controversy or unresolved complaints. The
City shall endeavor to so arrange its request for such special testing so as to
minimize hardship or inconvenience to Grantee or to the subscribers caused by
such testing. Before ordering such tests, Grantee shall be afforded 30 days to
correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered. The City shall
meet with Grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such
and, if possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of
concern. If, after such meetings and inspections, City wishes to commence
special tests and the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a
qualified engineer selected by City. In the event that special testing is
required by City to determine the source of technical difficulties, the cost of
said testing shall be borne by the City if the testing reveals that the system
meets the minimum technical performance standards set forth in this chapter. If
the testing reveals that Grantee’s system does not meet the minimum technical
performance standards set forth in this chapter, then the cost of said test
shall be borne by Grantee.
4.   FCC Reports. The results of tests required to be filed by Grantee with the
FCC shall also be copied to City .
5.   Nonvoice Return Capability. Grantee is required to use cable having the
technical capacity for nonvoice return communications.
6.   Lockout Device. Upon the request of a subscriber, Grantee shall provide by
sale or lease a lockout device.
114.06   SERVICES PROVISIONS.
1.   Regulation of Service Rates.
   A.   The City may regulate rates for the provision of cable service,
equipment, or any other communications service provided over the system to the
extent allowed under federal or State laws. In exercising its jurisdiction to
regulate any such rates, City will adhere to regulations adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission at 47 C.F.R., 76.900 et seq. as they may be amended
from time to time.
   B.   A list of Grantee’s current subscriber rates and charges shall be
maintained on file with City and shall be available for public inspection.
Grantee shall give City and subscribers written notice of any change in a rate
or charge no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the change.
2.   Sales Procedures. Grantee shall not exercise deceptive sales procedures
when marketing its cable communications services within City. Grantee shall
have the right to market its cable services door-to-door during reasonable
hours consistent with local ordinances and regulation.
3.   Customer Service Standards. Grantee will at all times fully comply with
any customer service standards adopted by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309. At a
minimum, Grantee will at all times during the term of this franchise comply
with the standards attached hereto as Exhibit B regardless of whether the FCC
amends or repeals its customer service standards at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309.
4.   Complaint Log. Subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 521 et
seq., Grantee shall prepare and maintain written records of all written
complaints made to it and the resolution of such complaints, including the date
of such resolution. Such written records shall be on file at the office of
Grantee. City agrees to make good faith efforts to promptly inform Grantee of
all legitimate complaints it receives.
5.   Subscriber Contracts. Grantee shall submit any subscriber contract
utilized to City. If no written contract exists, Grantee shall file with the
City Clerk a document completely and concisely stating the terms of the
residential subscriber contract offered to customers, specifically including
the length of the subscriber contract. The length and terms of any subscriber
contract shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
6.   Emergency Alert System. Grantee agrees to provide emergency alert override
capabilities in a manner consistent with the FCC’s Emergency Broadcast System
(EBS) rules and consistent with any State and regional emergency alert system
plans adopted in response to the FCC’s EBS rules which are applicable to the
franchise area and the City of Orange City.
114.07   COMMUNITY PROGRAMMING PROVISIONS.
1.   Public, Educational, and Government Access.
   A.   Grantee shall provide to each of its subscribers who receive some or
all of the services offered on the system reception on at least one specially
designated access channel. Grantee shall make two specially designated access
channels available.
   B.   City shall establish rules pertaining to the administration of the
specially designated access channels required in this section.
   C.   Grantee shall provide reasonable levels of technical assistance
regarding the access channels.
   D.   Grantee shall make available its buying power by selling equipment used
by the City in the operation of the access channels at Grantee’s cost.
   E.   Upon acceptance of this franchise, Grantee shall remit to City payment
in the amount of $4,000.00 in support of the City’s acquisition of equipment to
be used for the production of public, educational, and governmental access
programming.
   F.   Grantee shall provide and maintain throughout the term of this
franchise a return line from both Northwestern College and City Hall to
Grantee’s headend which will enable these two institutions to cablecast live
programming and/or to locate playback equipment in one or both of these
facilities to handle playback for the designated access channels.
   G.   Grantee specifically agrees that any costs associated with satisfying
the obligations outlined in this section shall be entirely Grantee’s
responsibility and shall be provided free of charge to the City with no
associated pass-through to subscribers. Grantee further agrees that it will not
identify as a separate line item on subscriber’s monthly cable bills or
otherwise assess subscribers any costs associated with meeting the obligations
of this section.
2.   Leased Commercial Access. Grantee shall offer leased commercial access
programming to the public on reasonable terms and conditions and in conformance
with 47 C.F.R. Chapter 76, Subpart L, as from time to time may be amended.
114.08   OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Fee.
   A.   Grantee shall pay to City a franchise Fee in an annual amount equal to
five percent of its annual gross revenues.
   B.   Payments due to City under this provision shall be payable quarterly.
Payments shall be made within 30 days of the end of each of Grantee’s fiscal
quarters together with a report showing the basis for computation.
   C.   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and re-computation by City
and acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the
amount paid is in fact the correct amount.
2.   Open Books and Records. Subject to the privacy provisions of the Cable Act
and the confidentiality of Grantee’s information, the City shall have the right
to inspect, upon 72-hours’ written notice pursuant to Subsection
114.03(8) herein, at a time mutually agreed to by Grantee and City, all books,
records, maps, plans, financial statements, complaint logs, performance test
results, records of requests for service, and other like materials of Grantee
which are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this
franchise.
3.   Additional Reports. Grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City, at the
times and in the form prescribed, such reports with respect to its operation,
affairs, transactions, or property, which Grantee and City agree are reasonably
necessary for the administration and enforcement of this franchise.
4.   Maps. Upon request Grantee shall provide the City with a current map
showing any changes in the location of the system in streets and other public
places.
5.   Periodic Evaluation and Renegotiation Sessions. The field of cable
communications is a relatively new and rapidly changing one which may see many
regulatory, technical, financial, marketing, and legal changes during the term
of this franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of
flexibility in this franchise, and to help achieve a continued advanced and
modem system, the following evaluation provisions will apply:
   A.   The City reserves the right to adopt rules and regulations controlling
the procedures as set forth below and the subjects for evaluation and
renegotiation sessions. In the absence of any City action taken to exercise
these rights, Grantee shall be subject to at least the procedures and subjects
described in this section.
   B.   The City may require, at its sole discretion, evaluation sessions at
any time during the term of this franchise; provided, however, there shall not
be more than one evaluation session every three years.
   C.   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session include, but
are not limited to, channel capacity, system technical performance,
programming, access, municipal uses of cable, subscriber complaints, judicial
rulings, FCC rulings, and any other topics the City or Grantee deem relevant.
   D.   During an evaluation session, Grantee shall fully cooperate with the
City and shall provide such information and documents as the City may request
to perform the evaluation subject to federal privacy requirements and Grantee’s
need for confidentiality of certain information.
   E.   If at any time during its evaluation, the City determines that
reasonable evidence exists of failure to meet FCC technical specifications, 47
C.F.R. 76.601 et seq., the City may proceed in accordance with Subsection
114.09(2) herein.
   F.   As a result of an evaluation session held pursuant to this section, the
City or Grantee may determine that a change in the terms of the franchise may
be required, that the system or franchise requirements should be updated,
changed, or that additional services should be provided.
114.09   GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.
1.   Letter of Credit.
   A.   At the time the franchise becomes effective and at all times
thereafter, until the Grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with City,
the Grantee shall furnish a letter of credit to City in the amount of
$10,000.00 in a form as reasonably acceptable to City. This bond will be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Grantee according to the terms
of the franchise and upon the further condition that in the event the Grantee
shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance, or regulation governing the
franchise, there shall be recoverable any damages or loss suffered by City as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost
of removal or abandonment of any property of the Grantee, plus a reasonable
allowance for attorneys’ fees and costs, up to the full amount of the letter of
credit, and further guaranteeing payment by the Grantee of claims, liens, and
taxes due City which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or
maintenance of the system. The rights reserved by City with respect to the
letter of credit are in addition to all other rights City may have under the
franchise or any other law. City may, from year to year, in its sole
discretion, reduce the amount of the letter of credit.
   B.   The time for Grantee to correct any violation or liability shall be
extended by City if the necessary action to correct such violation or liability
is of such a nature or character as to require more than 30 days within which
to perform, provided Grantee provides written notice that it requires more than
30 days to correct such violations or liability, commences the corrective
action within the 30 days period, and thereafter uses reasonable diligence to
correct the violation or liability.
   C.   In the event this franchise is canceled by reason of default of Grantee
or revoked, City shall be entitled to collect from the letter of credit that
amount which is attributable to any damages sustained by City pursuant to said
default or revocation. Grantee, however, shall be entitled to the return of
such performance bond, or portion thereof, as remains at the expiration of the
term of the franchise.
   D.   The rights reserved to City with respect to the letter of credit are in
addition to all other rights of City whether reserved by this franchise or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to the performance bond shall affect any other right City may have.
   E.   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by Grantee to the City or
damages to the City as a result of any acts or omissions by Grantee pursuant to
the franchise, the City in its sole discretion may charge to and collect from
the letter of credit the following penalties:
      (1)   For failure to complete any required construction upgrade, unless
the City approves the delay, the penalty shall be $200.00 per day for each day,
or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      (2)   For failure to comply with any of the provision of this franchise
for which a penalty is not otherwise specifically provided pursuant to this
section, the penalty shall be $100.00 per day for each day, or part thereof,
such failure occurs or continues.
      (3)   For failure to provide the services Grantee has proposed,
including, but not limited to, the implementation and the utilization of the
access channels, the penalty shall be $100.00 per day for each day, or part
thereof, such failure occurs or continues.
      (4)   Each violation of any provision of this franchise shall be
considered a separate violation for which a separate penalty can be imposed.
2.   Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations.
   A.   Upon discovery of a violation of this franchise, the City shall first
notify Grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery, registered, or
certified mail, state with specificity the violation alleged to have occurred
and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 10
days in the case of the failure of the Grantee to pay any sum or other amount
due the City under this franchise, and 30 days in all other cases. If Grantee
fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed or if Grantee fails
to commence corrective action within the time prescribed and diligently remedy
such violation thereafter, the Grantee shall then be given a written notice of
a public hearing to be held before the Council. Such written notice shall
provide for a reasonable opportunity for Grantee to attend and submit evidence
related to the alleged non-performance or cure.
   B.   At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant
evidence, and thereafter render written findings of fact and its decision.
   C.   In the event the Council finds that Grantee has corrected the violation
or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof
from the City and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or
that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no
penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. In determining whether a violation
is material, the City shall take into consideration the reliability of the
evidence of the violation, the nature of the violation and the damage, if any,
caused to the Grantor thereby, whether the violation was chronic, and any
justifying or mitigating circumstances and such other matters as the Grantor
may deem appropriate. In the event that the City attempts to revoke the
franchise, after the public hearing and upon written determination by City to
revoke the franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an appropriate
State or federal court or agency. During the review of the appeal by an
appropriate State or federal court or agency, the franchise shall remain in
full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
   D.   If Grantee remains in non-compliance with the requirement of this
franchise, then the Grantor may pursue any available remedy.
3.   Indemnification of City.
   A.   Except as otherwise provided herein, Grantee shall indemnify, hold
harmless, release, and defend the City, its officers, agents, and employees
from and against any and all lawsuits, claims, actions, demands, damages,
disability, losses, expenses (including attorney’s fees and other defense
costs), or liabilities of any nature that may be asserted by any person or
entity arising out of the activities of Grantee, its subcontractors, employees,
and agents hereunder, except claims arising from or related to PEG access
programming or operation of PEG facilities or equipment. Grantee shall be
solely responsible and save the City harmless from all matters relative to
payment of Grantee’s employees including compliance with social security and
income tax laws and regulations.
   B.   This indemnification obligation is not limited in any way by a
limitation of the amount or type of damages or compensation payable by or for
Grantee under Workers’ Compensation, disability, or other employee benefit
acts, acceptance of insurance certificates required under this franchise, or
the terms, applicability, or limitations of any insurance held by Grantee;
provided, however, that City shall be obligated to promptly notify Grantee of
any claim or action for which it is seeking indemnification ..
   C.   Grantee shall not be required to indemnify the City under this section
for negligence or misconduct solely attributable to the act or omission of the
City, its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees.
4.   Insurance.
   A.   On the effective date of this franchise, Grantee shall file with the
City, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole
expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including
contractual liability coverage, in protection of City in its capacity as such,
its officers, elected officials, boards, commissions, agents, and employees.
The policy or policies shall name as additional insured City, its officers,
agents, and employees. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not
less than $300,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person, and
$1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one
occurrence, $300,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $1,000,000.00
for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.
   B.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by Grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of
insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not
cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of Grantee or for other
reasons, except after 30-days’ advance written notice have been provided to
City.
114.10   REVOCATION, SALE, RECEIVERSHIP, AND TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
1.   City’s Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which City has
pursuant to law or equity, City reserves the right to revoke, terminate, or
cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if
after following the procedure outlined in Subsection
114.09(2) herein and has determined that:
   A.   Grantee has violated any material provision of this franchise and
failed to cure on a timely basis; or
   B.   City may revoke this franchise without the hearing required by
Subsection
114.09(2) herein if Grantee is adjudged a bankrupt.
2.   Receivership. The City shall have the right to revoke this franchise
subject to this section of this chapter and any applicable provisions of
federal or State law, including the Bankruptcy Act, 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
Grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action
or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
   A.   Within 120 days after election or appointment, such receiver or trustee
shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this franchise and
remedied all defaults thereunder; and,
   B.   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed an
agreement, duly approved by the Court having competent jurisdiction, whereby
such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every
provision of this franchise.
3.   Sale or Transfer of Franchise.
   A.   No sale, transfer, or change of control of this franchise or the
Grantee shall take place until the parties to the sale, transfer, or change of
control file a written request with City and obtain City’s approval in
accordance with all applicable laws, provided, however, that said approval
shall not be required where Grantee grants a security interest in its franchise
and assets to secure an indebtedness.
   B.   In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control be
approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this franchise and
assuming all rights and obligations thereunder, and assuming all other rights
and obligations of the transferor to the City.
   C.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the Grantee or its assets
for the advancement of money for the construction or operation of the franchise
shall have the right to notify the City that it or its designee satisfactory to
the City shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a
Grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, said financial
institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within 30 days of
assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with
all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the City in
its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to
petition the City to transfer the franchise to another Grantee.
114.11   PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.
1.   Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. Grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal, State, and City laws,
and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
2.   Subscriber Privacy.
   A.   No signals, including signals of a Class IV channel, may be transmitted
from a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing
patterns or practices without the express written permission of the subscriber.
The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate document with
a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the permission in full
knowledge of its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited
period of time not to exceed one year which shall be renewed at the option of
the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s failure to
provide or renew such authorization. The authorization shall be revocable at
any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such
permission shall be required for each type or classification of Class IV
channel activity planned for the purpose of monitoring individual viewing
patterns or practices.
   B.   No information or data obtained by monitoring transmission of a signal
from a subscriber terminal, or any other means including but not limited to
lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers or any lists that identify
the viewing habits of subscribers, shall be sold or otherwise made available to
any party other than to Grantee and its employees for internal business use,
and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless Grantee has
received specific written authorization from the subscriber to make such data
available.
   C.   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be required for the
conducting of system-wide or individually-addressed electronic sweeps for the
purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring for the purpose of billing.
Confidentiality of such information shall be subject to Section
114.11 of this franchise.
114.12   UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
1.   Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or
agency, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make or possess, or
assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically, or otherwise,
with or to any segment of the system.
2.   Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm,
person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or
segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever.
3.   Penalty. Any firm, person, group, company, or corporation found guilty of
violating this section may be fined not less than $20.00 and the costs of the
action nor more than $500.00 and the costs of the action for each and every
subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a
separate occurrence.
114.13   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
1.   Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this franchise shall be done in
accordance with applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
2.   Work Performed by Others. All provisions of this franchise shall apply to
any subcontractor or others performing any work or services pursuant to the
provisions of this franchise. Grantee shall provide notice to City of the names
and addresses of any entity, other than Grantee, which performs substantial
services pursuant to this franchise.
3.   Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and City may mutually agree,
from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made
subsequent to a review session pursuant to Subsection
114.08(5) or at any other time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment
will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required due to
changes in federal, State, or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law
pertaining to the ordinance amendment process.
4.   Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Laws.
   A.   If any federal or State law or regulation shall require or permit City
or Grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit City or Grantee from
performing any service or act which may be in conflict with the terms of this
franchise, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, either party
shall notify the other of the point in conflict believed to exist between such
law or regulation. Grantee and City shall conform to State laws and rules
regarding cable communications not later than one year after they become
effective, unless otherwise stated, and to conform to federal laws and
regulations regarding cable as they become effective.
   B.   If any term, condition, or provision of this franchise or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be held
to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the application of
such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances other than those
as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall not be affected
thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions, and conditions
hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and complied with
provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does not substantially
alter the agreement between the parties. In the event such law, rule, or
regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended, or otherwise changed
so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in
conflict with the law, rules, and regulations then in effect, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on Grantee and City.
5.   Nonenforcement by City. Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligations
to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by reason of any failure
or delay of City to enforce prompt compliance. Any waiver by City of a breach
or violation of any provision of this franchise shall not operate as or be
construed to be a waiver of any subsequent breach or violation.
6.   Administration of Franchise. The City shall have continuing regulatory
jurisdiction and supervision over the system and the Grantee’s operation under
the franchise.
7.   Grantee Acknowledgment of Validity of Franchise. Grantee acknowledges that
it has had an opportunity to review the terms and conditions of this franchise
and that under current law Grantee believes that said terms and conditions are
not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that Grantee believes City has the power to
make the terms and conditions contained in this franchise.
8.   Captions. The captions to sections throughout this franchise are intended
solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of
this franchise. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of
this franchise.
9.   No Joint Venture. Nothing herein shall be deemed to create a joint venture
or principal-agent relationship between the parties, and neither party is
authorized to act, nor shall either party act toward third persons or the
public, in any manner which would indicate any such relationship with the
other.
10.   Entire Agreement. This franchise and all attachments represent the entire
understanding and agreement between the City and Grantee and supersede all
prior agreements between the parties or franchises granted to the Grantee.
Unless expressly provided otherwise by this franchise, this franchise and all
attachments can be modified only by a written agreement signed by both the City
and Grantee.
11.   Construction. This franchise shall be construed and enforced in
accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Iowa.
12.   Calculation of Time. Where the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, payment, or thing is required hereunder and the period of time or
duration for the performance or during thereof is prescribed and fixed herein,
the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day
of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last day of the
period falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that day shall be omitted
from the computation.
114.14   EXHIBIT A: SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
1.   City Hall
2.   Library
3.   All accredited public and private K-12 schools located in the City.
4.   Northwestern College
5.   Fire Station
6.   Adult activity center
114.15   EXHIBIT B. CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS.
Consumer Protection and Service Standards. Grantee shall maintain a convenient
local customer service and bill payment location in the City for receiving
subscriber payments, handling billing questions, and equipment replacement.
Grantee shall also provide the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel
to comply with the following consumer protection standards under normal
operating conditions:
1.   Cable System Office Hours and Telephone Availability.
   A.   Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free, or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven
days a week.
   B.   Grantee representatives will be available to respond to customer
telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
   C.   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained Grantee representative on the next business day.
   D.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer
representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the
connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall
not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of
the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
   E.   Grantee shall acquire equipment and/or perform surveys to measure
compliance with the telephone answering standards above.
   F.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than three percent of the time.
   G.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours. Payments at Grantee’s drop-box location
shall be deemed received on the date such payments are picked up by Grantee
which shall occur no less than 24 hours after each and every due date for
subscriber bills.
2.   Installations, Outages, and Service Calls. Under Normal Operating
Conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95
percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis:
   A.   Standard installations will be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are
located up to 150 feet from the existing distribution system.
   B.   Barring situations that are outside the control of Grantee (i.e.,
physical damage to the system caused by third parties not under the control of
Grantee, weather related restrictions, etc.), Grantee will begin working on
service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known. Grantee must begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service problem.
Grantee shall resolve all service interruptions within 48 hours under normal
operating conditions.
   C.   The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls,
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (Grantee may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
   D.   Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close
of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
   E.   If Grantee’s representative is running late for an appointment with a
customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient
for the customer.
3.   Communications Between Grantee and Subscribers.
   A.   Notifications to Subscribers. Grantee shall provide written information
on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
      (1)   Products and services offered;
      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
      (5)   Channel positions of the programming carried on the system; and
      (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the Grantee’s office within the service area.
   B.   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming,
services, or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the
changes are within the control of the Grantee. In addition, the Grantee shall
notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other
information required by this chapter. Grantee shall not be required to provide
prior notice of any rate changes as a result of a regulatory fee, franchise
fee, or other fees, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any
federal agency, State, or franchising authority on the transaction between the
operator and the subscriber.
4.   Billing. Bills will be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee must respond to
a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
5.   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:
   A.   The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the request
or 30 days, whichever is earlier, or
   B.   The return of the equipment supplied by Grantee if service is
terminated.
6.   Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer’s
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
Grantee shall provide City with a quarterly customer service compliance report
specific to the system serving City in the form mutually agreed upon, which
report shall, at a minimum, describe in detail Grantee’s compliance with each
and every term and provision of this chapter and any additional customer
service requirements contained in Grantee’s franchise and shall outline and
summarize all subscriber complaints received by Grantee during the preceding
quarter.
CHAPTER 115
CEMETERY
 
115.01 Definition                  115.05 Sale of Interment Rights
115.02 Trusteeship                 115.06 Perpetual Care
115.03 Establishment of Trust Fund 115.07 Rules and Regulations
115.04 Records
 
115.01   DEFINITION.
The term “cemetery” means the West Lawn Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery
under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall be
operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
115.02   TRUSTEESHIP.
Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council hereby
states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual
maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
115.03   ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUST FUND.
A perpetual trust is hereby established for West Lawn Cemetery in accordance
with Chapter 5231 of the Code of Iowa, the Iowa Cemetery Act. A restricted fund
is created, to be known and designated as the “perpetual care cemetery fund,”
which shall be funded by the deposit of an amount equal to or greater than 25
percent of the gross selling price, or $50.00, whichever is more, for each sale
of a grave within the cemetery. The fund shall be administered in accordance
with the purposes and provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa. The
perpetual care cemetery fund shall be maintained separate from all operating
funds of the cemetery, and the principal of the fund shall not be reduced
voluntarily except as specifically permitted by the Iowa Cemetery Act and
applicable administrative regulations.
115.04   RECORDS.
It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying the
owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information
regarding any transfers of ownership. The records shall include all of the
following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
1.   Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
   A.   The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of
interment rights.
   B.   The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
   C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
2.   Interments.
   A.   The date the remains are interred.
   B.   The name, date of birth, and date of death of the decedent interred, if
those facts can be conveniently obtained.
   C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space where the remains are interred.
115.05   SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.
The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by
a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance
of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price.
The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by
Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa. The payment of all fees and charges shall be
made at the office of the Clerk where receipts will be issued for all amounts
paid. Said fees and charges shall be based upon the charges as established by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
115.06   PERPETUAL CARE.
The cemetery shall maintain a registry of individuals who have purchased
interment rights in the cemetery subject to the care fund requirements of the
Iowa Cemetery Act, including the amounts deposited in the perpetual care
cemetery fund. The Council, by resolution, shall accept, receive, and expend
all moneys and property donated or left to them by bequest for perpetual care,
and that portion of interment space sales or permanent charges made against
interment spaces which has been set aside in a perpetual care fund. The assets
of the perpetual care fund shall be invested in accordance with State law. The
Council, by resolution, shall provide for the payment of interest annually to
the appropriate fund, or to the cemetery, or to the person in charge of the
cemetery, to be used in caring for or maintaining the individual property of
the donor in the cemetery or interment spaces that have been sold with
provisions for perpetual care, all in accordance with the terms of the donation
or bequest or the terms of the sale or purchase of an interment space and
Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.503, 523I.507, and 523I.508)
115.07   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Rules and regulations for the cemetery may be adopted, and may be amended from
time to time, by resolution of the Council and may cover such things as the
use, care, control, management, restrictions and protection of the cemetery as
necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the cemetery. The rules
shall specify the cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces,
memorials, or memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism. Any
veteran, as defined in Section 35.1 of the Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or
who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an interment space and
to be interred within the cemetery. In addition, any veteran who purchases an
interment space within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment
space for interment of the spouse of the veteran if such a space is available,
and the surviving spouse of a veteran interred within the cemetery shall be
allowed to purchase an interment space and be interred within the cemetery if
such a space is available.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.02 General Prohibition        120.06 Amusement Devices
120.03 Investigation              120.07 Liquor Store Location
120.04 Action by Council
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer permit, the
Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred
in the application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine
if they conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve
an application for a license or permit for any premises that does not conform
to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
(Section 120.04 – Ord. 842 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide
credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to retail sales
by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as follows:
   A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are defined
as follows:
      (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
      (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
   B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file, written
permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16 or 17
years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
      (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
      (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B, a
person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
   C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
   D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
   E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall require
the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual harassment
upon commencing employment.
   F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing
or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic liquor
in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa Department
of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for
immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed
premises, subject to rules adopted by the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle
used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original
package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to
use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2k])
12.   Permit or allow any person under 21 years of age to remain upon licensed
premises unless over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision
does not apply to holders of a Class “B” retail alcohol license or an
establishment employee when employed in compliance with State law.
(Section 120.05 – Ord. 842 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a liquor control license or beer
permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of
a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the
age of 21.
120.07   LIQUOR STORE LOCATION.
No liquor store shall be located within 300 feet of a public or private
educational institution.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective
of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed
with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper
or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be construed to include
cigars.
3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of
the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other
chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to
be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing
and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the
required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed
at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $ 75.00
October, November, or December $ 56.25
January, February, or March    $ 37.50
April, May, or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.   
(Ord. 842 – Oct. 23 Supp.)
121.06   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in
the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this
subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
14 days.
2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit
shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.12 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.13 Loud Speaking Systems and Other Noises
122.03 License Required         122.14 Location in Streets or Congested Areas
122.04 Application for License  122.15 Revocation of License
122.05 Power to Investigate     122.16 Hearing
122.06 License Fees             122.17 Record and Determination
122.07 Bond Required            122.18 Appeal
122.08 Insurance Required       122.19 Effect of Revocation
122.09 License Issued           122.20 License Exemptions
122.10 Display of License       122.21 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.11 License Not Transferable 122.22 Penalty
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in
violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license.
122.05   POWER TO INVESTIGATE.
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall forward the
application to all City departments who shall review the application with
respect to their duties and responsibilities. Each department shall, upon
completion of their review and investigation, submit to the Clerk, within seven
days of the City’s receipt of the application, a written report outlining their
review and investigation and recommendation on the issuance of a license.
122.06   LICENSE FEES.
In addition to any application fee identified in Section
122.04 of this chapter, the following license fees shall be paid to the City
Clerk prior to the issuance of any license.
1.   For one day   $   10.00
   A.   For one week   $   25.00
   B.   For one month   $   75.00
   C.   For one year (if associated with the same location)   $   500.00
122.07   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.08   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchant an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evident that the
applicant has established insurance as outlined in Section
124.09 of this Code of Ordinances.
122.09   LICENSE ISSUED.
The Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Chief or designee for
review and if the Police Chief or designee finds the application is completed
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, and the facts stated
therein are found to be correct, the Police Chief or designee shall recommend
to the Clerk to issue the license. Upon payment of the license fee, the Clerk
shall issue a license immediately.
122.10   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.11   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.12   TIME RESTRICTION.
All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in
force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. No sales are
allowed on Sunday.
122.13   LOUD SPEAKING SYSTEMS AND OTHER NOISES.
No licensee hereunder (or any person on behalf of the licensee) shall shout,
blow on a horn, ring a bell, or use any loud speaking system, amplifying
system, or any other noise-making device for the purpose of advertising or
otherwise announcing or proclaiming the licensee’s wares or business
activities, except as the same may be permissible under any other ordinance of
the City or statute of the State.
122.14   LOCATION IN STREETS OR CONGESTED AREAS.
No licensee (or any person acting for or on behalf of the licensee) shall have
any right to any location in the public streets or ways or upon any public
property without City approval, nor shall such person be permitted to operate
in any congested area where such operations might impede or inconvenience the
public. The judgment of a police officer exercised in good faith shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public
inconvenienced.
122.15   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk or
Police Chief may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the
following reasons:
1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order,
or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.16   HEARING.
The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.17   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.18   APPEAL.
If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part
of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.19   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.20   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own produce or local citizens selling garden or farm products at any
local farmers market authorized by the City.
4.   Schools and Churches. Persons representing any school or religious
institution located within the corporate boundaries of the City.
5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
7.   Special Events. Merchants coming to town for a special event that is
approved by the City.
8.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally operated
exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional basis
for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[13])
122.21   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and
122.06. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to the Clerk
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.17 of this chapter.
122.22   PENALTY.
1.   The sale of food or beverages or locating of a temporary business for the
sale of food, beverages, merchandise, or entertainment outdoors without a
permit or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Law enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to
cause any offending stand or temporary stand (business) or outdoor
entertainment to be dismantled, removed, and terminated without notice.
2.   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to supply to sell food,
beverages, merchandise, or entertainment within the City without first having
obtained a Peddlers Solicitors or Transient Merchant Permit as required herein.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.08 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required     123.09 Time Limit
123.03 Application         123.10 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required       123.11 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required  123.12 Overhead Wires
123.06 Permit Fee          123.13 Flaggers and Warning Signs
123.07 Permit Issued       123.14 Revocation of Permit
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or
any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 144 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk at
least 48 business hours in advance of the proposed moving schedule. The
application shall include:
1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Electric Supervisor and
Public Works Director. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of
the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT FEE.
A permit fee of $1,000.00 shall be payable at the time of filing the
application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required for each house,
building or similar structure to be moved. Permit fees will be returned to the
permittee if no damage has occurred.
123.07   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08   PUBLIC SAFETY.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons
at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the
sides, behind, and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.09   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours without
having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section
123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12   OVERHEAD WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable
television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
123.13   FLAGGERS AND WARNING SIGNS.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public property, the licensee shall maintain flaggers at
the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides,
behind, and ahead of the building or structure, or licensee may make
arrangements with the Police Department to have a police escort. At all times
when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or
public property, the licensee shall maintain adequate warning signs or flares
at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of
the building or structure.
123.14   REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Following written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the City Clerk may
revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
1.   Fraudulent Statements. The permittee has made fraudulent statements in
their application for the permit or in their conduct of business.
2.   Violation of Law. The permittee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted their business in an unlawful manner.
3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order,
or morals.
CHAPTER 124
SPECIAL EVENTS
124.01 Purpose                          124.11 Obstruction of Traffic
                                        Prohibited
124.02 Definitions                      124.12 Exhibiting Permit
124.03 Permit Required; Food and Health 124.13 Contractual Arrangements
Regulations
124.04 Application For A Special Event  124.14 Revocation or Suspension of
Permit                                  Permit
124.05 Decision By City Council         124.15 Appeals
124.06 Coordination of Application      124.16 Peddler, Solicitor, and
                                        Transient Merchant License
124.07 Permit Fee                       124.17 Limitation On Outdoor Beverage
                                        Gardens
124.08 Seasonal Permits                 124.18 Motorized Vehicles
124.09 Insurance and Other Requirements 124.19 Penalty
124.10 Permit Expiration
 
124.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that special events are promoted and
staged in a manner which preserves the safety of both our citizens and visitors
to our City; to ensure that all promoters of these events are treated fairly
and in accordance with their particular needs in the promotion of the event; to
promote the economic well-being of our community through the orderly attraction
of people to these events; and to ensure City personnel adequate opportunity to
prepare for and provide services for the events so as to provide them the
maximum opportunity for success.
124.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter certain terms and words are hereby defined.
1.   “Food vendor” means a person, organization, or entity which has obtained a
Vendor’s Permit from the Tulip Festival Steering Committee, or the committee,
entity, or organization in charge of the event, to provide or sell food or
beverages to the public in the City.
2.   “Special event” shall mean an event sponsored by an individual,
organization, club, group, partnership, or corporation in which the public is
invited to attend and which requires the use of public streets or other public
property as a staging area for promotion of the event.
3.   “Special event area” shall mean a place designated by the special event
promoter as provided in this chapter where the general public is invited to
gather for an event and where the area of interest of the promoter will be
promoted and/or celebrated and where, in connection with the special event,
there may be displays, speeches, the performance of music or the arts, games,
and other similar celebrations, and the sale and distribution of literature,
antiques, crafts, curios, art or artifacts, food, and other similar items, all
under the sponsorship of a “special event promoter” as defined in this section.
The area designated as a special event area may include property which is
privately owned, provided that the inclusion of private property within the
special event area shall not be construed as requiring the owner of the private
property to participate in or otherwise allow the property to be used in the
special event without his, her, or its consent, or as prohibiting the owner of
the private property from using the private property in a manner otherwise
allowed by law.
4.   “Special event merchant” shall mean an individual, organization, club,
group, partnership, or corporation which engages in the sale of items within a
“special event area” as defined in this section through the permission of the
special event promoter.
5.   “Special event promoter” shall mean an individual, organization, club,
group, partnership, or corporation which organizes, sponsors, promotes, or
makes space available for a special event or is otherwise considered the
organizer of the special event.
6.   “Street vendor” means a person, organization, or entity which has obtained
a Vendor’s Permit from the Tulip Festival Steering Committee, or the committee,
entity, or organization in charge of the event, to provide or sell merchandise
or entertainment to the public in the City.
124.03   PERMIT REQUIRED; FOOD AND HEALTH REGULATIONS.
1.   No individual, organization, club, group, partnership, or corporation
shall act as a special event promoter within the City without first obtaining a
permit therefor as provided in this chapter.
   A.   Exceptions. Tulip Festival and when applicable RAGBRAI shall be exempt
from obtaining a permit for special events.
2.   Special event promoters granted a permit hereunder and special event
merchants selling pursuant to that permit shall comply with all applicable
State food and health rules and regulations, and
Chapter 125, Mobile Food and Beverage Vendors, regulations
   A.   Exceptions. Tulip Festival and when applicable RAGBRAI vendors shall be
exempt from obtaining a mobile food and beverage license from the City under
Chapter 125.
(Section 124.03 – Ord. 846 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
124.04   APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
1.   A special event promoter shall file with the City Clerk an application for
a special event permit. The City Council may grant authority to a special event
promoter to hold a special event in a designated special event area. The
application shall be on a form furnished by the City Clerk and shall contain
information concerning the requested dates and hours of the event, other
information required by this chapter, and such other information as may be
reasonable in relation to the event for which the permit is requested.
2.   The special event promoter shall provide, at the time of application, a
preliminary map or drawing showing the area to be designated as the special
event area. Upon approval of the application for a special event permit, the
special event promoter shall provide the City Clerk a detailed map of the
designated special event area, showing any booths, trailers, stages, or other
facilities which will be temporarily erected, constructed or parked as a part
of the event. The detailed map shall be furnished according to a schedule to be
established by the City Clerk and approved by the City Council.
3.   At the time of application for the special event permit, the special event
promoter shall make a request for any necessary street or right-of-way closing.
Public right-of-way barricades must be attended in order to allow authorized
personnel to enter and exit the special event area. It shall be the
responsibility of the special event promoter to arrange for the personnel who
will attend the barricades.
4.   An application for a special event shall be submitted to the City Clerk at
least 60 days prior to the date of the event to allow the City time to review
the permit, provide feedback to the organizers and for Council to approve the
permit at least 30 days in advance of the event date.
124.05   DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall approve or deny the permit application in its sole
discretion based upon the facts and comments presented to it and the overall
effect the special event would have on the City and its citizens at least 30
days prior to the event.
124.06   COORDINATION OF APPLICATION.
1.   Prior to submitting an application, special event promoters shall
coordinate with City personnel as may be appropriate for the coordination of
street closings, barricades, and City personnel and service requirements. If
the Police Chief deems it necessary for the protection of the public good, the
Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of the special event promoter and
the proposed special event. The Chief shall submit findings and any other
comments to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall submit the Chief’s comments to
the City Council for its consideration in making a final decision on the
application.
2.   Upon review of a special event promoter’s application, all affected
department directors shall attached their comments to the application and
return the application to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall submit the
Directors’ comments to the City Council for its consideration in making a final
decision on the application.
3.   Any permit approved by the Council will also include all comments from
City Departments and will be provided to the applicant for compliance.
124.07   PERMIT FEE.
The City Council may establish a permit fee by resolution if desired.
124.08   SEASONAL PERMITS.
A special event promoter who coordinates and sponsors an event which occurs on
a regular basis throughout a specific time period, at least one day a week for
a minimum of four consecutive weeks; not to exceed a maximum of 24 weeks in any
12 month period must apply for a permit prior to commencement of the activity
season.
124.09   INSURANCE AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
1.   The approval by the City Council of an application for a special event
permit shall be contingent upon the special event promoter providing the City
appropriate proof of liability insurance coverage. If deemed necessary due to
event circumstances, the City Council may require a certificate of liability
insurance naming the City as an “additional insured” in a minimum amount to be
set by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of the appropriate
certificate of insurance the City Clerk shall issue the permit to the special
event promoter.
2.   Food vendors may be granted a Vendor Permit on the condition that the food
vendor:
   A.   Locates the stand as determined by the Vendor Committee;
   B.   Shows proof of liability insurance with a minimum amount of
$1,000,000.00; and
   C.   Complies with the Iowa Department of Health rules and regulations and
the Iowa Department of Revenue rules governing the sale of food for consumption
in the City.
3.   Street vendors may be granted a Vendor Permit on the condition that the
street vendor:
   A.   Locates the stand as determined by the Vendor Committee;
   B.   Shows proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000.00; and
   C.   Complies with the Iowa Department of Health rules and regulations and
the Iowa Department of Revenue rules governing the sale of merchandise.
4.   A Vendor Permit applications shall be submitted to the Tulip Festival
Steering Committee or the committee, entity, or organization in charge of the
special event.
124.10   PERMIT EXPIRATION.
A special event permit as issued shall set forth the time period for which the
permit is issued. The time period for which the permit is effective shall
include a reasonable period for cleanup. The permit shall expire at the end of
the time period specified in the permit.
124.11   OBSTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
The special event for which a permit is issued shall be conducted within the
designated special event area. The special event shall not be conducted in such
a manner as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic outside of the designated special event area.
124.12   EXHIBITING PERMIT.
A special event promoter shall be required to provide a copy of its permit to
each special event merchant for exhibit by the special event merchant during
the term of the permit period.
124.13   CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS.
The special event promoter shall be solely responsible for contractual
arrangements between itself and any special event merchants and private
property owners operating or located within the designated special event area.
124.14   REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Police Chief, without notice, for any of the following causes:
1.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or an incorrect statement contained in the
application for permit, or made in the course of promoting the special event.
2.   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.
3.   Promoting the special event in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety, or general welfare of the public.
124.15   APPEALS.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Chief in revoking or
suspending a permit or by the action of the City Council in the denial of a
permit may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the City Clerk, within 14 days after the notice of the action complained
of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for such appeal. The
City Clerk shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal and notice of
such hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant at its last
known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be
delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three
days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision of the City Council
regarding an appeal shall be final.
124.16   PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANT LICENSE.
A special event promoter may, in its application for a special event permit,
request the City Council to temporarily limit the areas within the City for
which a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant license provided under
Chapter 122 of this Code of Ordinances may be issued to an applicant thereunder
during the time period for which a permit is issued under this chapter. In
making its request, the special event promoter shall suggest particular areas
within the City limits which the special event promoter believes would be
appropriate for the issuance of peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
licenses during the time period in question. If the City Council agrees with
the suggested limitation of areas for which a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant license may be issued during the time period for which a permit is
issued under this chapter, the City Council shall adopt a resolution providing
for the modification of the issuance of peddler, solicitor, and transient
merchant licenses as requested in the application hereunder. In adopting its
resolution, the City Council shall be required to find that the permitted
special event is of City-wide interest, promotes the well-being and reputation
of the City, and that the issuance of a peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant license on a City-wide basis concurrent with the permitted special
event would detract from the benefits provided by the permitted special event.
If the City Council adopts the resolution as previously required, the exclusion
for yard sales contained in the second to the last sentence of the definition
of “transient merchant” set forth in Subsection
122.02(3) of this Code of Ordinances shall not be available during the time
period for which the issuance of a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
license is so restricted.      
(Section 124.16 – Ord. 846 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
124.17   LIMITATION ON OUTDOOR BEVERAGE GARDENS.
The presence of 20,000 to 25,000 extra people in the City for special events,
many of whom may be consuming alcoholic beverages, has the potential to
overwhelm local law enforcement personnel. Therefore, in order to ensure public
safety and to facilitate police protection, there may be no more than one
applicant permitted to operate an outdoor alcoholic beverage garden from a
temporary location with a five-day or 14-day beer permit and/or five-day or 14-
day liquor license. To help support the cost incurred by the Tulip Festival
Steering Committee or the committee, entity, or organization in charge of the
special event, or its designee, shall have the first option to apply for the
necessary permits or licenses to operate such alcoholic beverage garden at such
location. Businesses that have an existing liquor license for an outdoor
beverage garden as of the date of approval of this chapter shall be permitted
to operate such within the space defined in their license.
124.18   MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
The use of motorized vehicles such as scooters, golf carts, ATVs, etc., are
prohibited in event venue areas, as designated by the Tulip Festival Steering
Committee or the committee, entity, or organization in charge of the special
event, unless specifically authorized by the Committee or Police Department.
124.19   PENALTY.
1.   The sale of food or beverages or locating of a temporary business for the
sale of food, beverages, merchandise, or entertainment outdoors without a
permit or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Law enforcement personnel are hereby empowered to
cause any offending stand or temporary stand (business) or outdoor
entertainment to be dismantled, removed, and terminated without notice.
2.   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to supply to sell food,
beverages, merchandise, or entertainment within the City without first having
obtained a Vendor’s Permit as required herein. This special events chapter
shall apply on subsequent dates as specific events are scheduled or occur, with
the timelines adjusted accordingly in keeping with the pattern hereby
established.
CHAPTER 125
MOBILE FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDORS
 
125.01 Purpose                        125.07 Police Department Review
125.02 Definition                     125.08 Action by Clerk
125.03 Mobile Vendor License Required 125.09 Areas of Mobile Vendor Veihcle
                                      Operation
125.04 Application for License        125.10 General Regulations
125.05 License Fees                   125.11 Enforcement and Penalties
125.06 Insurance Required
 
125.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and unsafe food sources; preserve the attractiveness of the
City’s public spaces; and encourage the fair and orderly growth of the mobile
food and beverage segment of the local economy by licensing and regulating
mobile food and beverage vendors.
125.02   DEFINITION.
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the following meaning:
1.   “Mobile vendor” means a person engaged in the business of selling food,
beverages, or both, from a mobile vendor vehicle.
2.   “Mobile vendor vehicle” means a licensed motorized vehicle, a licensed
trailer, or both, used for the sale of food, beverages, or both, for immediate
consumption. The definition of mobile vendor vehicle includes but is not
limited to the common term “food truck.”
3.   “Restaurant” means a food service establishment which derives at least
fifty percent (50%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food, beverages, or
both, for immediate consumption on the premises.
125.03   MOBILE VENDOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
Before offering for sale any food or beverage in the City, a mobile vendor
shall obtain a license for their sale from the City Clerk as provided in this
chapter. A separate mobile vendor license shall be required for each mobile
vending vehicle.
1.   Regulations relating to the allowed location or area of mobile vendor’s
operations may be modified by the City for the Tulip Festival or RAGBRAI as
stated in
Chapter 124, Special Events.
125.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
A mobile vendor shall apply online for a mobile vendor license at least three
(3) business days prior to its use by providing the following information and
providing the required documents specified below and paying the application fee
for the period of the license duration in the amount set in Subsection
125.05.
1.   The full name, permanent address, e-mail address, if any, and telephone
number of the applicant.
2.   The business name and address.
3.   A description of the licensed motorized vehicle or licensed trailer from
which the sale will be conducted, including the license plate number, and the
length of the motorized vehicle or the trailer and tow vehicle.
4.   A summary of the food and beverages to be sold.
5.   The application must be accompanied by a copy of the Retail Sales Tax
Permit issued to the applicant by the Iowa Department of Revenue. A copy of the
mobile vendor vehicle issued by the Iowa Department of Inspections and Appeals
for the mobile vendor vehicle.
6.   Required site plan/map of where in the City the mobile vendor vehicle will
conduct sales.
125.05   LICENSE FEES.
The following fees shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of any
license.
1.   For one day   $10.00
2.   For one week   $25.00
3.   For one month   $75.00
4.   For one year   $500.00
125.06   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a mobile food and beverage
vendor an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has
established insurance as outlined in Subsection
124.09 of this Code of Ordinances.
125.07   POLICE DEPARTMENT REVIEW.
Each application for a mobile vendor license may be provided to the Police
Chief for review and comment and the applicant’s submission of such an
application authorizes the police to conduct a background check with respect to
the applicant.
125.08   ACTION BY CITY CLERK.
All references to the City Clerk in this chapter shall be deemed to include the
City Clerk designee.
125.09   AREAS OF MOBILE VENDOR VEHICLE OPERATION.
1.   Operation of mobile vendor vehicles shall not be permitted on public road
rights-of-way, including all streets and off-street parking in the downtown
business district, with the following exceptions:
   A.   The west side of Windmill Park on Arizona Ave. NW between 2nd Street NW
and 3rd Street NW on the east side of street in the dedicated off-street
parking area.
   B.   The south side of Windmill Park on 2nd Street NW between Central Ave.
NW and Arizona Ave. NW on the north side of the street in the dedicated off-
street parking area.
   C.   Tulip Festival, RAGBRAI, and special events with a permit.
2.   Mobile vendor vehicles may be permitted in Orange City parks upon approval
of the City and limited to designated parking areas.
125.10   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
The following rules govern operations of mobile food and beverage vendors:
1.   They may operate seasonally or year round.
2.   Hours of Operation. Mobile food and beverage vendors may set up and/or
operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. local time.
3.   No mobile vendor shall conduct any sale from a mobile vendor vehicle
located within one hundred (100) feet of any public entrance of any street
level restaurant that’s open for business, unless authorized by the restaurant
or specifically approved for a special event by the City Council.
4.   No mobile vendor vehicle shall be operated within 10 feet of any building
or other structure and shall not be operated within 50 feet of any other mobile
vendor vehicle, unless specifically approved for a special event by the City
Council.
5.   No mobile vendor shall conduct any sale in a residential neighborhood
unless such sales are specifically authorized in the mobile vendors license and
then shall only be in the specific areas stated in the license.
6.   The mobile vendor vehicle must be removed from the location of operation
after the hours of operation.
7.   Mobile vendors must be totally self-contained when engaged in the
preparation, serving and sale of food within City owned parks and right-of-
ways. No outside sources of electrical power, public or private are permitted.
No outside sources of water, public or private, are permitted.
8.   Trash Receptacles. A mobile vendor shall provide one or more trash
receptacles readily accessible to its customers either in or attached to the
mobile vendor vehicle. All accumulations of trash and liter shall be removed
from the site by the mobile vendor before departing.
9.   Mobile vendors may not operate as a permanent or semi-permanent
“restaurant.”
10.   No alcoholic beverages or tobacco products may be sold.
125.11   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction and subject to penalties in accordance with the Code of Ordinances
of Orange City and Iowa law.
(Chapter 125 – Ord. 845 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.09 Excavations
135.04 Playing In                 135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.11 Failure to Maintain
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.12 Dumping of Snow
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the City Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking, or
alley except in accordance with the following:
1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining
a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City
and shall contain the following:
   A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
   B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to
be made;
   C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
   D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted
passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
4.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the
minimum sum of $1,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such
bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any
damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $1,000.00 may be filed with the City.
5.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
   A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
   B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill
shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved street or
alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder/property owner.
9.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
11.   Permit Fee. A permit fee, set by resolution of the Council, shall be
payable at the time of filing the application with the City. A separate permit
shall be required for each excavation.
12.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be
issued.
13.   Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all
other pertinent provisions.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 9
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section
9 136.04 relating to property owner’s responsibility for maintenance of
  sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.10 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.11 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.12 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.14 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.15 Defacing
136.07 Sidewalk Standards                    136.16 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.17 Merchandise Display
136.09 Failure to Repair or Barricade        136.18 Sales Stands
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
2.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
7.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
8.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the
surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
The abutting property owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly
from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations
within 10 hours, the City may do so and assess the costs against the property
owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The abutting
property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to remove snow, ice,
and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b and e])
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or,
in the absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that
portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
(Section 136.04 – Ord. 856 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d and e])
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction
and repair of sidewalks.
2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained
soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact, clean,
coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be
determined by the City.
4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
5.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
   A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and four inches
thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in length.
   B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the
curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six feet in
length.
   C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge of
the property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to
special circumstances.
7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street,
which is the established grade.
8.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even
with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for
each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot toward the curb.
10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood float
finish.
11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a street,
road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area
shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street, road, or
highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built or
reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at
each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road. Curb
ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall be
constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.08   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.09   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.10   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.11   AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.12   ENCROACHING STEPS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.13   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.14   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.15   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.16   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.17   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk.
136.18   SALES STANDS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate            137.04 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.02 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.05 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.03 Findings Required
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered. In addition to the
published notice, notice shall be posted at least twice on each block along the
street or alley proposed to be vacated not more than 25 days nor less than 10
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
137.03   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.04   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.05   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] and 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following streets, alleys, or parts thereof as originally set out by
recorded plat, original, or as an addition to the municipality, are hereby
vacated by prior action of the City Council and are hereby approved and
confirmed including the following:
1.   Sixth Street between Blocks One (1) and Eight (8) and Two (2) and Seven
(7), from west line of Block Two (2) to the east line of Block Eight (8);
2.   Grant Street running north and south between said Blocks One (1) and Two
(2), Seven (7) and Eight (8) from the north line of Block One (1) to the south
line of Block Eight (8) from the north line of Block One (1) to the south line
of Block Eight (8) and the alley in said Block Seven, and all in East Addition
to Orange City;
3.   Central Street, between Blocks Thirty-five (35) and Thirty-six (36) in
South Addition to South Addition to Orange City;
4.   The north fifty (50) feet of the alley running north and south in Block
Seventeen (17) of Original Plat of Orange City;
5.   In west one hundred and thirty-four (134) feet of alley running east and
west in Block Five (5), East Addition to Orange City, and all according to
recorded plats thereof;
6.   The alley in Block Forty-two (42) of Original Plat of Orange City, Iowa;
7.   The alley in Block Thirty-nine (39) of South Addition, Orange City, Iowa
as lies north of and is adjacent to Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four
(4), and Five (5), South Addition of Orange City, Iowa;
8.   That portion of the alley platted as part of Replat of Out lots One (1),
Two (2), Three (3) and Four (4) of Block Four (4), Replat of Out lots One (1),
Two (2), Three (3) Four (4), and Five (5), South Addition of Orange City,
Iowa;
9.   That all of the platted alleys in Block Forty (40), South Addition to the
Incorporated City of Orange City, Iowa, except the north one hundred (100)
feet of the alley running north and south in said block;
10.   Or that portion of said alleys lying between Lots One (1) and Two (2),
and Lots Six (6) and Seven (7) of said blocks be and hereby are vacated.
In addition, the following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically
saved from repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or
public grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
615
629
630
634
665
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
528           June 8, 1961       654           September 5, 1989
533           June 18, 1962      668           July 6, 1992
536           August 5, 1963     680           December 2, 1996
546           September 19, 1966 684           December 21, 1998
550           June 5, 1967       696           October 16, 2000
551           June 5, 1967       697           November 6, 2000
552           June 5, 1967       701           April 16, 2001
553           September 5, 1967  777           March 3, 2014
566           August 21, 1972    788           April 6, 2015
567           August 21, 1972    811           March 19, 2018
577           June 16, 1975      820           February 17, 2020
593           July 11, 1978      848           March 18, 2024
616           September 19, 1983
620           August 6, 1984
622           May 6, 1985
623           June 17, 1985
635           June 23, 1986
640           April 6, 1987
648           April 4, 1988
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets          139.05 States and Capitals Used As Names
139.02 Changing Name of Street     139.06 Recording Street Names
139.03 Quadrants Named             139.07 Official Street Name Map
139.04 Naming and Numbering System 139.08 Revision of Street Name Map
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing
street.
2.   Ordinance. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by ordinance.
3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by ordinance, change the name of a street.
139.03   QUADRANTS NAMED.
All four quadrants shall be referred to as Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, and
Northwest from the center point of the quadrant system. The intersection of
First Street and Central Avenue, shall be the center point of said quadrant
system.
139.04   NAMING AND NUMBERING SYSTEM.
The streets within the corporate limits of the City shall be named and numbered
in accordance with the quadrant system established in Section
139.03 for naming and numbering streets. All north-south streets shall be
referred to and designated as “Avenues” except when south of Iowa HWY 10, in
which case they shall be designated as “Place.” All east-west streets shall be
designated as “Streets.”
139.05   STATES AND CAPITALS USED AS NAMES.
The east-west street intersecting the center point of the quadrant as
designated in Section
139.03 shall be known as First Street and the north-south street intersecting
the center point of the quadrant shall be known as Central Avenue. All avenues
west of Central Avenue shall be named in alphabetical order and in accordance
with the name of a state within the United States of America. All avenues east
of Central Avenue shall be named in alphabetical order and in accordance with
the name of the state capital of the states of the United States of America.
All streets north and south of First Street shall be designated by Arabic
numerals beginning with 2nd Street.
139.06   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.07   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Orange City, Iowa.”
139.08   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council with an entry on
the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the
City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk. No amendment to this chapter which involves naming or changing the
name of a street shall become effective until after such change and entry have
been made on said map.
CHAPTER 140
DEDICATING STREETS
 
EDITOR'S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted dedicating streets and remain in full force and
effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED  ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
853           9-3-2024
 
CHAPTER 141
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
141.01 Legislative Power                   141.13 Restoration
141.02 Definitions                         141.14 Business License
141.03 Applicability                       141.15 Reimbursement of Costs
141.04 Authority                           141.16 Administration
141.05 Reservation of Rights; Police Power 141.17 Audits
141.06 Conditions For Using the Public     141.18 Reports and Records
Rights-of-Way
141.07 Work Permit Required                141.19 Bond or Letter of Credit
141.08 Work Permits Not Transferable       141.20 Insurance
141.09 Exceptions                          141.21 Enforcement
141.10 Construction Standards              141.22 Indemnification
141.11 Placement of Facilities             141.23 Telecommunications Facilities
141.12 Relocation of Facilities
 
141.01   LEGISLATIVE POWER.
By enactment of this chapter, the Council hereby exercises its lawful police
power and common law authority, and all statutory authority which is available
to it, but not limited to, the powers conferred on it under Iowa law, including
Section 364 of the Code of Iowa, and other provisions of law.
141.02   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1.   “Affiliate” when used in relation to any person, means another person who
de facto or de jure owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under
common ownership or control with, such person.
2.   “Certificate of compliance” means a certificate issued by the City to a
person that has obtained an authorization in accordance with this chapter, as a
prerequisite to obtaining work permits.
3.   “Communications facility” or “communications system” means facilities for
the provision of communications services, as that term is defined herein.
4.   “Communications services” means telecommunications services, interactive
computer services, and any other services involving the transmission of
information by electronic or optical signals, except that it does not include
“cable service” as that term is used in the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, as amended.
5.   “Degradation” means the accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation did not occur.
6.   “Emergency” means a condition that (i) poses a clear and immediate danger
to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or (ii) requires
immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a customer.
7.   “Equipment” means any tangible thing located in any right-of-way; but
shall not include plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-
way between a person's property and the street curb.
8.   “Excavation” means any opening or tunneling in or under the surfacing of
any public place or public rights-of-way in the City. The exception is an
opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a public place or public
right-of-way (e.g., a manhole), the top of which is flush with the adjoining
surface and so constructed as to allow frequent openings without injury or
damage to the public place or public right-of-way.
9.   “Facility” or “facilities” means a pipe, sewer, pipeline, tube, main,
service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit,
wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, fiber optic, public irrigation
system, junction box, transformer, or any other material, structure, sign,
traffic control device, or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated
herein or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed, or
maintained in, upon, along, across, under, or over any public place or public
right-of-way.
10.   “Federal Communications Commission” (or “FCC”) means the Federal
Communications Commission or any successor.
11.   “Franchise” means an authorization granted by the City to a person to
construct, maintain or emplace facilities generally upon, across, beneath and
over the public rights-of-way in the City.
12.   “Franchise agreement” means a contract entered into between the City and
a franchisee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise
may be exercised.
13.   “Franchisee” means a person that has been granted a franchise by the
City.
14.   “Obstruct” means to place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
15.   “Owner or operator of a facility” means any person which has a possessory
interest in such facility or that controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such facility.
16.   “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the City under this chapter.
17.   “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust, governmental entity or any other legal entity, but
not the City.
18.   “Public place” means property owned or controlled by the City and
dedicated to public use, including but not limited to any park, square, or
plaza.
19.   “Public rights-of-way” means the surface and space above, on, and below
any public highway, avenue, street, lane, alley, boulevard, concourse,
driveway, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier,
public easement, or right-of-way within the City in which the City now or
hereafter holds any property interest which, consistent with the purposes for
which it was dedicated or otherwise acquired, may be used for the purpose of
constructing, operating and maintaining a facility.
20.   “Public Works Director” means the City of Orange City Director of Public
Works, or his designee.
21.   “Registrant” means an operator or other person that has registered with
the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
22.   “Registration” or “register” refers to the process described in this
chapter whereby an owner or operator of a facility provides certain information
to the City to obtain an authorization under this chapter.
23.   “Restore” or “restoration” means the process by which an excavated or
obstructed right-of-way and surrounding area, including, but not limited to,
pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before
the commencement of excavation.
24.   “Right-of-way” means the area on, below, or above any real property in
which the City has an interest including, but not limited to any street, road,
highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway, or any other place, area, or
real property owned by or under control of the City, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements.
25.   “Routine maintenance” means the action of keeping in a certain state of
repair, that is a regular, customary procedure and does not include excavation,
restoration or impede the traveling public.
26.   “Substructure” means any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault,
buried cable or wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface
of any public place or public right-of-way.
27.   “Supplementary application” means an application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that
had already been issued.
28.   “Telecommunications” has the meaning ascribed to it in 47 U.S.C. § 153
(43).
29.   “Telecommunications service” has the meaning ascribed to it in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(46).
30.   “Traffic control device” means any traffic signal equipment, signs,
interconnect lines or cables, paint or pavement markings, traffic safety
barricades or cones, or any other in-place traffic safety device.
31.   “Utility” means a private company or corporation or City department
engaged in providing a particular service to the general public.
32.   “Work” means any excavation upon, under, or through a public place or the
public rights-of-way at specified times and places to erect, construct,
excavate, emplace, or otherwise work on facilities.
33.   “Work permit” means an authorization issued by the City to enter upon the
public rights-of-way at specified times and places to erect, construct,
emplace, or otherwise work on facilities.
141.03   APPLICABILITY.
To the extent permitted by applicable federal, State and local law, this
chapter shall apply to all owners or operators of facilities, as that term is
described herein, in the public rights-of-way, in addition to, and not in lieu
of any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances. To the extent there is a
conflict between (i) the terms and conditions of this chapter and (ii) any
existing ordinance that applies to an owner or operator of facilities in the
public rights-of-way, the terms of the latter shall be expressly subordinate to
the terms and conditions of the former. Any owner or operator of a facility
that is not required to obtain a franchise or lease for any reason shall
nonetheless be subject to the provisions of this chapter to the maximum extent
permitted by law.
141.04   AUTHORITY.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the City’s
powers, including but not limited to those under Section 38A of the Iowa
Constitution and Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa.
141.05   RESERVATION OF RIGHTS; POLICE POWER.
No registration shall estop or limit the City in the full exercise of its
governmental powers to protect the health and safety of the public, and all its
governmental powers may be fully exercised except as expressly provided to the
contrary herein. In particular, and without limitation, the City expressly
reserves the right to amend this chapter from time to time in the exercise of
its governmental powers.
141.06   CONDITIONS FOR USING THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
1.   Authorization Required. No person shall install, erect, hang, lay, bury,
draw, emplace, construct, reconstruct, maintain, or operate any facility upon,
across, beneath or over any public right-of-way in the City or other City
property without first obtaining from the City the necessary authorization
required under local, State or federal law. An owner or operator of facilities
may be required to hold different authorizations for its use of the public
rights-of-way to provide different services. For example, and without
limitation, the owner or operator of facilities that provides both cable
service and electric services must also obtain both a cable franchise and an
electric service franchise before the owner or operator may offer cable
television service within the City.
2.   Registration Required.
   A.   A person that desires to place or operate a facility shall first
register with the City in accordance with this chapter. Subject to the terms
and conditions prescribed in this chapter and to any other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the City, an approved registrant may place and
operate a facility in the City’s public rights-of-way.
   B.   A registration shall be revocable at will to the extent permitted by
State and federal law.
   C.   No reference herein, or in any registration issued hereunder, to a
public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or warranty by the
City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is
sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a registrant shall be
deemed to acquire only those rights of user as are properly in the City and as
the City may have the undisputed right and power to give.
   D.   A registration under this chapter shall not convey any title or
property interest, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way.
   E.   A registration under this chapter does not excuse a person from
obtaining any necessary work permits before carrying out activities in the
public rights-of-way.
   F.   A registration under this chapter does not excuse a person from
obtaining any necessary pole attachment agreements or other permissions before
locating its facilities on private property, or on public property other than
the public rights-of-way.
   G.   Registration shall not in itself reserve priority over any other right-
of-way users for the placement or maintenance of a facility. Registrations are
expressly subject to any future amendment to this chapter and to any other
lawful City ordinances, as well as to any applicable State or federal law.
3.   Registration Requirements.
   A.   If a facility has more than one owner or operator, each such owner or
operator must register.
   B.   Each person that wishes to place or maintain a facility shall file a
registration with the City which shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name of the registrant;
      (2)   Name, address, and telephone number of the registrant’s primary
contact person in connection with the registration;
      (3)   Name, address, and telephone number of the registrant’s agent to
contact in case of an emergency;
      (4)   Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this chapter;
      (5)   Acknowledgment that the registrant has received and reviewed a copy
of this chapter;
      (6)   A copy of the registrant’s certificate of authorization or license
to provide services issued by the Iowa Public Service Commission, the Federal
Communications Commission, or other federal or State authority, if any; and
      (7)   For any registrant that does not provide a Iowa Public Service
Commission certificate of authorization number, if the registrant is a
corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Iowa, including
the number of the certificate of incorporation.
   C.   The Public Works Director shall review the information submitted by the
registrant and respond in writing to the applicant within 30 days after receipt
of registration information pursuant to this section. If the City determines
that the information submitted by the registrant is in accordance with
paragraph B above, the City’s response shall approve the registration,
effective immediately. If the City determines that the information submitted by
the registrant is not in accordance with paragraph B above, the City shall
notify the applicant that its registration is not effective, and shall identify
the reasons for the insufficiency of the registration information.
   D.   A registrant may cancel its registration by written notice to the City
stating that it will no longer place, maintain, or operate any facilities in
public rights-of-way within the City and will no longer need to obtain permits
to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant may not cancel its
registration if the registrant continues to place, maintain, or operate any
facilities in public rights-of-way.
   E.   Within 30 days of any change in the information that must be submitted
pursuant to paragraph B of this subsection, a registrant shall provide updated
information to the City.
   F.   A registrant shall renew its registration with the City by April 1 of
each even-numbered year, in accordance with the City’s registration
requirements. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed
and no additional information needs to be submitted, the renewal shall state
that no information has changed.
   G.   The Mayor shall issue a certificate of compliance to an owner or
operator of a facility within 30 days after its registration or renewal if the
following conditions have been met:
      (1)   The owner or operator has provided evidence of valid registration
under this section.
      (2)   The owner or operator has demonstrated that it has in effect the
bond or letter of credit required under Section
141.19.
      (3)   The owner or operator has provided the certificate of insurance
required under Section
141.20.
      (4)   The City is not aware of any noncompliance by the owner or operator
with applicable law.
   H.   If a registrant fails to timely renew its registration, the City may
suspend any certificate of compliance issued pursuant to Subsection
141.06(3)(G) on the basis of the registration until the registrant has complied
with the registration requirements of this chapter.
   I.   To the extent permitted by applicable law, the City may require a
registrant that places or maintains facilities in the public rights-of-way to
pay compensation to the City for such use or occupation of the public rights-
of-way.
141.07   WORK PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   No person shall install, erect, hang, lay, bury, draw, emplace, construct,
reconstruct, or otherwise work on any facility upon, across, beneath, or over
any public right-of-way in the City, or enter upon a public place or the public
rights-of-way at any time to work on facilities, without first obtaining a work
permit to do so from the Public Works Director, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. No work permit to work or make an excavation in a public place or
public rights-of-way shall be issued except as provided in this chapter. An
authorization under this chapter shall not render unnecessary or take the place
of such work permits.
2.   No person shall tunnel under the surface of any public place or public
rights-of-way for the purpose of making any gas, sewer, water, steam heating
pipe, or underground electric connection without first obtaining a work permit
required herein.
3.   No work permit shall be issued unless a written application (on a form
provided by the Public Works Director) is submitted to the Public Works
Director. The written application shall include:
   A.   Name and address of applicant;
   B.   Signature of applicant;
   C.   Principal place of business of the applicant, with contact information,
including 24-hour notification capability;
   D.   Authority of the applicant to occupy the public place or public rights-
of-way for which the work permit is sought;
   E.   Appropriate indemnifying bond or insurance certificate if applicable;
   F.   Location and dimensions of the installation or removal and the
approximate area and scope of the work to be done;
   G.   Location of all known survey monuments in the area of the work;
   H.   Location and dimensions of any relevant easement associated with the
work;
   I.   Location and dimensions of any and all existing and proposed traffic
control and traffic safety devices (including signs) that will be affected by
the work;
   J.   The purpose of the facility and the proposed start date and ending
dates that will be required to complete such work, including backfilling said
excavation and removing all obstructions, material, and debris, and
restoration.
   K.   Any other sketches, maps, studies, engineering reports, tests,
profiles, cross-sections, construction plans, and specifications so the Public
Works Director may fully analyze the application. The application, when
approved and signed by the Public Works Director, shall constitute a work
permit.
4.   Any proposed lane closures will require the completion of a separate lane
closure notice, including a sketch showing the location of the lane to be
closed and applicable dimensions. The form is provided by the Public Works
Director, and must also be submitted to and approved by the Public Works
Director.
5.   The City may withhold work permits for a facility if an owner or operator
thereof lacks an effective certificate of compliance.
141.08   WORK PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
A work permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable to another person.
141.09   EXCEPTIONS.
The following are exempt from the application of this chapter:
1.   A project that has been approved and funded by the City.
2.   Routine maintenance, as determined by the Public Works Director. However,
if damage is caused during routine maintenance, restoration shall be in
compliance with Section
141.13 of this chapter.
141.10   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
1.   Construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of facilities shall be in
accordance with all applicable law and regulation, and with sound industry
practice. All safety practices required by law shall be used during
construction, maintenance, and repair of facilities.
2.   No franchisee, registrant or holder of any work permit for any facility
shall dig, trench, or otherwise excavate in the public rights-of-way without
complying with the provisions of the Iowa One-Call System, Iowa Code § 480.3
et. seq., or its successor.
3.   An owner or operator shall at all times employ at least ordinary care and
shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices
preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or
nuisance to the public.
4.   In the event of a conflict among codes and standards, the most stringent
code or standard shall apply (except insofar as those standards, if followed,
would result in a system that could not meet requirements of federal, State, or
local law, or is expressly preempted by other such standards).
5.   A franchisee or registrant shall have the authority to trim trees that
overhang public rights-of-way of the City so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the facilities of the franchisee or
registrant. Notwithstanding that grant of authority, if the franchisee or
registrant performs the work, it shall be fully liable for any damages caused
thereby, and shall be responsible for replacing damaged trees and shrubs.
Franchisee or registrant shall be responsible for notifying abutting property
owners prior to trimming trees and shall obtain permission from the Public
Works Department. At the option of the City, such trimming may be done by it.
6.   The City may adopt additional standards as required to ensure that work
continues to be performed in a safe, orderly, and workmanlike manner.
7.   Every owner or operator shall, at least 30 days prior to commencing
significant construction activity (including a significant rebuild, upgrade, or
repair to existing facilities) upon, across, beneath, or over any public right-
of-way in the City or other City property, specify in writing the date on which
the owner or operator anticipates it will begin construction and the
approximate length of time required for such construction.
8.   Prior to the erection, construction, upgrade or rebuild of any facilities
in the public right-of-way, the owner or operator of such facilities shall
first submit to the City for approval a concise description of the facilities
proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if
required by the City, together with maps and plans indicating the proposed
location of all such facilities. The owner or operator shall provide the best
information it has in such reasonable format as may be specified by the City
for the City’s planning function. No such erection or construction shall be
commenced by any person until approval therefor has been received from the
City.
9.   Any contractor or subcontractor used for work or construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public
rights-of-way must be properly licensed under laws of the State and all
applicable local ordinances. Each contractor or subcontractor shall have the
same obligations with respect to its work as an owner or operator of the
facility would have if the work were performed by the owner or operator. An
owner or operator shall be responsible for all activities carried out by its
contractors, subcontractors and employees at the owner or operator’s request.
10.   The owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-of-way shall
notify the public prior to commencing any construction that will significantly
disturb or disrupt public property or have the potential to present a danger or
affect the safety of the public generally. Written notice of such construction
work shall be delivered to the City at least one week prior to commencement of
that work. Notice shall be provided to those persons most likely to be affected
by the work in at least two of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by
mail, by distribution of flyers to residences, by publication in local
newspapers, or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate
notice. If an owner or operator must enter a building or other structure, it
must schedule an appointment at the convenience of the owner or resident.
141.11   PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES.
1.   All facilities shall be installed and located to minimize interference
with the rights and convenience of other property owners.
2.   An owner or operator of a facility shall not place facilities, equipment,
or fixtures where they will interfere with any other utility or cable
facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving
the residents of the City or their use of any public rights-of-way.
3.   The City may reasonably direct the specific placement of facilities to
ensure that users of the public rights-of-way do not interfere with each other
and that the public rights-of-way are used safely and efficiently.
4.   Every franchisee or registrant that shall cease operating or maintaining
any facility shall, upon written request of the City within two years or the
cessation or maintenance of such facility, promptly remove it. Should the
franchisee or registrant neglect, refuse, or fail to remove such facility, the
City may remove the facility at the expense of the franchisee or registrant.
The obligation to remove shall survive the termination of the franchise or
license for a period of two years and shall be bonded.  
5.   No owner or operator of a facility shall erect new aerial plant in or on a
public right-of-way in which one or more public service providers (electricity,
telephone, cable television) has placed its lines underground, or in an area
which the City has by ordinance forbidden new aerial plant to be constructed or
existing aerial plant to be maintained.
6.   If at any time the City determines that existing wires, cables, or other
like facilities of public utilities anywhere in the City shall be changed from
an overhead to underground installation, the owner or operator of a facility
shall at the owner’s or operator’s sole expense, convert its system to an
underground installation.
7.   To the extent practicable, above-ground equipment placed on private
property shall be placed at the location requested by the property owner. An
owner or operator shall provide affected homeowners with at least 10 days’
advance written notice of its plans to install such equipment, and shall make
reasonable efforts to confer with such homeowners before any work is done.
8.   Whenever above-ground equipment is placed on private property, the
operator shall either provide landscaping camouflage acceptable to the property
owner, at the operator’s expense, or shall provide a cash allowance to the
property owner for such landscaping in the amount of $2000.00, adjusted
annually for inflation based on the Consumer Price Index. An operator may
provide such allowance either in the form of a credit against customer
billings, if the property owner is a customer, or in the form of a cash
payment.
141.12   RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
1.   The owner or operator of a facility on or within the public rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, upon written notice from the City reasonably in
advance, promptly relocate any facility located on or within the public rights-
of-way as the City may deem necessary or appropriate to facilitate the
realignment, reconstruction, improvement or repair of public streets,
sidewalks, curbs, drains, sewers, and public improvements of any sort;
provided, however, an operator may be permitted to abandon any property in
place with the written consent of the City.
2.   If any removal, relaying, or relocation is required to accommodate the
construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of another person that is
authorized to use the public rights-of-way, an owner or operator of a facility
shall, upon 30 days’ advance written notice, take action to effect the
necessary changes requested by the responsible entity. The City may resolve
disputes as to responsibility for costs associated with the removal, relaying,
or relocation of facilities as among entities authorized to install facilities
in the public rights-of-way if the parties are unable to do so themselves, and
if the matter is not governed by a valid contract between the parties or a
State or federal law or regulation.
3.   In the event of an emergency, or where a facility creates or is
contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the City may
remove, relay, or relocate any or all parts of that communications system
without prior notice.
141.13   RESTORATION.
If an owner or operator of a facility disturbs a pavement, sidewalk, driveway,
or other surfacing or landscaping, either on private property or in public
rights-of-way, the owner or operator shall, in a manner approved by the City,
replace and restore all pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing or
landscaping disturbed, in substantially the same condition and in a good,
workmanlike, timely manner, in accordance with any standards for such work set
by the City. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 30 days
after the damage is incurred, and shall be completed as soon as reasonably
possible thereafter. The owner or operator shall guarantee and maintain such
restoration for at least one year against defective materials or workmanship.
141.14   BUSINESS LICENSE.
A franchise or lease under this chapter does not render unnecessary or take the
place of any generally applicable business license that may be required by the
City for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
City generally.
141.15   REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.
All registrants will reimburse the City for its internal and out-of-pocket
costs, including but not limited to attorneys’ and consultants’ fees, actually
and reasonably incurred by the City in connection with the review of any
authorization under this chapter, as determined by the City after it takes
action on the application. Any application fee submitted with the application
will be credited against this amount. The applicant will remit to the City
payment for such costs within 30 days of its receipt of the City’s invoice.
141.16   ADMINISTRATION.
1.   The City Clerk shall collect any applicable fees from all owners or
operators of facilities using public rights-of-way in the City;
2.   The City Clerk shall audit any franchise fees or payments owed to the
City;
3.   The City Clerk shall publish from time to time a schedule of application
and hearing fees, which shall be designed to recover the City’s costs in
processing applications hereunder and may provide specially for hearing fees in
those cases where hearings are required;
4.   The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the continuing
enforcement of all terms and conditions of registrations under this chapter;
5.   The Public Works Director shall review registration statements filed
pursuant to Section
141.06(2); and
6.   The Mayor shall issue certificates of compliance pursuant to Section
141.06(3)(G).
141.17   AUDITS.
Each owner and operator of facilities in the public rights-of-way shall
maintain books, records, and plant accounts sufficient to document its
obligations for right-of-way fees under this chapter or any other fee owed
pursuant to this Code of Ordinances. Such books, records, and accounts shall be
maintained and available for inspection for a period of four years; provided,
however, such books, records, and accounts shall be maintained and available
during the continuation of any audit by or on behalf of the City commenced
during such four-year period or during any dispute or litigation with respect
thereto.
141.18   REPORTS AND RECORDS.
1.   Open Books and Records.
   A.   The City shall have the right to inspect and copy at any time during
normal business hours at the nearest office of an owner or operator of a
communications system, or at such other location as the City may reasonably
designate, all books, receipts, maps, records, codes, programs, and disks or
other storage media and other like material which the City reasonably deems
appropriate in order to monitor compliance with the terms of this chapter or
applicable law. This includes not only the books and records of the operator,
but any books and records held by an affiliate, or any contractor,
subcontractor or any person holding any form of management contract for the
facilities in the public rights-of-way to the extent such books or records
relate to the facilities. An owner or operator is responsible for collecting
the information and producing it at a location as specified above.
   B.   Access to an owner or operator’s records shall not be denied on the
basis that said records contain “proprietary” information. Any confidential
information received by the City shall remain confidential insofar as permitted
by the Iowa Fair Information Practices Act, Iowa Code § 22.1111 and other
applicable State and federal law.
2.   Annual Report. Unless this requirement is waived in whole or in part in
writing by the City, no later than 90 days after the end of its fiscal year,
each owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-of-way shall submit a
written report to the City, in a form directed by the City, which shall
include:
   A.   An organizational chart showing all corporations or partnerships with
more than a five percent ownership interest in the owner or operator, and the
nature of that ownership interest (limited partner, general partner, preferred
shareholder, etc.); and showing the same information for each corporation or
partnership that holds such an interest in the corporations or partnerships so
identified, and so on until the ultimate corporate and partnership interests
are identified.
   B.   Detailed, updated maps depicting the location of all facilities in the
City.
3.   Special Reports. Unless this requirement is waived in whole or in part by
the City, the owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-of-way shall
deliver the following special reports to the City:
   A.   An owner or operator shall submit monthly construction reports to the
City for any major construction undertaken in the public rights-of-way until
such construction is complete. The owner or operator must submit updated as-
built system design maps to the City, or make them available for inspection
with notice of their availability, within 30 days of the completion of system
construction in any geographic area. These maps shall be developed on the basis
of post-construction inspection by the owner or operator and construction
personnel. Any departures from design must be indicated on the as-built maps.
   B.   An owner or operator must submit a copy and brief explanation of any
request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a
declaration of bankruptcy by the owner or operator or by any partnership or
corporation that owns or controls the owner or operator directly or indirectly.
4.   Records Required. An owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-
of-way shall at all times maintain:
   A.   A full and complete set of plans, records, and “as built” maps showing
the exact location of all equipment installed or in use in the City, exclusive
of customer service drops.
   B.   A file showing its plan and timetable for construction of the
facilities.
5.   Voluminous Materials. If any books, records, maps or plans, or other
requested documents are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be
copied and moved, then an owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-
of-way may request that the inspection take place at some other location,
provided that (i) the owner or operator must make necessary arrangements for
copying documents selected by the City after review; and (ii) the owner or
operator must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the
City in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected by its
designee.
141.19   BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT.
No person shall install, erect, hang, lay, bury, draw, emplace, construct,
reconstruct, maintain, or operate any facility upon, across, beneath, or over
any public right-of-way in the City or other City property until the owner or
operator shall have filed with the City a bond or letter of credit, in a form
acceptable to the City, running in favor of the City, to guarantee the
obligations of the owner or operator under this chapter and applicable law. The
amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be no less than the reasonable
cost of removal of the facilities and restoration of any affected public
rights-of-way or other property pursuant to this chapter.
141.20   INSURANCE.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance to an owner or operator of
a facility, the owner or operator of the facility shall purchase general
liability insurance, specifically identifying the City of Orange City, Iowa as
an additional insured, in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00, with a maximum
deductible of $5,000.00, to cover any and all claims arising from the owner’s
or operator’s use of the public right-of-way within the City. Upon request of
the City, the owner or operator of a facility shall submit a certified copy of
this insurance policy to the City.
141.21   ENFORCEMENT.
1.   Penalties. For violation of provisions of this chapter or its
authorization under this chapter, penalties shall be assessable against an
owner or operator and shall be chargeable to its performance bond in any amount
up to the limits specified below, at the City’s discretion:
   A.   For failure to supply information, reports or filings lawfully required
under applicable law or agreements: $400.00 per day for each violation for each
day the violation continues.
   B.   For failure to render payments due under this chapter, any applicable
agreement or applicable law: $100.00 per day in addition to the amount of any
such payment due.
   C.   For failure to file, obtain or maintain any required performance bond
or letter of credit in a timely fashion: $50.00 per day;
   D.   For failure to restore damaged property: $50.00 per day, in addition to
the cost of the restoration and any other penalties or fees as required
elsewhere herein;
   E.   For any other violations of this chapter, any applicable agreement or
other applicable law: $200.00 per day for each violation for each day the
violation continues.
2.   Additional Remedies. In addition to any other remedies hereunder, the City
may seek an injunction to mitigate or terminate a violation, or employ any
other remedy available at law or equity, including but not limited to
imposition of penalties pursuant to Subsection 5 of this section.
3.   Timely Performance. Any failure of the City to insist on timely
performance or compliance by any person shall not constitute a waiver of the
City’s right to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that person
or any other person.
4.   Termination on Account of Certain Assignments or Appointments.
   A.   To the extent not prohibited by the United States Bankruptcy Code, an
authorization under this chapter shall terminate automatically by force of law
120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the
appointment of a receiver or trustee (including a debtor-in-possession in a
reorganization) to take over the business of the owner or operator, whether in
bankruptcy or under a State law proceeding; provided, however, such
authorization shall not so terminate if, within that 120-day period:
      (1)   Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or
      (2)   Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has cured any defaults and has
fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and any applicable
agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by any court having
jurisdiction, under which it assumes and agrees to be bound by the terms and
conditions of this chapter and any applicable agreement.
   B.   In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment, or property of an owner or operator of facilities in the
public rights-of-way, its authorization under this chapter shall automatically
terminate 30 calendar days after such foreclosure or sale, unless:
      (1)   The City has approved a transfer to the successful bidder; and
      (2)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions binding its predecessor.
   C.   Any mortgage, pledge or lease of facilities in the public rights-of-way
shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the City under this chapter,
any applicable agreement, and other applicable law.
   D.   If an authorization under this chapter is terminated for any reason,
the City may, at its discretion, require the franchisee or registrant to remove
its facilities from the public rights-of-way and to restore the public rights-
of-way to their prior condition at the owner or operator’s expense, or that of
their sureties. If an owner or operator whose authorization has been terminated
fails, after reasonable notice from the City, to remove its facilities from the
public rights-of-way, such facilities shall be deemed abandoned and ownership
forfeited to the City.
5.   All remedies specified in this section are cumulative unless otherwise
expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of
another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated
damages or penalties relieve an operator of its obligations to comply with this
chapter.
6.   The owner or operator shall pay any penalty assessed in accordance with
this section within 14 days after receipt of notice from the City of such
penalty.
7.   The City may reduce or waive any of the above-listed penalties for good
cause shown.
141.22   INDEMNIFICATION.
1.   An owner or operator of facilities in the public rights-of-way shall, at
its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its
officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against
any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for
damages or equitable relief arising out of the construction, maintenance, or
operation of its facilities in the public rights-of-way, or the conduct of the
owner or operator’s business in the City, or in any way arising out of the
owner or operator’s activities in the City’s public rights-of-way, regardless
of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by this chapter.
2.   The indemnity provided under Subsection 1 includes, but is not limited to,
the City’s reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in defending against any such
claim, suit, or proceeding.
3.   Recovery by the City of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond,
letter of credit, or otherwise shall not limit in any way a person’s duty to
indemnify the City, nor shall such recovery relieve a person of its obligations
pursuant to an authorization under this chapter, limit the amounts owed to the
City, or in any respect prevent the City from exercising any other right or
remedy it may have.
141.23   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
This chapter applies to the provision of telecommunications services for hire
in the public rights-of-way but does not include such provision of cable
services. This chapter does not apply to communications facilities owned or
operated by a person for its own internal use in a business other than the
provision of telecommunications services.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty
construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used.
3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to
the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date,
time and place of hearing.
2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 10
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
   Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
10 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
   recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
   procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF ORANGE
CITY, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition,
removal or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without
written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the
building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of
demolishing the building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section
145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to
the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against
the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover
costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than four inches in height and of a
contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 14 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition            151.04 Disease Control
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the
following:
1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking
midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb
line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line 10 feet from the
property line.
2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than nine
feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil surface per
tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from street intersections
(property lines extended) and 10 feet from driveways. If it is at all possible,
trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk
and the curb.
3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing
tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder,
Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c and e])
151.04   DISEASE CONTROL.
Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect or
disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.05   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
The City shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the City
reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and
shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any
public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The City may also order the removal of any trees on the
streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any
such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to
adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the City
shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such
property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 30 days of
said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 30 days of receipt of notice, the City may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b and h])
CHAPTER 154
BUILDING CODE
 
154.01 Title                            154.06 Adoption of International
                                        Existing Building Code
154.02 Adoption of International        154.07 Adoption of International
Building Code                           Plumbing Code
154.03 Adoption of International Fire   154.08 Adoption of International
Code                                    Mechanical Code
154.04 Adoption of International        154.09 Adoption of National Electrical
Residential Code                        Code (NEC)
154.05 Adoption of International Energy 154.10 Adoption of International
Conservation Code                       Swimming Pool and Spa Code
 
154.01   TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the City Building Code.
154.02   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such portions as may be
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy of the International
Building Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The following
deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.03   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such portions as may be
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy of the International
Fire Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The following deletions,
modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.04   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such portions as
may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy of the
International Residential Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The
following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
1.   Subsection R313.1 and R313.2 is hereby amended by deleting said sections
and adopting in lieu thereof the following:
The following structures shall be provided with automatic fire sprinkler
systems installed in accordance with Section 2904 of the IRC, NFPA 13, NFPA
13R, NFPA 13D, or other systems listed and approved for installation in
dwellings:
1.   Any residential dwelling unit in which the gross square footage of the
dwelling space(s), including all floor levels whether finished or unfinished
and all basement areas whether finished or unfinished (exclusive of attached
garage areas), that exceed 5,000 square feet.
2.   Townhouse structures that contain more than six dwelling units.
3.   Townhouse structures that exceed 14,000 square feet in gross floor area as
determined above for dwelling units.
154.05   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such
portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy
of the International Energy Conservation Code is on file in the office of the
City Clerk. The following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.06   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such
portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy
of the International Existing Building Code is on file in the office of the
City Clerk. The following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.07   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such portions as may be
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy of the International
Plumbing Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The following
deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.08   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such portions as
may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy of the
International Mechanical Code is on file in the office of the City Clerk. The
following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
154.09   ADOPTION OF NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE (NEC).
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
National Electrical Code (NEC), 2020 Edition, published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such
portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy
of the National Electrical Code (NEC) is on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE –
154.10   ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, as required by law, the
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 Edition, published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted in full by reference except such
portions as may be hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. An official copy
of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is on file in the office of the
City Clerk. The following deletions, modifications, and amendments are made:
- NONE -
CHAPTER 155
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
 
155.01 Property Maintenance Standards   155.08 Extermination
Enumerated
155.02 Definitions                      155.09 Light and Ventilation
                                        Requirements
155.03 Exterior Property Areas          155.10 Plumbing Facilities and Fixture
                                        Requirements
155.04 Exterior Structures              155.11 Mechanical and Electrical
                                        Requirements
155.05 Interior Structures and Property 155.12 Fire Safety Requirements
Areas
155.06 Handrails and Guardrails         155.13 Carbon Monoxide Detectors
                                        Required
155.07 Accumulations of Rubbish,        155.14 Notice to Abate
Garbage, and Yard Waste
 
155.01   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS ENUMERATED.
These minimum conditions and responsibilities of persons for maintenance of
structures, equipment, and exterior property shall govern.
1.   Responsibility. Owners shall be responsible to maintain structures and
exterior property in compliance with these requirements while the occupants
shall be responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition which
they occupy and control.
2.   Vacant Structures and Land. Vacant structures and land shall be maintained
in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not
to constitute a violation of any other applicable chapter of this Code of
Ordinances, adversely affecting the public health or safety.
155.02   DEFINITIONS.
1.   “Habitable space” means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating,
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
2.   “Stagnant water” means ponding of standing water for unusual amounts of
time, with no current or flow for drainage purposes, often with an unpleasant
smell or harboring of mosquitoes as a result.
155.03   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
1.   Grading and Drainage. Exterior areas must be maintained to prevent erosion
and accumulation of stagnant water.
2.   Rodent Infestation. Proper precautions must be taken to prevent or
eliminate rodent infestation.
3.   Exhaust Vents. Vents shall not be discharged directly upon abutting public
or private property.
4.   Accessory Structures. Accessory structures must be maintained,
structurally sound, and in good repair.
5.   Retaining Walls. Retaining walls must be maintained, structurally sound,
and in good repair.
155.04   EXTERIOR STRUCTURES.
1.   General. The exterior structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
2.   Premises Identification. Buildings shall have address numbers that are
plainly legible from the street, in compliance with
Chapter 150 of this Code of Ordinances.
3.   Structural Members. Structural members shall be maintained free from
deterioration and capable of safely supporting the imposed loads.
4.   Exterior Walls. Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose
or rotting materials, and otherwise properly maintained. All exterior wood
surfaces of a dwelling and its accessory structures, fences, porches, and
similar appurtenances shall be reasonably protected from the elements and
against decay by non-lead-based paint or other approved protective coating.
(Exception: Where it can be demonstrated that the exterior wood surface is
comprised of a type or species of wood or has been treated in such a way as to
cause it to be especially resistant to decay or infestation, the wood surface
in question, if approved by the inspector, shall be exempt from the
requirements listed in this subsection.)
5.   Roofs and Drainage. Roofs shall not have defects that admit rain with
drainage to prevent leaking into structure or deterioration. Drains, gutters,
and downspouts, where present, must be maintained and not discharged in a
manner to create a nuisance.
6.   Decorative Features. Decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
7.   Overhang Extensions. All overhang extensions, including (but not limited
to) canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and
exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as
to be kept in a safe and sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces
of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust
by periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
8.   Stairways, Decks, Porches, and Balconies. Stairways, decks, porches, and
balconies shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper
anchorage, and capable of supporting imposed loads.
9.   Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys and towers shall be maintained structurally
safe and sound and in good repair with exposed surfaces protected from the
elements and against decay or rust.
10.   Handrails and Guards. Handrails and guards shall be firmly fastened,
capable of supporting normally-imposed loads, and maintained.
11.   Windows, Skylights, and Door Frames. Windows, skylights, and door frames
shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, weather-tight, easily openable
if required for emergency egress, and capable of being held in position by
window hardware.
12.   Insect Screens. From April 1 to October 31, outside openings required for
ventilation shall be supplied with tightly-fitting screens. Every storm door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. Screens shall not
be required where other approved means such as air curtains or insect repellent
fans are employed.
13.   Doors. Doors shall be maintained in good condition with locks at unit’s
entrances being tightly secured. Doors that are equipped with a deadbolt shall
be operated from the inside only by the turning of a knob and shall have a
lock-throw of not less than one inch. A sliding bolt shall not be acceptable,
and the lock shall be operable without the use of a key, tool, special
knowledge, or effort.
14.   Basement Hatchways. Basement hatchways shall be maintained to prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain, and surface drainage water. If the hatchway provides
access to a unit, it shall be equipped with devices that secure the unit from
unauthorized entry.
15.   Building Security. Doors, windows, or hatchways for units shall be
provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and
property within.
16.   Windows. A unit’s operable windows, located in whole or part within six
feet of ground level, shall be equipped with sash-locking devices.
17.   Cisterns. All cisterns or similar water storage facilities shall be
fenced, safely covered, or filled in such a way as not to create a hazard to
life or limb.
155.05   INTERIOR STRUCTURES AND PROPERTY AREAS.
1.   General. Structures and areas shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound, and in a clean, sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep
that part of the structure which they occupy in a clean and sanitary condition.
The owner of multi-unit dwellings shall maintain the shared or public areas of
the structures and exterior in a clean and sanitary condition. No owner shall
permit occupancy of a vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean,
sanitary, and fit for human occupancy.
2.   Structural Members. Structural members shall be maintained structurally
sound and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
3.   Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Stairs and walking surfaces shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
4.   Handrails and Guards. Handrails and guards shall be firmly fastened,
capable of supporting normally-imposed loads, and maintained.
5.   Interior Surfaces. Every interior partition, wall, floor, ceiling, and
other interior surface shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
155.06   HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall
have a handrail on one side of the stairs and every open portion of a stair,
landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than
30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not
be less than 30 inches high or more than 42 inches high measured vertically
above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or
walking surface. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches high above the floor
of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp, or other walking surface. For new
installation in a residential setting, guards (spindles) on the open side of
stairs shall not have openings which allow passage of a sphere four inches in
diameter.
155.07   ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH, GARBAGE, AND YARD WASTE.
1.   Accumulation. All exterior property and premises, in compliance with
Chapter 105 of this Code of Ordinances, and the interior of every structure,
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Exterior property
and premises shall additionally be free from any accumulation of yard waste in
compliance with
Chapter 105.
2.   Disposal of Rubbish and Garbage. Rubbish and garbage shall not be stored
outside for more than 48 hours except in a covered, leak-proof container.
155.08   EXTERMINATION.
1.   Infestation. Structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation.
2.   The owner shall be responsible for extermination prior to renting or
leasing and in the public or shared areas of the structure.
3.   Occupants shall be responsible for extermination during their occupancy of
said dwelling structure or unit.
155.09   LIGHT AND VENTILATION REQUIREMENTS.
These provisions shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light,
ventilation, and space for occupying a structure. Owner shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation, and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements and no person shall occupy any premises that do not comply with
this code.
1.   Light.
   A.   Habitable spaces with exterior-facing walls shall have at least one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court with a
minimum glazed area of five percent of the floor area.
   B.   Common Halls and Stairways. Multi-unit dwellings shall be lighted at
all times with at least a 60-watt incandescent bulb or equivalent energy saving
bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area, with a spacing not greater than 30
feet.
   C.   Other Spaces. Other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial
light sufficient to the maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe
occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment, and
fixtures.
   D.   Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for natural light prescribed,
artificial light complying with the applicable International Building Code
guidelines is permitted.
2.   Ventilation.
   A.   Habitable spaces with exterior-facing walls shall have at least one
openable window equal to 50 percent of the minimum required glazed area.
   B.   Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall comply
with ventilation requirements for a habitable space, except that a window shall
not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system
discharged to the outdoors or to a properly vented attic.
   C.   Clothes Dryer Exhaust. A clothes dryer exhaust shall be independent of
all other systems by exhausting in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.
   D.   Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for ventilation prescribed,
artificial mechanical ventilation complying with the applicable International
Mechanical Code guidelines is permitted.
155.10   PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS.
This section shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities, and
plumbing fixtures to be provided. The owner shall provide and maintain such
plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements.
1.   Required Facilities.
   A.   Dwelling Units. Each dwelling unit shall contain its own tub or shower,
lavatory, toilet, and kitchen sink, which shall be maintained in a sanitary and
safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the
toilet or in close proximity. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute
for the required lavatory.
   B.   Rooming Houses. At least one toilet, lavatory, and tub or shower shall
be supplied for each four rooming units.
   C.   Hotels. Where private toilets, lavatories, and baths are not provided,
then one toilet, lavatory, and tub or shower having access from a public
hallway shall be provided for each 10 occupants.
2.   Toilet Rooms.
   A.   Privacy. Bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the
only passage to a hall or other space or exterior. A door and interior locking
device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms in a multiple-unit
dwelling.
   B.   Location. Bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units, or dorm units
shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall
have access from a common hall or passageway.
3.   Plumbing Systems and Fixtures.
   A.   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, kept free from obstructions, leaks, defects, and
capable of performing its function.
   B.   Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearance for
usage and cleaning.
   C.   Plumbing System Hazards. If a hazard is found, the Code Official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard promptly.
4.   Water System.
   A.   General. Every fixture shall be properly connected to an approved water
system and shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water as per
the International Plumbing Code.
   B.   Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination and all water outlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture.
   C.   Supply. Water supply shall be installed and maintained to provide a
supply of water to fixtures in sufficient volume and pressures adequate to
enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and
leaks.
   D.   Water Heating Facilities. Water heaters shall be properly installed,
maintained, and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
every required fixture at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees
Fahrenheit. A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
bedroom, or other occupied room normally kept closed unless the plumbing code
requirements are met. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief
valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water
heaters.
5.   Sanitary Drainage System.
   A.   General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
   B.   Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects.
155.11   MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. The owner of the structure
shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment
in compliance with these requirements.
1.   Heating Facilities. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as
required by this section.
   A.   Heat Supply. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities in
good working order and capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65? in all
habitable rooms and bathrooms. Cooking appliances or portable heating units
shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirement.
   B.   Room Temperature Measurement. Temperature shall be measured three feet
above the floor near the center of the room and two feet inward from the center
of each exterior wall.
2.   Mechanical Equipment.
   A.   Mechanical Appliances. Appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition.
   B.   Removal of Combustion Products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent (exception for
labeled and unvented).
   C.   Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
   D.   Safety Controls. Safety controls shall be maintained in effective
operation.
   E.   Combustion. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for
ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided.
   F.   Energy Conservation Devices. Energy conservation devices shall not be
installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically
approved.
   G.   Duct Systems. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and
shall be capable of performing the required function.
3.   Electrical Facilities. Facilities Required. Every occupied building shall
be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of
this section.
   A.   Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with
the International Electrical Code. Dwellings shall be served by a three-wire,
120/240 volt, single-phased electrical service having a rating of not less than
100 amps.
   B.   Electrical System Hazards. Where a hazard is found to the occupants or
the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient
receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration
or damage, or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects
to be corrected immediately to eliminate the hazard.
4.   Electrical Equipment.
   A.   Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
   B.   Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit shall contain at
least one separate and remote receptacle outlet. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground-
fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom outlet shall have ground-fault circuit interrupter
protection.
5.   Elevators, Escalators, and Dumbwaiters.
   A.   General. Elevators, escalators, and dumbwaiters shall be maintained to
sustain all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical
and fire hazards with current certificate of inspection displayed and available
for public inspection.
   B.   Elevators. In buildings equipped with more than one passenger elevator,
at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the
building is occupied.
155.12   FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. The State Fire
Marshal may impose additional provisions. The owner shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements.
1.   Means of Egress.
   A.   General. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way.
   B.   Aisles and Corridors. Aisles and corridors shall be unobstructed.
   C.   Locked Doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from
the side from which egress is to be made without need for keys, special
knowledge, or effort.
   D.   Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of
keys or tools. Bars, grills, grates, or similar devices are permitted to be
placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear
opening size complies with the requirements of
Chapter 154 and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool, or force greater than which is required for
normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
2.   Fire-Resistance Ratings.
   A.   Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The fire resistance rating of the
walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions, and floors shall be
maintained.
   B.   Opening Protection. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in
an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be maintained in
operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
3.   Fire Protection Systems.
   A.   General. Existing residential rental units not already provided with
single-station smoke alarms shall be provided with approved single-station
dual-sensor smoke alarms.
   B.   Smoke Alarms. Approved single- or multi-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in existing single- and multi-unit dwellings,
duplexes, congregate residences, and hotel or lodging house guest rooms
regardless of occupant load in each sleeping room and immediately outside of
sleeping areas and on each story including the basement.
   C.   Fire Extinguishers. Multi-unit dwellings shall have a 2A10BC-rated fire
extinguisher located within 75 feet of each dwelling unit’s main entrance, with
a minimum of one per floor. Extinguishers shall be checked and tagged by a
qualified service person annually.
155.13   CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS REQUIRED.
1.   General. Approved carbon monoxide detectors are required to be installed
and maintained in each dwelling unit immediately outside sleeping areas.
Dwelling units with no potential source of carbon monoxide are exempted from
this requirement.
2.   Responsibility. The owner shall provide and maintain such detectors and
equipment in compliance with these requirements.
155.14   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of violations of this chapter, the City may within seven days
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 156
RENTAL HOUSING CODE
156.01 Purpose                        156.09 Right of Entry
156.02 Definitions                    156.10 Violations
156.03 Enforcement                    156.11 Additional Housing Inspection Fees
156.04 Permit Required                156.12 Method of Service
156.05 Permit Application Process and 156.13 Appeals
Fees
156.06 Expiration of Permit           156.14 Suspension or Revocation
156.07 Transfer of Ownership          156.15 Removal of Tenants
156.08 Rental Inspection              156.16 No Warranty By City
 
156.01   PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to detail the requirements of a rental
housing inspection program, in order to:
1.   Protect, preserve, and promote the physical health and social wellbeing of
the people;
2.   Prevent and control the incidence of communicable diseases;
3.   Reduce environmental hazards to health;
4.   Regulate rental dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate
sanitation; and
5.   Protect the life, safety, and possessions of the people.
156.02   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined:
1.   “Exempt rentals” means rental units that are inspected by a certified
third-party inspection organization. Such rentals will not require an
inspection from the City. The Code Enforcement Department of the City will
maintain a list of all rental units that are exempt from the inspection
requirements of this chapter.
2.   “Newly-constructed units” means any unit that has been newly-constructed
within the last year.
3.   “Owner” or “landlord” means the persons who are responsible for the
renting or leasing of rental units, which shall include the owners of such
property or their designated representative.
4.   “Owner’s representative” means a person who is appointed by a rental
property owner to act as the property manager. The owner’s representative
should be able to provide a City inspector access to the entire property for
inspections and be at least 18 years old.
5.   “Rental unit” means any building or portion thereof which is allowed to be
occupied by one or more persons as a dwelling space which includes one or more
of the following activities: sleeping, eating, or general habitation. As a
condition of occupying the space, the renter or renters exchange cash or other
valuable considerations for the right to occupy the space.
6.   “Tenant” or “renter” means a person or group occupying a rental unit.
7.   “Vacation house” or “guest house” means a furnished apartment, house,
dwelling unit, or professionally managed condominium complex rented out on a
temporary basis to guest or guests.
8.   “Violation” means a violation of all applicable building codes that, if
allowed to remain as found, would constitute an immediate threat to the safety
of those living in the rental unit. (Examples of major violations could
include, but are not limited to, improper venting of combustion air, missing or
inoperable smoke detectors, improper electrical wiring or equipment, lack of or
damaged water heater, or lack of required egress.)
156.03   ENFORCEMENT.
The Code Enforcement Department is responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
156.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person or entity wishing to engage in the renting of dwelling units within
the City limits shall first obtain a rental permit from the City. This permit
shall be deemed to be a public record and shall be made available to the public
upon request.
1.   No owner or landlord shall rent or lease any rental unit or any portion of
a rental unit to a tenant or renter until a valid rental permit has been issued
by the City for the rental unit being rented.
2.   It is the responsibility of the owner or landlord to ensure that the
rental unit has been inspected and granted a rental permit. Failure to obtain a
rental permit or renew a rental permit after a prior rental permit has expired
will result in a notice being sent to the property owner that the rental unit
is not in compliance and can no longer be rented to a tenant or renter until a
new permit is issued.
3.   Rental units that are found to be exempt rentals are required to be
registered as exempt rentals with the City.
4.   Rental units that are found to be newly-constructed units   must be
registered before they are occupied. The final inspection of the building
permit process will serve as the first inspection of the rental inspection
program.
5.   Failure by an owner or landlord to obtain a rental permit for any rental
units within 90 days of adoption of this policy will result in the rental unit
being in violation of this chapter and the rental unit can no longer be rented
to a tenant or renter until a rental permit is obtained for said rental unit.
The owner or landlord may also be assessed fines or municipal ordinance
infraction penalties due to the failure to obtain a rental permit on a timely
basis.
6.   Rental permits will be valid for only one building. For properties that
have multiple buildings on site, a permit will be required for each building on
the property.
7.   A rental permit or the renewal of a rental permit may be denied or revoked
if the property owner has one or more rental units in which the property has
been cited for violations of this chapter or any other provisions of this Code
of Ordinances. Prior violations that have been corrected shall not be counted
as a prior violation for purposes of this section. If the rental property has
three or more violations within a 12-month period, the City shall, in its sole
and absolute discretion, deny or revoke the rental permit.
8.   An owner or landlord may appeal the denial or revocation of a rental
permit per the procedure set out in Section
156.13 below.
156.05   PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES.
The owner or landlord of each rental unit shall register that rental unit with
the City by filling out an application for a rental permit approved by the Code
Enforcement Department. A rental permit shall be renewed every five years.
Owners shall pay a permit or permit renewal fee of $100.00 per unit plus an
additional $15.00 for each rental unit in excess of one per building, subject
to the following:
1.   On the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the
following discounts from the above fees will be applicable:
   A.   If the owner or landlord registers a rental unit within 60 days of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the permit fee will be
discounted by 50 percent.
   B.   If the owner or landlord registers a rental unit within 90 days of
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the permit fee will be
discounted by 25 percent.
2.   The owner or landlord shall pay an additional $50.00 late permit fee for
any rental unit which is not registered within the time frame set forth above.
156.06   EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
Every rental permit issued by the Code Enforcement Department under the
provisions of this policy shall be valid for five years. Permits that are
revoked as herein provided shall be null and void at time of revocation. Owners
or landlords shall have 30 days from the date of expiration of the rental
permit term to renew the rental permit. If at the end of the 30-day renewal
period the permit has not been renewed, the rental dwelling is then no longer
considered an eligible rental. The owner or landlord can no longer rent said
rental to a tenant, and the owner or landlord must reapply for a rental permit
for said rental unit.
156.07   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
If ownership of a rental property is transferred to a new owner or landlord,
the new owner or landlord shall apply for a new rental permit no later than 30
days following date of closing of purchase. No refunds will be given to the
original property owners for the previously paid rental permit. If the new
owner or landlord does not register the rental property within the first 30-
days of renting the property, the new owner or landlord shall not be able to
rent the rental property to a tenant or renter until a new rental permit is
obtained, and shall pay a late fee of $50.00 in addition to the registration
fee when registering the rental property.
156.08   RENTAL INSPECTION.
The Code Enforcement Department shall inspect all rental units being offered as
a rental in the City every five years. As part of the revolving inspection
process, the Code Enforcement Department may require that a reinspection be
held at a time sooner than five years if concerns or violations were found
during previous inspections or if the Code Enforcement Department receives
complaints of possible building code violations of a rental unit during the
five-year term. Inspections of a rental unit shall be subject to the following
terms and conditions:
1.   The City shall notify the owner or landlord of its intent to inspect a
rental unit at least 15 days prior to a scheduled inspection. It is the owner’s
or landlord’s responsibility to notify the tenants of the date and time of
inspection prior to the inspection.
2.   Inspections shall not be conducted without the property owner or owner’s
representative present unless owner or owner’s representative gives their
permission to the City to inspect without them being present prior to the
inspection.
3.   Inspections shall be consistent with the applicable building codes adopted
by the City.
4.   All fees are to be collected before inspection, at time of application.
5.   If the inspector arrives at the time scheduled and no person is available
to show the premises to him, the owner or landlord shall pay a $50.00 “no show”
fee.
6.   Items not inspected as part of this chapter include but are not limited
to:
   A.   Asbestos
   B.   Lead-based paint
   C.   Complaints between tenants
   D.   Rental agreements
156.09   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
If it is necessary for a code official to conduct an inspection in order to
enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances and, in doing so, requires
access to the rental, the inspector may enter the rental at reasonable times to
inspect or to perform duties imposed by this chapter. If such rental is
occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant before entry.
If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided
by law to secure entry including, but not limited to, obtaining an
administrative search warrant to search the rental unit.
156.10   VIOLATIONS.
Whenever a property or portion of a property being governed by the provisions
of this chapter is found to have a violation of the City building code, the
Code Enforcement Department may order repairs to remedy the violation. A
written letter setting out the corrective work necessary to remedy the major
violations shall be delivered to owner or landlord by certified mail or hand
delivery. The Code Enforcement Department may order that the occupancy of the
rental unit subject to a violation finding be discontinued and vacated until
the violation is corrected. Notice to vacate or removal of tenants shall be
carried out according to Iowa law. The owner or landlord shall be given 30 days
from date of receipt of the letter to complete the necessary repairs to remedy
the violation, or submit an appeal of the Code Enforcement Officer’s
determination of a violation per Section
156.13 below. At the end of the said 30-day time period, if the necessary
repairs to remedy the violation are not completed and no appeal has been taken,
the owner or landlord shall be assessed a fee of $100.00 per violation. If
repairs are not completed in the mentioned time frame, the Code Enforcement
Officer can grant an extension given a reasonable explanation for completion of
violations.(See also Section
156.11)
156.11   ADDITIONAL HOUSING INSPECTION FEES.
 
TYPE OF INSPECTION OR TRANSACTION               FEE
Certificate of Compliance                       Included with Housing Permit
New Construction Certificate of Compliance      Included with Building Permit
Failure to Correct or Repair Violation (See
Section                                         $100.00
156.10
Inspection fee for every additional inspection,
including, but not limited to, court-requested, $50.00 per unit
attorney-requested, progress inspection at
request of owner or manager or City Council.
Failure to keep appointment, arrange for
inspection, or provide entry for scheduled      $50.00 per unit
inspection.
Housing Appeals                                 $100.00
 
156.12   METHOD OF SERVICE.
The notice of violation will be in the form of a letter sent by certified mail
or hand delivery to the owner or landlord or owner’s representative.
156.13   APPEALS.
If an owner or landlord submits a timely appeal of the Code Enforcement
Department’s determination of a violation or required action to remedy the
violation, said appeal shall be submitted to a City Council subcommittee
consisting of members of the City Council appointed by the Mayor. The findings
of the subcommittee shall be conclusive, and if the subcommittee finds that a
violation has occurred or the corrective work is reasonable and necessary to
remedy the violation, the owner or landlord shall then have 30 days from the
date of the subcommittee’s ruling to complete the necessary corrective work and
further be subject to the penalties provided for in this chapter for failure to
timely complete the corrective work in the event the corrective work is not
completed within the 30-day time period.
156.14   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The Code Enforcement Department may revoke or suspend the rental permit
whenever provided by this chapter or in the event that any information provided
by the property owner or owner’s representative is found to be inaccurate.
156.15   REMOVAL OF TENANTS.
The Code Enforcement Department may seek removal of tenants if violations are
not corrected after proper notice of violations and time to correct· violations
is given. In the event that it becomes necessary for the Code Enforcement
Department to proceed with removal procedures, all legal fees and actual
associated costs with the action shall be paid in full by the owner or landlord
or owner’s representative. Occupancy of any kind on that property shall not be
allowed until all fines and fees are paid in full.
156.16   NO WARRANTY BY CITY.
By enacting and undertaking to enforce this chapter, the City Council, its
agents, and employees do not warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness, or
suitability of any dwelling in the City. Owners and occupants should take
whatever steps they deem necessary or appropriate to protect their interests,
health, safety, and welfare.
CHAPTER 157
DUTCH FRONT
 
157.01 Title                       157.06 General Regulations
157.02 Interpretation of Standards 157.07 Zoning Permits and Matching Fund
                                   Applications
157.03 Definitions                 157.08 Financial Assistance Guidelines
157.04 Purpose                     157.09 Denial of Financial Assistance and
                                   Appeal Process
157.05 Application of This Chapter
 
157.01   TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Dutch
Front Ordinance.”
157.02   INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS.
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered as either guidelines or
recommendations. Where provisions of law or other rules or regulations or
ordinances impose a greater restriction, those provisions shall apply.
157.03   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined:
1.   “Business District” means all areas which have been zoned commercial by
ordinance of the City, both the General Commercial District and the Highway
Commercial District.
2.   “Dutch Front Committee” means the Dutch Front Committee as established in
Chapter 26 of this Code of Ordinances.
3.   “Dutch theme” means the philosophy in keeping with 16th - 19th Century
Dutch architecture as developed by the Dutch Front Committee.
4.   “Person” means any association, organization, trust, or company, or
successor or assigns or agent.
157.04   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the development and preservation of
16th - 19th Century Dutch architecture in the Business District in a manner
consistent with the history and life of the City and the Dutch theme of this
chapter; to develop, maintain, and promote the atmosphere and charm of a Dutch
community in an integrated shopping, living, entertainment, and recreation
environment for visitors and the people of the City. To provide funding
incentives to property owners to develop Dutch themed store fronts and adjacent
properties.
157.05   APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
1.   The recommendations for construction prescribed by this chapter in the
Business District, whether consisting of maintenance, repair, alterations,
modifications, or painting of any buildings, signs, graphics, visual displays,
outdoor furniture or fixtures, shall apply as follows:
   A.   To any and all new construction of structures.
   B.   To pre-existing structures requiring a zoning permit for improvements.
   C.   Any structure occupied or to be occupied by any governmental body may
be excluded from recommendations of this chapter by the Council.
   D.   Any pre-existing structure of historical or architectural significance
which is or is to be developed in a manner consistent with such historical or
architectural significance may be excluded by the Council.
2.   Whenever a building, appurtenance, or open space adjacent thereto is
subject to this chapter, such work is recommended to be consistent with the
architectural style of the previously-approved Dutch theme.
3.   Nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to regiment architecture
to the extent of prohibiting modern technological styling of materials which
would be in sympathy with the purposes of this chapter.
4.   The owner or occupant of any existing structure in the Business District
which is to be re-constructed, repaired, altered, modified, painted, or
repainted including any sign, graphic, visual display, outdoor furniture,
fixtures, or other appurtenances thereto, whether a zoning permit is required
or not, is required to seek guidance from the Dutch Front Committee for
integrating Dutch these into their project.
157.06   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
1.   All activities, public or private, and all uses of property, public or
private, within the General Commercial District are required to abide by the
provisions of this chapter and all activities, public or private, and all uses
of property, public or private within the Highway Commercial District are
strongly encouraged to voluntarily abide by the provisions of this chapter.
2.   Conforming with the provisions of this chapter shall be strongly
encouraged for areas not in the Business District but which abut the Iowa HWY
10 corridor and the Albany Avenue corridor. It is recognized that certain areas
along these corridors are not zoned commercial, but adhering to the principles
of this chapter will greatly enhance the Dutch theme and overall purpose of the
chapter and may quality for financial assistance.
157.07   ZONING PERMITS AND MATCHING FUND APPLICATIONS.
1.   Whenever an application is made for a zoning permit to construct, alter,
modify, or repair any building within the Business District or previously
defined corridor areas, the Zoning Compliance Officer shall require review of
the plans by the Dutch Front Committee to meet the intent of this chapter.
The Committee shall review the proposed plans and specifications, so far as
they relate to the proposed appearance, colors, texture, materials, and
architectural design of the exterior, including the front, side, rear, and roof
of said building, and also including all parts of the building that are in a
visual line from all areas or any alterations, modifications, or repair, or any
court yard, fence, or dependency thereof.
The Committee shall also review the proposed plans and specifications, so far
as they relate to the placement, alteration, modifications, or repair of any
signs, graphic, visual display, outdoor furniture, or fixtures with respect to
the appearance, colors, texture, materials, and architectural and design
factors of the sign, visual display, outdoor furniture, or fixtures, including
all parts of same that are visible from all areas.
2.   The Committee shall provide the Council with pertinent information to
enable the Council to fully consider applications for matching funds for both
pre-existing and new buildings, as follows:
   A.   Owners indication of the amount willing to be spent on the building
front.
   B.   To what extent has the building owner consulted with design or
construction individuals to determine any possibilities within the parameters
of private and matching funds.
157.08   FINANCIAL ASSSITANCE GUIDELINES.
1.   The Council, by separate action, may provide for financial assistance to
owners or occupants of new or pre-existing structures within the Business
District, which shall be available upon such terms, and conditions as may be
developed thereunder in conjunction with the Dutch Front Committee.
2.   All applications for funding of Dutch Front projects shall be submitted to
the committee and the City Council. Funding of any project will be dependent
upon available funds and budget decisions by the Council, which considers said
applications. The City Council may, at its discretion, provide matching funds
in an amount appropriate with the size and scope of the entire project.
3.   The Council shall pay no more than a 50 percent match of actual exterior
costs for approved Dutch theme treatments when completed with a maximum City
contribution of $100,000.00.
4.   The Council shall pay no more than a 50 percent match of actual exterior
costs for approved Dutch theme treatments for secondary street side fronts when
completed with a maximum City contribution of $50,000.00.
(Subsection 3 and 4 – Ord. 858 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
5.   The City Council may, at its discretion, also grant additional matching
funds per project to offset a portion of the costs of architects or contractor
design expenses. Any additional funds shall be limited to no more than five
percent or less of the actual cost of the approved Dutch Front.
6.   In the event that the previously constructed Dutch store front is in need
of maintenance or repair the City Council may, at its discretion, provide
matching funds in an amount appropriate with the size and scope of the project.
The Council shall pay no more than a 50 percent match of the actual cost of
maintenance and repair with a maximum City funding of $15,000.00 within a five
year period.
7.   In the event a store owner wishes to renovate their Dutch front to another
Dutch style, the City Council may, at its discretion, provide matching funds in
an amount appropriate with the size and scope of the project. Matching funds
provided by the City Council shall pay no more than a 50 percent match of the
actual cost to renovate the Dutch front with a maximum City funding of
$25,000.00. The store owner must submit an application for this grant and go
through the same application process as required for matching funds for a new
construction Dutch front grant.
(Subsections 6 and 7 – Ord. 858 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
8.   The process for handling a Dutch Front application requesting matching
funds by an owner shall follow these steps:
   A.   The building owner engages a contractor or architect to draw up a
detailed proposed front. Preliminary cost estimates are compiled for committee
review.
   B.   The proposal and estimates are submitted to the committee and final
approval is given by the committee when the requirements of this chapter have
been met.
   C.   The committee recommends the Council provide funding if appropriate.
   D.   Council agrees to a maximum amount of City matching funds.
   E.   The front is constructed as authorized.
   F.   Construction costs are invoiced for approval by the City.
   G.   The City issues a matching amount check up to the amount authorized by
the Council.
157.09   DENIAL OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND APPEAL PROCESS.
1.   If the committee recommends denial of financial assistance, the Zoning
Compliance Officer shall notify the applicant that said application is not
eligible for funding and the reasons therefore. The Zoning Compliance Officer
may proceed with funding request upon amendment of the application to conform
with the recommendations of the committee.
2.   Any person denied matching funds by the Zoning Compliance Officer pursuant
to the recommendation of the committee under the condition of this chapter may
appeal said denial to the City Council.
3.   This chapter is intended to give owners and developers flexibility while
strongly encouraging the policies contained within the Dutch Front Ordinance.
4.   Some project areas may be exempted by the Council upon application of the
owner or developer and such grant of exemption shall constitute waiver of
funding. This procedure shall apply to all construction, reconstruction,
maintenance and decorating of new or existing structures.
CHAPTER 158
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE PERMIT
 
158.01 Permit Required                       158.08 City To Act
158.02 Application                           158.09 Permit Issued
158.03 Residential Districts                 158.10 Driveways
158.04 Permits Prohibited                    158.11 Magazines Now Established
158.05 Storage of Explosives                 158.12 Offense
158.06 Storage of Flammable and Combustible  158.13 Inspection
Liquids
158.07 Storage of Liquified Petroleum Gasses
 
158.01   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to install, operate, maintain, or use any magazine or tank
for the storing or keeping of inflammable oils, gasoline, or liquefied
petroleum gases, having the capacity of up to 1,000 gallons, in all Commercial
and Industrial Districts within the City limits, without first obtaining a
permit.
158.02   APPLICATION.
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring a permit for the construction,
installation, operation, or maintenance of any magazine or tank for the
storing, keeping, or disposing of inflammable oils, gasoline, or liquefied
petroleum gases, shall make application for a permit to the City, and shall
file with such application a plat, drawn to scale, showing the size and
location of the magazines or tanks installed or to be installed, and all other
buildings or structures erected thereon, and the location of and present use of
all buildings within 200 feet.
158.03   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
There is to be a maximum limit of 125-gallon tanks for aboveground storage of
liquefied petroleum gases in all Residential Districts within the City limits.
These tanks shall meet the requirements of the International Fire Code.
158.04   PERMITS PROHIBITED.
No permit shall be granted by the City for the construction and maintenance of
magazines or tanks for the storing or keeping of inflammable oils, gasoline, or
liquefied petroleum gases upon any premises, any part of which is within 400
feet of any school grounds, church, hospital, public auditorium, or other
public institution.
158.05   STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
No person shall store explosives, as defined by State law and rules promulgated
thereunder, classified as Class A, Class B, or Class C explosives by the
federal Department of Transportation, within the fire limits without a permit
from the City fire marshal except for quantities of 25 pounds or less of
smokeless powder or five pounds or less of black powder for use in small arms,
but a permit shall not be required for retail stocks of small arms ammunition
for small bore rifles or shotguns customarily used in wild game hunting, or for
target practice or skeet shooting. The City fire marshal shall have the power
to limit the quantities of other explosives for which a permit is requested,
but shall not grant permits for liquid nitroglycerin, dynamite with over 60
percent of liquid explosive ingredient, unstable types of dynamite,
nitrocellulose, fulminate of mercury, or explosive compositions that ignite
spontaneously or markedly decompose to become more hazardous when subjected to
48 consecutive hours at a temperature of 167 degrees F.
158.06   STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS.
The regulations for the storage and handling of flammable and combustible
liquids as set forth in IAC 661, Chapter 51 are adopted by reference and shall
be enforced by the City fire marshal. No flammable or combustible liquid shall
be dispensed from underground tanks in residential areas except in public
garages or motor fuel (service) stations which exist as legally-nonconforming
uses under the zoning regulations in
Chapter 165.
158.07   STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES.
The regulations for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases as
set forth in IAC 661, Chapter 51 are adopted by reference and shall be enforced
by the City fire marshal, and no installation exceeding 900 pound capacity
shall be made without a City permit, conditioned on compliance with said State
rules, issued by the City fire marshal.
158.08   CITY TO ACT.
The City shall investigate all applications and, at its discretion, may grant
or refuse a permit for any particular location.
158.09   PERMIT ISSUED.
For any person, firm, or corporation desiring a permit for any location by the
City, the City’s Code Enforcement Officer shall issue the permit.
158.10   DRIVEWAYS.
The owner or proprietor of each magazine or tank for the storing or keeping of
inflammable oils, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum gases, commonly called a
filling station, shall be entitled to construct and maintain on any street or
streets, for each place so constructed or maintained as one operation unit, a
driveway or driveways thereto not exceeding 30 feet in width, or to use not
exceeding 30 feet of curb line.
158.11   MAGAZINES NOW ESTABLISHED.
This chapter, with the exception of securing a permit from the City, shall
apply to all magazines and tanks now installed, maintained, operated, and used,
and the owner or proprietor shall comply with the provisions of this chapter
within 30 days from and after the date of publication of the ordinance codified
in this chapter.
158.12   OFFENSE.
It shall be unlawful to draw or handle inflammable oils, gasoline, or liquid
petroleum gases in the presence of any open flame, fire, lamp, candle, lighted
cigar, pipe, or cigarette, or within 10 feet of any engine, machine, or other
apparatus from which fire or sparks are emitted.
158.13   INSPECTION.
All filling stations and bulk storage stations, where magazines or tanks for
the storage or keeping of inflammable oils, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum
gases are installed, maintained, and used, shall be inspected by the Chief of
the Fire Department as required by the City. Such inspections shall be made to
see that all precautions and protections against fire, as required by this Code
of Ordinances and the laws of the State, or the regulations of the State Fire
Marshal, are being observed, and the Fire Chief shall report to the City, in
writing, the results of such inspections and make recommendation for the
removal of any dangerous conditions or fire hazards found to exist.
CHAPTER 159
AGRICULTURAL USE IN CITY
 
159.01 Definitions  159.04 Agricultural Machinery – Use Within the City
159.02 Exceptions   159.05 Violations and Penalties
159.03 Restrictions
 
159.01   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
1.   “Agricultural enterprise” means any enterprise of activity involving the
planting and harvesting of agricultural crops and products on a for-profit
basis, such as hay crops, grain crops, soybeans, corn, wheat, oats, barley,
alfalfa, and other commonly-known crops used for livestock and human
consumption.
2.   “Area type” means that, within the municipal boundaries there exists a
variety of land uses ranging from intensive residential occupancy to intensive
industrial production, and older, fully-developed areas contrasted with newer,
partially-developed growth areas. For the purposes of this chapter, the said
area types are defined as follows:
   A.   “Border Area.” Fringe or border areas of the community with at least
two sides open to the countryside, not surrounded by residences.
   B.   “Special Covenants.” Special areas designed for light cropping and
hobby livestock acreages established by dedication and plat or covenants.
   C.   “Undeveloped.” Undeveloped areas surrounded by residential housing.
   D.   “Vacant Lots.” Vacant lots and platted developed areas.
3.   “Garden or hobby crops” means residential horticultural practices such as
the raising of private vegetable gardens for family production and consumption,
together with flower gardens, tulip beds, rose gardens, and other hobby and
adornment activities.
159.02   EXCEPTIONS.
The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to private occasional or
seasonal use of privately-owned property for vegetable gardens, flower beds,
horticultural experiments, or other land uses compatible with residential
housing within a municipality.
159.03   RESTRICTIONS.
The raising and harvesting of agricultural crops within the City as an
enterprise or for-profit activity shall be restricted as follows:
1.   Border Areas. All border areas at the edge or fringe of the municipality
may plant and harvest, without restriction, all hay, grain, and row crop
produce as is customarily associated with agricultural enterprise in the
surrounding rural community. Such agricultural practices shall be exercised in
a manner that prevents any unhealthy or unsightly accumulation of crop
residues, dust, noise, smell, or other nuisance or sanitation risk.
2.   Special Covenants. No restrictions apply in special covenant areas other
than may be privately provided for by the terms of such covenants for so long
as they may be binding upon the areas in question.
3.   Undeveloped Areas. In any undeveloped areas within the City which are
surrounded by residential housing, row crops such as soybeans and small grains
shall not be permitted except that any owner of two contiguous platted lots
which share at least one boundary, or any owner of parcels greater in area than
one acre, may plant and harvest alfalfa hay or other hay crops with a small
grain or soybean rotation permitted for one or two years to allow reseeding and
with such reseeding practice to occur not more frequently than in four year
intervals so that no more than two years out of six years may such nurse crop
be planted for the maintenance of an alfalfa or hay crop enterprise. Such
excepted areas within area Type #2 shall be harvested regularly and cleanly so
as to prevent an accumulation of crop residues, noise, dust, and odor, or
excessive machine noise. All other parcels within area Type #2 shall be
restricted to grass or cover crops with a six inch height limit as in the case
of area Type #1.
4.   Vacant Lots. Vacant lots shall be kept weed-free and shall be planted to
grass and trimmed to a growth height of no more than six inches.
159.04   AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY – USE WITHIN THE CITY.
In all areas of the City, those engaged in agricultural enterprise shall limit
the size and speed of agricultural machinery to assure safety and comfort of
the residential neighborhood affected by such enterprise. No agricultural
machine shall be of such size that it may cause permanent injury or damage to
curbs, sidewalks, or other improvements at the time and manner of the use of
such equipment shall be exercised so as to minimize the impact upon residential
neighbors.
159.05   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $200.00 for each separate offense. Each day
the violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                      160.06 Establishment of Variance
                                        Procedures
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of 160.07 Nonconforming Uses
Fact, and Purpose
160.03 General Provisions               160.08 Penalties for Violation
160.04 Administration                   160.09 Amendments
160.05 Floodplain Management Standards
 
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel of
the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also commonly referred to as the “100-year flood”).
3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would reach
at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
6.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed
area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
160.05(4)(A) of this chapter; and
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
   D.   The enclosed area is not a basement, as defined in this section.
7.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
8.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
9.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
10.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For purposes of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also includes recreational
vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and
not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
11.   “Factory-built home park” means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
12.   “500-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
13.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
14.   “Flood insurance rate map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
15.   “Flood insurance study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
16.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
as a result of a flood.
17.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
18.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
19.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot.
20.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the special flood hazard area
outside the floodway.
21.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
22.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
23.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of
“enclosed area below lowest floor” are met.
24.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
25.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for filling,
grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
26.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted
by the community.
27.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
28.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
29.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not
trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
   A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles and replacing siding;
   B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops and similar finish work;
   C.   Basement sealing;
   D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
   E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
30.   “Special flood hazard area” (SFHA) means the land within the City subject
to the base flood. This land is identified on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate
Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
31.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
32.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities,
and/or other similar uses.
33.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in
the estimated cost of repair.
34.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
(i) before the start of construction of the improvement; or (ii) if the
structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a historic
structure.
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added
to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25 percent.
35.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulations.
36.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 364, Code of Iowa, as
amended, delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and perform any
function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges,
and property of the City or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the
peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents.
2.   Findings of Fact.
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
   B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
(i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Paragraph 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
   C.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
   D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this ordinance shall
apply to all lands and development which have significant flood hazards. The
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Sioux County and Incorporated Areas, City
of Orange City, Panels 19167C0464D, 0468D, 0469D, 0627D, 0631D, 0632D, dated
August 2, 2022, which were prepared as part of the Sioux County Flood Insurance
Study, shall be used to identify such flood hazard areas and all areas shown
thereon to be within the boundaries of the base flood shall be considered as
having significant flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Study for Sioux County is
hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this ordinance for the
purpose of administering floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
2.   Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries. The boundaries of the
Special Flood Hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of a boundary, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make the
necessary interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
3.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered, without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
4.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
5.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
6.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated special flood hazard areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
7.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Administrator.
   A.   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
   B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
      (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the Department of Natural
Resources for floodplain construction.
      (3)   Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
(Subparagraph 3 - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
      (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
      (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
      (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
      (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment
of potential conflict.
      (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps
when:
         a.   Development placed within the Floodway results in an increase in
the base flood elevations or alteration to the floodway boundary.
         b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
         c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
      (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
   A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
material and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
   B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished by
the Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
      (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
      (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
      (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
      (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
      (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
(Subparagraph 6 - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
      (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
      (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
   C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
   D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or construction.
Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate,
registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, structure floor
elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or
occupancy of any structure.
160.05   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
All development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
meet the following applicable performance standards. Where base flood
elevations have not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to determine: (i) whether
the land involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway
fringe; and (ii) the base flood elevation. The applicant will be responsible
for providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination. Review by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources is not required for the proposed construction of new or
replacement bridges or culverts where: (i) the bridge or culvert is located on
a stream that drains less than two square miles; and (ii) the bridge or culvert
is not associated with a channel modification that constitutes a channel change
as specified in 567 IAC 71.2(2).
1.   All Development. All development within the special flood hazard areas
shall:
   A.   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
   B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
   C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
   D.   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
2.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevations. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevations and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable
consideration by the City Council, where existing topography, street grades, or
other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces
and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures located in
areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding ground shall be
provided with a means of access that will be passable by wheeled vehicles
during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply where the
Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for the
protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
3.   Non-Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
(Subsection 3 - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
   A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including basements)
that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
   B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   C.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or in the case on non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation.
(Paragraph C - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
   D.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water/gas meters and other similar service utilities
either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed to) a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or
designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a level.
(Paragraph D - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
5.   Factory-Built Homes.
   A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those
placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a
minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
   B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those
placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to, use of over-
the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
   A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
   B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
   C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7.   Storage of Materials and Equipment. Storage of equipment and materials
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
(i) not subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due
to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
8.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as levees,
flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood
with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
9.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
10.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses. Detached garages, sheds, and
similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the
base flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
   A.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. Its
size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of the structure
located less than one foot above the BFE must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials.
   B.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
   C.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so
as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
   D.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
   E.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
   F.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Subsection 4(A) of this section.
Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure
and its contents.
12.   Recreational Vehicles.
   A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Subsection 5
of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days; and
      (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
13.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried
in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent
rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
14.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially improved
maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the elevation of the 500-
year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2% annual
chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water. A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2% chance flood
elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determinations.
(Subsection 14 - Ord. 835 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
160.06   ESTABLISHMENT OF VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
1.   The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
   A.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
   B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
   C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection
for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: (i)
the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage;
and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
   E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
2.   Factors upon Which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall Be Based.
In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
   A.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
   B.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or downstream
to the injury of others.
   C.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
   D.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
   E.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
City.
   F.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
   G.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
   H.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
   I.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
   J.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
   K.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
   L.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
   M.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
3.   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
   A.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
   B.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
   C.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
   D.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees,
and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of
Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving
the purpose of this chapter.
   E.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
160.07   NONCONFORMING USES.
1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
   B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or regulations or the
cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
160.08   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
160.09   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
165.01 Short Title                      165.18 Manufactured Home Park (R-3)
                                        District
165.02 Interpretation of Regulations    165.19 Residential Suburban (RS-1)
                                        District
165.03 Definitions                      165.20 General Commercial (C-1)
                                        District
165.04 Use Classifications              165.21 Highway Commercial (C-2)
                                        District
165.05 General Description of           165.22 Light Industrial (I-1) District
Residential Use Types
165.06 General Description of           165.23 Heavy Industrial (I-2) District
Commercial Use Types
165.07 General Description of           165.24 Additional Area and Height
Industrial Use Types                    Regulations
165.08 General Description of Civic Use 165.25 Additional Use Regulations
Types
165.09 Zoning District Classifications  165.26 Off-Street Parking and Loading
                                        Requirements
165.10 Boundaries and Official Zoning   165.27 Sign Regulations
Map
165.11 Interpretation of District       165.28 Nonconformities
Boundaries
165.12 Road or Public Way Vacated       165.29 Special Exceptions
165.13 Incorporation                    165.30 Enforcement
165.14 General Regulations              165.31 Violation and Penalty
165.15 Agricultural (A-1) District      165.32 Board of Adjustment
165.16 Low-Density Residential (R-1)    165.33 Changes and Amendments
District
165.17 Medium- to High-Density          165.34 Mixed Use Overlay Zone
Residential (R-2) District
 
165.01   SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Zoning
Regulations of the City of Orange City, Iowa”, to the same effect as if the
full title were stated.
165.02   INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or other
rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern.
165.03   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words, terms, and
expressions are herein defined.
1.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “A.”
   A.   “Accessory storage building” means a building originally constructed
for use as an accessory building for the storage of material and equipment
accessory to a primary use located on the property. For purposes of this
chapter, cargo containers, railroad cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes,
trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similar
prefabricated items and structures originally built for purposes other than the
storage of goods and materials are not accessory storage buildings.
   B.   “Accessory storage container” is an accessory storage building and, in
limited circumstances (as set out in Subsection 3A of this section), a cargo
container.
   C.   “Addition” means any construction which increases the site coverage,
height, length, width, or floor area of a structure.
   D.   “Alley” means a public or private way permanently reserved as a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   E.   “Alley, service” means a service roadway providing a secondary means of
public access to abutting property intended only for service access to
utilities and not to be used for general traffic circulation.
   F.   “Attached” means having one or more walls in common with a principal
building, or joined to a principal building by a covered porch or passageway.
   G.   “Attic” means a space under a gable, hip, gambrel, or other roof, the
finished floor of which is or would be at or entirely above the level of the
wall plates of at least two exterior walls, and the height of which, from the
floor level to the highest point of the roof, does not exceed 10 feet.
2.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “B.”
   A.   “Basement” means a story partly underground but having at least one-
half of its height above the curb level, and also one-half of its height above
the highest level of the adjoining ground, with a floor to ceiling dimension of
at least six and one-half feet.
   B.   “Boarding house” or “lodging house” means a building other than a
hotel, where, for compensation and by arrangement, lodging is provided for
three or more persons.
   C.   “Buildable area” means the portion of a lot remaining after required
yards have been provided.
   D.   “Building” means a roofed structure supported by columns or walls for
shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. When separated
by division walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such
structure shall be deemed a separate building.
   E.   “Building, accessory” means a building which is subordinate to the main
building on the lot, not attached thereto, and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the main building. Private garages are accessory
buildings.
   F.   “Building, height of” means the perpendicular distance measured in a
straight line from the curb level to the highest point of the roof. Where a
building is situated on ground above the curb level or where no curb grade is
established, such height shall be measured from the level of the adjoining
ground at the middle of the front wall.
   G.   “Building line” means the setback distance from the front property
line, rear lot line, and side lot lines as provided in this chapter.
   H.   “Building wall” means the wall of a building forming a part of the main
structure. The foundation walls of unenclosed porches, steps, walks and
retaining wall or similar structures, shall not be considered as building walls
under the provisions of this Code of Ordinances.
3.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “C.”
   A.   “Cargo container” means standardized reusable vessels that were
originally designed for, or used in, the parking, shipping, movement, or
transportation of freight, articles, goods, or commodities, or originally
designed for, or capable of being mounted or moved by, rail, truck, or ship by
means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device. This
definition includes the terms “transport container” and “portable site storage
container” having a similar appearance to, and similar characteristics of,
cargo containers.
   B.   “Condominium” means a multi-unit dwelling or townhouse as defined
herein where the fee title to each dwelling is held independently of the others
and title to common areas is held jointly by dwelling unit title holders.
   C.   “Court” means an open space fully-enclosed on at least three adjacent
sides by walls of a building. An outer court is any court facing for its full
width on a street, or on any other required open space not a court.
   D.   “Curb level” means the established curb grade adjacent to a lot.
4.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “D.”
   A.   “Deck” means a non-roofed structure open on two or more sides
projecting from side or rear wall of a building.
   B.   “Detached” means fully-separated from any other structure; not
attached.
   C.   “Drive-in service” means a feature or characteristic of a use involving
sale of products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles, including
drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services such as mechanical
automobile washing.
   D.   “Driveway” means an area providing vehicular access between a street
and an off-street parking or loading area.
   E.   “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof which is designed or
used primarily for residential purposes but not including a tent or trailer.
   F.   “Dwelling, single-unit” means a detached building that is arranged,
designed, or intended to be occupied as the residence of a single party and
having no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
   G.   “Dwelling, two-unit” means a detached building that is arranged,
designed, or intended to be occupied as the residence of two parties or
housekeeping units living independently of each other.
   H.   “Dwelling, multi-unit” means an apartment house or dwelling used or
intended to be used or occupied as the residence of three or more parties or
housekeeping units living independently of each other.
5.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “E.”
   A.   “Easement” means the right of a person, government agency, or public
utility company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific
purpose.
6.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “F.”
   A.   “Family” means a group of individuals living and cooking together on
the premises as one housekeeping unit, but a family shall not include more than
three individuals not related by blood or marriage.
   B.   “Fence” means any artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
7.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “G.”
   A.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building or portion of a building
in which one or more motor vehicles are housed, but in which no business
services or industry connected with the motor vehicles is carried on other than
leasing of space.
8.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “H.”
   A.   “Home occupation” means an occupation, profession, activity, or use
that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential
dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood. Refer to Subsection
165.25(2) for home occupation regulations.
9.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “I.”
10.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “J.”
11.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “K.”
   A.   “Kennel” means an establishment licensed to operate a facility housing
dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding,
training, or selling of animals is conducted as a business.
   B.   “Kennel, private” means any building or buildings or land designed or
arranged for the care of dogs and cats belonging to the owner of the principal
use, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or as pets.
12.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “L.”
   A.   “Loading space” means an area used for loading or unloading of goods
from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is
located.
   B.   “Lot” means a parcel of land under common ownership having its frontage
upon one or more streets or on an officially approved place.
   C.   “Lot area” means the net horizontal area within bounding lot lines, but
excluding any portion of a flag (panhandle) lot providing access to a street
and excluding any public or private easement or right- of-way providing access
to another lot.
   D.   “Lot, corner” means a lot fronting on two intersecting roads.
   E.   “Lot coverage” or “building coverage” means the area of a lot covered
by buildings or ground level paving, but excluding incidental projecting eaves,
balconies, and similar features and excluding landscaping and open recreational
facilities.
   F.   “Lot, depth” means the distance from the front lot line to the rear lot
line. In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the mean depth shall be the lot
depth.
   G.   “Lot, width” means the distance between the side lot lines. In the case
of a lot of irregular shape, the mean width shall be the lot width.
   H.   “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
   I.   “Lot line” means the lines bounding a lot.
   J.   “Lot line, front” means, in the case of an interior lot abutting on
only one street, the street line of such street. In the case of any other lot,
it may be such street line as is selected by the owner as the “front lot line”
for the purpose of this Code of Ordinances, provided that the principal
entrance to such building shall be on the street so selected.
   K.   “Lot line, rear” means that boundary line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line.
   L.   “Lot line, side” means any boundary line not a front line or a rear lot
line.
   M.   “Lot of record” means a lot or parcel of land the deed or valid
contract of sale of which was recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
Sioux County, Iowa prior to April 5, 1960.
   N.   “Lot, through” means a parcel of land under common ownership having a
frontage upon one street or officially approved place and having a second and
opposite frontage upon another street or officially approved place.
13.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “M.”
   A.   “Manufactured home” or “mobile home” means a structure transportable in
one or more sections which when placed on site measures eight body feet or more
in width by 40 body feet or more in length or when placed on site is 320 or
more square feet in area, and which is built on a permanently transportable
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This
definition shall also include and apply to such manufactured home (formerly
mobile homes) converted to real estate. All manufactured homes (formerly mobile
homes) shall be located within a manufactured home park.
   B.   “Manufactured home converted to real estate” means an unencumbered
manufactured home which has been attached to a permanent foundation on real
estate owned by the manufactured home owner, which has had the vehicular frame
destroyed, rendering it impossible to reconvert to a mobile manufactured home
and which has been inspected by the assessor, the manufactured home title,
registration, and license plates collected from the owner and the property
entered on the tax rolls of the County. Manufactured homes converted to real
estate are not allowed within the City.
   C.   “Manufactured home park” means any site or tract of land upon which two
or more occupied manufactured homes are parked and connected to utilities,
either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building,
structures, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
such manufactured home park.
   D.   “Manufactured home space” means an area within a manufactured home park
which is designed for and designated as the location for a single manufactured
home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
   E.   “Maternity group home” means a community-based residential home that
provides room and board, personal care, supervision, training, support, and
education in a family environment for women who are either pregnant or who have
given birth within the preceding twenty-four months and live with their
children, and includes overnight room accommodations and administrative and
office space for those persons who provide such services.
(Paragraph E – Ord. 857 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
   F.   “Modular home” means a factory-built structure designed to be
transported from the factory and placed upon a permanent foundation or basement
and used as a place of human habitation. A modular home must be constructed to
comply with the State Building Code for modular factory built structures, and
must display the seal issued by the State Building Code Commissioner.
14.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “N.”
   A.   “Nonconforming use” means a lawful use of any land, building, or
structure, other than a sign, that does not conform with currently applicable
use regulations, but which complied with use regulations in effect at the time
the use was established.
15.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “O.”
16.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “P.”
   A.   “Parking facility” means an area on a lot or within a building, or
both, including one or more parking spaces together with driveways, aisles,
turning and maneuvering areas, clearances, and similar features, and meeting
the requirements established by this chapter. The term “parking facility” shall
include parking lots, garages, and parking structures.
   B.   “Parking space” means an area on a lot or within a building, used or
intended for use for parking of a motor vehicle, having permanent means of
access to and from a public street or alley independently of any other parking
space, and located in a parking facility meeting the requirements established
by this chapter. The term “parking space” is equivalent to the term “parking
stall” and does not include driveways, aisles, or other features comprising a
parking facility.
   C.   “Porch, open” means a roofed structure, open on two or more sides,
projecting from the front, side or rear wall of the building.
   D.   “Principal use” means the main use of land or structures as
distinguished from an accessory use.
   E.   “Public notice” means the publication of the time and place of any
public hearing not less than seven days prior to the date of said hearing in
one newspaper of general circulation in the City.
   F.   “Public way” means an open or unoccupied public space more than 30 feet
in width which is permanently reserved for the purpose of access to abutting
property.
17.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “Q.”
18.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “R.”
   A.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its
own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used
for temporary dwelling, recreational or sporting purposes. The term
recreational vehicle shall include, but shall not be limited to, travel
trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted
trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers, and snowmobiles.
   B.   “Residential convenience service” means a use or activity of a
commercial nature conducted as an accessory use to multiple family residential
or mobile home park residential use, and intended solely for the convenience of
residents thereof.
19.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “S.”
   A.   “Setback line” means a line within a lot parallel to and measured from
a corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing
the placement of structures and uses on the lot.
   B.   “Sign” means an identification, description, illustration or device
which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity,
persons, institution or business. Refer to Section
165.27 for sign use regulations.
   C.   “Site plan” means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and
with complete dimensions, all of the buildings, structures and uses, and
principal site development features including parking, access, and landscaping
and screening, proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   D.   “Story” means that part of any building comprised between any floor and
the floor or attic next above; the first story of a building is the lowest
story having at least one-half of its height above the highest level of
adjoining ground.
   E.   “Street, front” means the street or public place upon which a lot
abuts. If a lot abuts upon more than one street or public place it shall mean
the street designated as the front street in the owner’s application for a
building permit.
   F.   “Street line” means the dividing line between a lot and a public
street, alley or place.
   G.   “Street, public” means a public thoroughfare more than 30 feet in
width.
   H.   “Street wall” means the wall of the building nearest the street under
consideration.
   I.   “Structure” means that which is built or constructed at least one foot
above the ground. “Structures” includes buildings.
   J.   “Substandard lot” means a lot of record that does not comply with
currently applicable minimum area, width, or depth requirements for the
district in which it is located, but which complied with applicable
requirements when it was placed on record.
20.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “T.”
   A.   “Townhouse” means a dwelling unit having a common wall with or abutting
one or more adjoining dwelling units in a townhouse group.
   B.   “Townhouse group” means two or more contiguous townhouses having common
or abutting walls.
21.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “U.”
   A.   “Use” means the conduct of an activity, or the performance of a
function or operation, on a site or in a structure.
   B.   “Use, accessory” means a use or activity which is incidental to and
customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site.
   C.   “Use, permitted” means a use listed by the regulations for any
particular zoning district as a permitted use within that zone, and permitted
therein as a matter of right when conducted in accordance with the regulations
established by this chapter.
   D.   “Use, principal” means a use which is a primary function of a lot or
structure.
   E.   “Use, special exception” means a use listed by the regulations for any
particular zoning district as a special exception use within that district and
allowable therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional basis subject to a
Special Exception Use Permit, and to all other regulations established by this
chapter.
22.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “V.”
   A.   “Valuation” means the 100 percent valuation of a building or structure,
as determined by the County Assessor.
23.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “W.”
24.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “X.”
25.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “Y.”
   A.   “Yard, front” means the required space, unobstructed to the sky, open
for the whole width of the lot extending from the nearest part of any building
of the lot to the front lot line excluding cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys
projecting not more than 30 inches, steps, bay windows or similar features not
extending through more than one story and which do not aggregate more than one-
third of the width of the frontage of the building, and vestibules not more
than one story in height and extending more than three feet beyond the front
wall of the principal building, one story open porches eight feet or less in
depth.
   B.   “Yard, rear” means the required open space, unobstructed to the sky,
extending along the rear lot line (not street line), throughout the whole width
of the lot to the rear of the principal building, excluding cornices, eaves,
gutters, chimneys projecting not more than 30 inches, uncovered steps, open
porches not more than one story in height and eight feet in depth and accessory
buildings.
   C.   “Yard, side” means the required open space, unobstructed to the sky,
extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard,
excluding cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, bay windows, and open porches, or
similar features which project into the side yard but are 30 inches or more
from the side lot line.
26.   Definitions For Terms Beginning With “Z.”
   A.   “Zoning Administrative Officer” means the individual appointed by the
City Council to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   “Zoning compliance permit” means a permit issued by the Zoning
Administrative Officer authorizing the use of land in the manner and for the
purpose specified in the application.
165.04   USE CLASSIFICATIONS.
The purpose of the use classifications shall be to provide a consistent set of
terms encompassing and defining uses permitted or specifically permitted in the
various districts, and to provide a procedure for determination of the
applicable use classification of any activity not clearly within any defined
use classification. In the event of any question as to the appropriate use
classification of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the authorization to determine the appropriate
classification, subject to the right of appeal pursuant to Section
165.32 of this chapter. In making such determination, the Zoning Administrator
shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in question, and shall
consider any functional, product, service, or physical facility requirements
common with or similar to uses cited as examples of use classifications.
165.05   GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES.
Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on a
wholly or primarily non-transient basis, but exclude institutional living
arrangements involving those providing 24-hour skilled nursing or medical care
and those providing forced residence such as asylums and prisons.
1.   Condominium Residential. The use of a site for three or more dwelling
units intended for separate ownership, together with common area serving all
dwelling units.
2.   Duplex Residential. The use of a site for two dwelling units within a
single building.
3.   Group Residential. The residential occupancy of living accommodations by
groups of more than five persons not defined as a family on a weekly or longer
basis. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses,
dormitories, residence halls, or boarding houses.
4.   Limited Multiple-Unit Residential. The use of a site for no more than four
one-story dwelling units.
5.   Manufactured Home Residential. The residential occupancy of manufactured
homes by families on a weekly or longer basis. Uses only include manufactured
home parks or manufactured home subdivisions.
6.   Multiple-Unit Residential. The use of a site for three or more dwelling
units within one or more buildings.
7.   Residential Animal Husbandry for Recreational Purposes. The use of a site
for the purpose of housing and maintaining animals used for personal
recreational pleasure. Such use includes the occupancy of horses, cattle,
sheep, goats, swine, and similar livestock and fowl for purposes such as
pleasure riding, 4H and FFA projects, and similar endeavors.
8.   Single-Unit Residential. The use of a site for only one dwelling unit.
9.   Townhouse Residential. The use of a site for three or more townhouse
dwelling units constructed with common or adjacent walls and each located on a
separate ground parcel within the total development site, together with common
area serving all dwelling units.
10.   Two-Unit Residential. The use of a site for two dwelling units, each in a
separate building.
165.06   GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES.
Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of
goods, and the provision of services other than those classified as industrial
or civic uses.
1.   Administrative and Business Offices. Office of private firms or
organizations which are primarily used for the provision of executive,
management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative
offices and services including real estate, insurance, property management,
investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering,
photocopy and reproduction, and business offices of public utilities,
organizations, and associations, or other use classifications when the service
rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services.
2.   Agricultural Animal Husbandry (General). The raising of cattle, swine,
poultry, horses, goats, or similar farm animals for reproductive stock or for
slaughter.
3.   Agricultural Animal Husbandry (Limited). The raising of cattle, swine,
poultry, horses, sheep, goats, or similar farm animals for reproductive stock
or for slaughter. Such uses shall be conducted completely within enclosed
structures.
4.   Agricultural Sales and Services. Establishments or places of business
engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides, and
similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related services with
incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical
uses include nurseries; hay, feed, or grain stores and tree service firms.
5.   Automotive and Equipment Services. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in automotive-related or equipment sales or services. The
following are automotive and equipment use types:
   A.   Automotive Rentals. Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
trailers, and recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing
of vehicles available for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental
agencies, trailer rental agencies, and taxi parking and dispatching.
   B.   Automotive Repair Services. Repair of automobiles, noncommercial
trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including
the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses
include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and boat, trailer
and recreational vehicle dealerships.
   C.   Automotive Sales. Sale or rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including incidental
storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include new or used car
dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and boat, trailer, and recreational
vehicle dealerships.
   D.   Automotive Washing. Washing and cleaning of automobiles and related
light equipment. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes.
   E.   Commercial Off-Street Parking. Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary
basis within a privately owned off-street parking facility other than accessory
to a principal use. Typical uses include commercial parking lots or parking
garages.
   F.   Equipment Repair Services. Repair of trucks, tractors, construction
equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses
include truck repair garages, tractor and farm implement repair services, and
machine shops, but excluding dismantling or salvage.
   G.   Equipment Sales. Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction
equipment, agricultural implements, manufactured homes, and similar heavy
equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical
uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and
manufactured homes sales establishments.
   H.   Service Station. Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts, accessories, and
incidental services to motor vehicles.
   I.   Vehicle Storage. Long-term storage of operational or non-operational
vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound
yards, but exclude dismantling or salvage.
6.   Building Maintenance Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than
individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window
cleaning services.
7.   Business or Trade School. A use providing education or training in
business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational
pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university,
or public or private educational facility.
8.   Business Support Services. Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in the sale, rental, or repair of equipment and supplies used by
office, professional, and service establishments to the firms themselves rather
than to individuals, but exclude automotive, construction, and farm equipment.
Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine
repair shops, or hotel equipment and supply firms.
9.   Cocktail Lounge. A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars,
and similar uses.
10.   Commercial Recreation. Establishments or places primarily engaged in the
provision of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or
spectators. The following are commercial recreation use types.
   A.   Indoor Entertainment. Predominately spectator uses conducted within an
enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, meeting halls,
and dance halls.
   B.   Indoor Sports and Recreation. Uses conducted within an enclosed
building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller
skating rinks, and penny arcades.
   C.   Outdoor Entertainment. Predominately spectator uses conducted in open
facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities, and
amusement parks.
   D.   Outdoor Sports and Recreation. Uses conducted in open or partially
enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature
golf courses, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, and racquetball
courts.
11.   Communication Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision
of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the
use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excludes those classified as
Major Utility Facilities. Typical uses include television studios,
telecommunication service centers or telegraph service offices.
12.   Construction Sales and Services. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots
other than construction sites, as well as the retail or wholesale (from the
premises) of materials used in the construction of buildings or other
structures other than retail sales of paint, fixtures, and hardware, but
excludes those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Service use
types. Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment
rental or sales, or building contractors.
13.   Consumer Repair Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms,
but excluding Automotive and Equipment use types. Typical uses include
appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair, or musical instrument repair
firms.
14.   Convenience Storage. Storage services primarily for personal effects and
household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but
excluding use as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing, or commercial activity.
Typical uses include mini warehousing.
15.   Convenience Store. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of food
and household products, including gasoline. However, the repair, storage, or
servicing of vehicles shall be prohibited.
16.   Crop Production. The growing of the usual farm crops for animal feed or
for sale for the manufacturing of food products. Typical uses include corn,
soybean, or wheat fields.
17.   Financial Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
financial and banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan
institutions, loan and lending activities, and similar services.
18.   Food Sales. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the
retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical uses
include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy
shops.
19.   Funeral Services. Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as
preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals.
Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries.
20.   General Retail Sales. Sale or rental of commonly used goods and
merchandise for personal or household use, but excludes those classified more
specifically in this section inclusive. Typical uses include department stores,
apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the following
products or services: household cleaning and maintenance products, drugs, cards
and stationary, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics and specialty
items, flowers, fabrics and like items; cameras, photography services,
household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils,
home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques,
paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, interior decorating
services, office supplies, bicycles, and automotive parts and accessories
(excluding service and installation).
21.   Kennels. Boarding and care services for dogs, cats, and similar small
animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog training
centers.
22.   Laundry Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as
Personal Services. Typical use types include bulk laundry and cleaning plants,
diaper services, or linen supply services.
23.   Liquor Sales. Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale
for consumption off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include
liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales for off-site consumption.
24.   Medical Offices. A use providing consultation, diagnosis, or therapeutic,
preventative, or corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists,
medical and dental laboratories, and similar practitioners of medical and
healing arts for humans, licensed for such practice by the State of Iowa.
25.   Personal Improvement Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of informational, instructional personal improvement and similar
services of a non- professional nature. Typical uses include photography
studios, driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons,
dance studios, or handicraft and hobby instruction.
26.   Personal Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses
include beauty and barber shops; seamstress, tailor, or shoe repair shops; and
self-service laundry or apparel cleaning services.
27.   Pet Services. Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and
similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include
pet stores, dog bathing and clipping salons, or pet grooming shops.
28.   Professional Office. A use providing professional or consulting services
in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, and
similar professions.
29.   Research Services. Establishments primarily engaged in research of an
industrial or scientific nature, but excludes product testing. Typical uses
include electronics research laboratories, space research and development
firms, or pharmaceutical research labs.
30.   Restaurant (Convenience). A use engaged in the preparation and retail
sale of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages, for on-premises
consumption. Typical uses include soda fountains, ice cream parlors, sandwich
shops, cafes, and coffee shops.
31.   Restaurant (General). A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of
food and beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an
accessory or secondary feature and producing less than 50 percent of the gross
income. A general restaurant may include live entertainment. Typical uses
include restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses, and similar establishments
with incidental alcoholic beverage service.
32.   Riding Academy. A use engaged in the provision of equestrian riding
lessons or for the quartering of horses. Typical uses include saddle clubs,
riding stables, or liveries.
33.   Small animal: means small animals or pets, including, but not limited to:
dogs, cats, birds, and the like that typically weigh less than 100 pounds.
(Subsection 33 – Ord. 850 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
34.   Veterinary clinic: means an animal hospital or clinic that provides
medical care for small animals or pets, including, but not limited to: dogs,
cats, birds, and the like. This definition does not include the veterinary
hospital use.
(Subsection 34 – Ord. 850 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
35.   Veterinary hospital: means a building or place used for diagnosing or
surgically or medically treating large animals, whether or not animals are kept
on the premises for the purpose of treatment.
(Subsection 35 – Ord. 851 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
36.   Veterinary Services. Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses
include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, and veterinary hospitals.
37.   Visitor Habitation. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
lodging services on a less-than-weekly basis with incidental food, drink, and
other sales and services intended for the convenience of guests. The following
are visitor habitation use types:
   A.   Bed & Breakfast Inn. A private, owner-occupied housing unit which
provides up to four sleeping rooms for rent to the general public. The only
meal to be provided to guests is breakfast, and it shall only be served to
those taking lodging in the facility. Individual units which are designed to be
rented shall contain no cooking facilities.
   B.   Campground. Campground facilities providing camping or parking areas
and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents.
Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks.
   C.   Cottage, Commercial. A single dwelling unit rented to the general
public for periods not exceeding one calendar month.
   D.   Cottage/Resort Enterprise. Any group of buildings containing guest
rooms offered for rent primarily for temporary occupancy. Such buildings may
include quarters for the boarding of employees.
   E.   Hotel/Motel. Lodging services involving the provision of room or board
where four or more units are offered for occupancy to the general public.
Typical uses include hotels, motels, or transient boarding houses.
165.07   GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES.
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by
non-agricultural methods, and storage and distribution of products.
1.   Basic Industry. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or
explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes which potentially
involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
2.   Custom Manufacturing. Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site
production of goods by hand manufacturing which involve only the use of hand
tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single
kiln not exceeding eight kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers
of only those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios,
candle making shops, or custom jewelry.
3.   Light Manufacturing. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products,
and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing.
4.   Resource Extraction. A use involving the on-site extraction of surface
mineral products or natural resources. Typical extractive uses are quarries,
borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction, and mining
operations.
5.   Scrap and Salvage Services. Places of business primarily engaged in the
storage, sale, dimpling, or other processing of used or waste materials which
are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include
automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, or paper salvage yards.
6.   Stockyards. Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of
livestock for slaughter, market, or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards
or animal sales and auction yards.
7.   Warehousing and Distribution. Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution, and handling of
materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are
wholesaling, storage, and distribution types:
   A.   General Warehousing and Distribution. Open-air storage, distribution,
and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument or stone
yards, grain elevators, or open storage yards.
   B.   Limited Warehousing and Distribution. Wholesaling, storage and
warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale
distributors, storage warehouses, or moving and storage firms.
165.08   GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CIVIC USE TYPES.
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational,
cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which are strongly
vested with public or social importance.
1.   Administrative Services. Offices, administrative, clerical, or public
contact services that deal directly with the citizens, together with incidental
storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal,
State, County, or municipal offices.
2.   Air Ambulances. A facility for landing and takeoff of emergency aircraft
relating to medical or hospital service delivery systems, located in close
proximity to such medical use, but not within 100 feet of any principal
dwelling.
3.   Aviation Facilities. Landing fields, aircraft parking and service
facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair,
storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities
directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities
and the provision of safety and security.
4.   Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and
dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums,
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundary of such cemetery.
5.   Club or Lodge. A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities
for a private or non-profit association, primarily for use by members and
guests. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal organizations.
6.   College and University Facilities. An educational institution of higher
learning which offers course study designed to culminate in the issuance of a
degree.
7.   Community Recreation. A recreational facility for use by residents and
guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, or
limited residential neighborhood, including both indoor and outdoor facilities.
8.   Convalescent Services. A use providing bed care and in-patient services
for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility
providing surgical or emergency medical services, and excluding a facility
providing care of alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable
disease.
9.   Cultural Services. A library, museum, art gallery, or similar non-profit
use affording display, preservation, and exhibition of objects of permanent
interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
10.   Day Care Services (General). A facility, or use of a dwelling unit or
portion thereof, for the care of seven or more individuals. This term includes
nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers for children or adults, and
similar uses.
11.   Day Care Services (Limited). A facility, or use of a building or portion
thereof, for the care of six or fewer individuals. This term includes nursery
schools, pre- schools, day care centers for children or adults, and similar
uses.
12.   Detention Facilities. A publicly operated use providing housing and care
for individuals confined by law.
13.   Game Refuge. A use of land providing natural habitat for animals and
plant species. Typical uses include prairies, marshes, woodlands, and wetlands.
14.   Guidance Services. A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative,
vocational, or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance
as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or
similar condition, either on a residential or daytime care basis.
15.   Hospital Services. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical
services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and
including ancillary facilities for out-patient and emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to
patients, employees, or visitors.
16.   Local Utility Services. Services which are necessary to support principal
development and involve only minor structures such as lines, poles,
transformers, control devices, and junction boxes which are necessary to
support principal development.
17.   Maintenance and Service Facilities. A facility supporting maintenance,
repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, materials storage, and similar
activities, including corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar
uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial
activities.
18.   Major Utility Facilities. Generating plants, electrical switching
facilities, primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities,
water and wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public
agencies or public utility firms having potentially significant impact upon
surrounding uses.
19.   Military Installations. Military facilities of the federal or State
governments.
20.   Park and Recreation Services. Publicly owned and operated parks,
playgrounds, recreation areas, or open spaces.
21.   Postal Facilities. Postal services, including post offices and bulk mail
processing or sorting centers, operated by the United States Postal Service.
22.   Primary Educational Facilities. A public, private, or parochial school
offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning
and study required to be taught in the public schools in the State of Iowa.
23.   Public Assembly. Publicly owned and operated facilities for major public
assembly, recreation, sports, amusement, or entertainment, including civic or
community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds, and
exhibition facilities.
24.   Railroad Facilities. Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and
terminal facilities.
25.   Religious Assembly. A use located in a permanent building and providing
regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto,
but excluding primary or secondary educational facilities.
26.   Residential Care Services. A use, other than a hospital or convalescent
facility, providing care for ambulatory persons in a residential environment,
including over-night occupancy or care for extended periods of time.
27.   Safety Services. Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency
services, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical
and ambulance services.
28.   Sanitary Landfill. A disposal project where garbage, refuse, rubbish, and
other similar discarded solid or semisolid materials are buried between layers
of earth.
29.   Secondary Educational Facilities. A public, private, or parochial school
offering instruction at the junior and senior high school levels in the
branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of
the State of Iowa.
30.   Transportation Terminals. A facility for loading, unloading, and
interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express
between modes of transportation, including bus terminals, railroad depots,
airport terminals, and public transit facilities.
165.09   ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS.
For the purpose and intent of this chapter; the City is hereby divided into the
following zoning district classifications and their respective official map
symbols.
Symbol Zone Name
Symbol Zone Name
A-1    Agricultural District
R-1    Low-Density Residential District
R-2    Medium- to High-Density Residential District
R-3    Manufactured Home Park District
RS-1   Residential Suburban District
C-1    General Commercial District
C-2    Highway Commercial District
I-1    Light Industrial District
I-2    Heavy Industrial District
 
165.10   BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS.
The boundaries of these districts are indicated and established as shown upon
maps designated as the “Official Zoning Maps of the City of Orange City, Iowa,”
which, with all their notations, designations, references, and other matters
shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described
and set forth herein. The Official Zoning Maps shall be identified by the Mayor
and attested by the City Clerk under the following words:
“This is to certify that these are the Official Zoning Maps referred to in
Section
165.10 of the City of Orange City Zoning Regulations, adopted on this _____ day
of _______, 20__.”
Amendments, supplements, or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Maps shall be made by an ordinance amending the “Zoning
Regulations of the City of Orange City, Iowa.” The amending ordinance shall
refer to the Official Zoning Map and shall set out the identification of the
area affected by legal description and identify the zoning district as the same
exists and the new district designation applicable to said property. Said
ordinance shall, after adoption and publication, be recorded by the County
Recorder as other ordinances and a certified copy thereof be attached to the
Official Zoning Maps. Such amendatory ordinance shall, however, not repeal or
reenact said map, but only amend it. The Official Zoning Maps, together with
amending ordinances (as listed in the following Editor’s Note), shall be the
final authority as to current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings,
and other structures in the incorporated areas of the City.
In the event that the Official Zoning Maps are damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may, by ordinance, adopt new Official Zoning Maps
which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Maps. The new Official Zoning
Maps may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official
Zoning Maps, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the
original Zoning Ordinance of the City or any subsequent amendment thereof.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 833 adopted February 21, 2022, adopting a new Official Zoning
Map and amendments thereto have not been included as a part of this Code of
Ordinances, but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full
force and effect. The following ordinances have been adopted amending
Ordinance No. 833 amending the Official Zoning Map of the City.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED ORDINANCE ADOPTED
 
165.11   INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys, or other public rights-of-way shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter-
section lines, or quarter-quarter-section lines shall be construed as following
such lines.
4.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal corporate
boundaries shall be construed as following such boundaries.
5.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow
such shorelines, and in the event of change in shoreline, shall be construed as
moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately
following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of
water shall be construed as following such center lines.
6.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
Subsections 1 through 5 of this section shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Maps shall be determined by the
scale of the maps.
7.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance
with those shown on the Official Zoning Maps, or in other circumstances not
covered by Subsections 1 through 6 of this section, the Board of Adjustment
shall interpret the district boundaries.
165.12   ROAD OR PUBLIC WAY VACATED.
Whenever any road, street, or other public way is vacated by the official
action of the City Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such
road or public way shall automatically extend to the center of such vacation
and all area included in such vacation shall then and therefore be subject to
all appropriate regulations of the extended district. (See also
Chapter 137)
165.13   INCORPORATION.
All territory which may hereafter become part of the incorporated area of the
City that is regulated by this chapter, by the incorporation of any land, shall
automatically be classified as lying and being within the A-1 District until
such classification shall have been changed by amendment to this chapter.
165.14   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
Except as herein provided:
1.   No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered, nor
shall any building or land be used, which does not comply with all of the
district regulations established by this chapter for the district in which the
building or land is located.
2.   No lot shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum required by
this chapter. No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space provided about any building, structure, or use for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter, shall be included as part of a
yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space required under this
chapter for another building, structure, or use.
3.   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located
on a lot herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one principal
use structure on one lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
4.   No building shall be erected or shall be structurally altered to the
extent specifically provided hereinafter, except in conformity with the off-
street parking and loading regulations of this chapter.
5.   No lot shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum required by
this chapter without first obtaining a certified survey.
165.15   AGRICULTURAL (A-1) DISTRICT.
The intent of the A-1 District is to preserve land best-suited for agriculture
from the encroachment of incompatible uses and to preserve in agricultural use
land suited to eventual development in other uses until such time as streets
utilities and other community facilities may be provided or programmed as to
ensure the orderly and beneficial conversion of these lands to non-agricultural
use.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. This district is intended to provide for areas
of agricultural use which remain compatible with the surrounding residential or
commercial uses.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Single-Unit Residential
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Crop Production
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Game Refuges
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be permitted
in the A-1 District, subject to review and approval of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Horses for Personal Use
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Major Utility Services
Religious Assemblies
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the A-1 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations
A-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
A-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                5 acres
Lot Width               300 feet
Front Yard Setback      50 feet
Rear Yard Setback       50 feet
Side Yard Setback       20 feet
Street Side Yard        35 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet from street grade
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.16   LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-1) DISTRICT.
This district is intended to provide for low-density residential development
compatible with the expected development of Northwestern College.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, only
the following structures and uses shall be permitted in the R-1 District.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Single-Unit Residential
Duplex Residential
Maternity Group Home
(Paragraph A – Ord. 857 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
   B.   Commercial Type Uses 
Home Occupations
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Air Ambulance Services
Cemetery
Day Care Services (Limited)
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Primary Education Facilities
Religious Assembly
Secondary Education Facilities
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be permitted
in the R-1 District subject to review and approval of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Two-Unit
Limited Multi-Unit
Boarding and Lodging House
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Visitor Habitation - Bed and Breakfast Inn
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
College and University Facilities
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the R-1 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations.
Site Development Regulations
R-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
R-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                       6,500 square feet (single-unit dwelling)
                               7,500 square feet (two-unit dwelling)
Lot Width                      70 feet
Front Yard Setback             30 feet
Rear Yard Setback              25 feet
Side Yard Setback              8 feet
Street Side Yard               15 feet
Maximum Building Height        35 feet from street grade
Maximum Ground Coverage        35 percent, including accessory building
                               Subject to all regulations as found in
Detached Garages and Accessory Section
Buildings                      165.24 of this chapter.
                               Maximum of two accessory buildings per
                               lot.
 
4.   Site Development Regulations for Lots of Record. Any non-residential use
development shall be subject to Subsection 3 above. Each residential use
development shall be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations For Lots of Record
R-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations For Lots of Record
R-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                       No minimum
Lot Width                      50 feet (single-unit dwelling)
                               60 feet (two-unit dwelling)
                               Equal to the front yard setback of the
Front Yard Setback             principal structure on either adjacent
                               lot or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
Rear Yard Setback              10 feet
Side Yard Setback              5 feet
                               Equal to the side yard setback of the
Street Side Yard               existing principal structure on the
                               adjacent property or 15 feet, whichever
                               is greater.
Maximum Building Height        35 feet from street grade
Maximum Ground Coverage        No more than 50 percent of the lot
                               Subject to all regulations as found in
                               Section
                               165.24 of this chapter, except when
                               located on an interior lot and placed at
                               a distance greater than 50 feet from the
Detached Garages and Accessory front street lot line, in which instance
Buildings                      the side yard setback shall be a minimum
                               of two feet. On interior lots, such
                               building shall not be less than two feet
                               from a rear lot line or alley line.
                               Maximum of two accessory buildings per
                               lot.
 
5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
6.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.17   MEDIUM- TO HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2) DISTRICT.
This district is designed to provide residential areas of higher density than
is allowed in the R-1 District.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Unless provided elsewhere in this chapter, only
the following structures and uses shall be permitted in the R-2 District.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Condominium
Duplex
Multiple-Unit
Single-Unit
Townhouse
Two-Unit
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Visitor Habitation - Bed and Breakfast Inn
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Administrative Services
Club or Lodge
Convalescent Services
Cultural Services
Day Care Services (Limited)
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Primary Educational Facilities
Religious Assembly
Residential Care Services
Safety Services
Secondary Educational Facilities
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be permitted
in the R- 2 District subject to review and approval of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Boarding and Lodging House
Group Residential
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Funeral Services
Medical Offices
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Day Care Services (General)
Major Utility Services
College and University Facilities
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the R-2 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations
R-2 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
R-2 DISTRICT
                               7,500 square feet, plus an additional
Lot Area                       2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit
                               in excess of one.
Lot Width                      150 feet
Front Yard Setback             50 feet
Rear Yard Setback              50 feet
Side Yard Setback              25 feet
Street Side Yard               25 feet
Maximum Building Height        35 feet (50 feet for churches and
                               schools) from street grade
Minimum Building Width         22 feet
Detached Garages and Accessory Subject to all regulations as found in
Buildings                      Section
                               165.24 of this chapter.
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.18   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (R-3) DISTRICT.
The intent of the R-3 District is to regulate the location and placement of
manufactured homes within the City.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Within the R-3 District, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or land shall be used for other than one
or more of the following purposes:
   A.   Residential Uses
Manufactured Home Residential
   B.   Commercial Uses
None
   C.   Industrial Uses
None
   D.   Civic Uses
Park and Recreation Services
Local Utility Services
Community Recreation
Day Care Services
2.   Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures: The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted:
   A.   Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to
the permitted uses and structures permitted as exceptions.
   B.   Private garage or carport.
   C.   Private swimming pools and tennis courts.
   D.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial uses.
3.   Special Exception Uses:   Within the R-3 District, the following uses and
structures may be permitted subject to review of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Uses
None
   C.   Industrial Uses
None
   D.   Civic Uses
None
4.   Site Development Regulations: Each manufactured home park shall be
developed in accordance with the following regulations.
   A.   Development Plan: The following information shall be shown on the
development plan or submitted in writing with it:
      (1)   The name of the proposed manufactured home park;
      (2)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the developers or the
developers’ representative;
      (3)   Location of the manufactured home park, giving the subdivision and
lot numbers;
      (4)   A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed
development is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
      (5)   A location map showing the relationship of the proposed development
and the adjacent tracts or parcels;
      (6)   The present land uses and the existing zoning of the proposed
development and the adjacent tracts or parcels;
      (7)   Interior streets, streets, street names, rights-of-way, and roadway
widths;
      (8)   All lot lines and open spaces with dimensions shown;
      (9)   Delineation of all improvements required in this section.
   B.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Requirements Thereof:
      (1)   Accessory buildings or structures under park management supervision
shall be used only as office space, storage, laundry facilities, recreation
facilities, garage storage, or other necessary service for park residents only.
No accessory building or structure shall exceed 25 feet in height and shall
meet requirements of the applicable codes and ordinances.
      (2)   A manufactured home may be displayed and offered for sale, provided
that the manufactured home is situated on a permanent pad within the
manufactured home park.
      (3)   One identification sign, approved in conjunction with the final
site plan approval of the manufactured home park. In no case shall such sign be
larger than 60 square feet in surface area nor have any moving parts nor stand
higher than 10 feet from the ground to the top of the sign. Such sign shall be
no closer to the public right-of-way than 30 feet.
      (4)   No more than one entry or exit sign at each access drive onto the
public right-of-way, approved in conjunction with the final site plan approval
of the manufactured home park. In no case shall the sign be larger than two
square feet in surface area, nor have any moving parts, nor stand higher than
five feet from the ground to the top of the sign.
      (5)   No more than one local street sign at a local intersection of such
park which identifies the local street by name, the sign approved in
conjunction with the final site plan approval for the manufactured home park.
In no case shall the sign be larger than one square foot in surface area per
local street name, nor stand higher than seven feet from the ground to the top
of the sign.
5.   Required Development Standards:
   A.   The land area of a manufactured home park shall not be less than 80,000
square feet.
   B.   Manufactured home sites shall be at least 4,500 square feet in area.
   C.   Each manufactured home within such park shall contain a flush toilet,
sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities, and plumbing
and electrical connections designed for attachment to appropriate external
systems and so attached.
   D.   Each manufactured home site shall have side yards with each yard having
a width of not less than 10 feet.
   E.   Each manufactured home site shall have front and rear yards with the
rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth and the front yard of not less than 35
feet. Corner manufactured home sites shall have front yard setbacks on each
street frontage.
   F.   For the purpose of this section, yard width shall be determined by
measurement from the manufactured home face (side) to its manufactured home
site boundary from which every point shall not be less than the minimum width
herein provided. The rear yard shall be the yard opposite and having the
farthest distance as measured from the street or public way.
   G.   From all lots, a minimum distance of 35 feet shall be maintained from
the boundary of the manufactured home park.
   H.   A manufactured home shall not be permitted to occupy single or multiple
sites if either its length or width would cause it to occupy the space required
by yard setback dimensions.
   I.   Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a stand consisting
of reinforced concrete runways not less than four inches thick and not less
than the length of the manufactured home that will use the site. These runways
will be so constructed, graded and placed to be durable and adequate for
support of the maximum anticipated load during all seasons.
   J.   Each manufactured home shall be anchored to the ground as provided in
Chapters 103A.30-103A.33 of the Code of Iowa.
   K.   Accessory structures may be no closer to the side lot line than five
feet.
   L.   A permanent type material and construction compatible with the design
and color of the manufactured home shall be installed to enclose the open space
between the bottom of the manufactured home floor and the grade level of the
manufactured home stand, and shall be constructed to provide substantial
resistance to heavy winds. Skirting shall be maintained in an attractive manner
consistent with the exterior of the manufactured home and to preserve the
appearance of the manufactured home park. Sufficient screened ventilating areas
shall be installed in the skirting to supply the combustion requirements of
heating units and ventilating of the manufactured home. Provisions shall be
made for easy removal of a section large enough to permit access for inspection
of the enclosed area under the manufactured home, and for repair of sewer and
water riser connections.
   M.   All manufactured homes within such park shall be suitably connected to
common sewer and water services provided at each manufactured home site. All
sanitary sewer facilities, including plumbing connections to each manufactured
home site, shall be constructed so that all facilities and lines are protected
from freezing, from bumping, or from creating any type of nuisance or health
hazard. Sewage facilities shall be of such capacity to adequately serve all
users of the park at peak periods. Running water from a tested and approved
supply designed for a minimum flow of 200 gallons per day per manufactured home
site shall be piped to each manufactured home. All sanitary sewer and water
facilities shall conform to minimum State and County Health regulations and
other applicable sections of this Code of Ordinances. Storm drainage facilities
shall be so constructed as to protect those who reside in the manufactured home
park as well as the property owners adjacent to the park. Such park facilities
shall be of such capacity to insure rapid drainage and prevent the accumulation
of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the park;
   N.   All electric, telephone, and other lines from supply poles outside the
park or other sources to each manufactured home shall be placed underground.
   O.   Any fuel storage shall be in accordance with applicable federal, State,
and local regulations.
   P.   All roads, driveways, and motor vehicle parking spaces shall be paved
and constructed so as to handle anticipated peak loads and be adequately
drained and lighted for safety and ease of movement of pedestrians and
vehicles.
   Q.   All manufactured home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public and private streets or roads to each
manufactured home site. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adopted to
topography. Access to manufactured home parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free movement of
traffic on adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the park streets with
a public street or road shall have minimum road pavement width of 41 feet where
parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width of 31 feet
where parking is limited to one side. When primary entrance road is more than
100 feet long and does not provide access to abutting manufactured home lots
within such distance, the minimum road pavement width may be 24 feet; with
parking limited to one side, 31 feet; and with parking permitted on both sides,
41 feet.
   R.   Required standards for roadways, parking, and traffic shall be as
follows:
 
VEHICLE PARKING                TRAFFIC USE MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTH
No Parking Allowed             2-Way Road  24 feet
Parallel Parking (1 Side Only) 1-Way Road  31 feet
No Parking Allowed             1-Way Road  24 feet
Parallel Parking (2 Sides)     2-Way Road  41 Feet
 
   S.   If any dead-end place or court is more than 250 feet in length, it
shall terminate in an open space, preferably circular, and have a minimum
dimension of 100 feet. Except in unusual instances, no dead-end street or place
shall exceed 600 feet in length.
   T.   All streets of a manufactured home park providing ingress and egress
from an abutting public street or road shall have the location and design of
intersection with said public street or road approved by the City and by any
other governmental agency exercising control over such streets or roads.
   U.   All parks shall be furnished with lighting units spaced and equipped
with approved fixtures, placed at mounting heights that will provide the
following average maintained levels of illumination for safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night:
      (1)   All parts of the park street system 0.6 foot-candle, with a minimum
of 2.5 foot-candle.
      (2)   Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps, individually illuminated with a minimum of 0.4
foot-candle.
   V.   All streets intended for general public use shall be dedicated as a
public right-of-way and subject to such improvements as may be required by the
City.
   W.   All streets intended primarily for use of park occupants, guests, and
services shall be owned and maintained by the manufactured home park owner.
Private streets shall be constructed with either hot mix asphaltic concrete or
Portland cement concrete to provide for drainage, and shall be constructed to
specifications approved by the City. Street surfaces shall be maintained free
of cracks, holes, and other hazards.
   X.   Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to insure adequate surface
drainage, and shall have prior approval of the City before commencing of
construction.
   Y.   Streets shall be at approximately right angles within 50 feet of an
intersection. A distance of at least 100 feet shall be maintained between
center line of off-set intersecting streets unless specifically approved by the
City. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
   Z.   The limits of each manufactured home site shall be clearly marked on
the ground by permanent steel or iron rods driven into the ground with the top
of said rods flush with the finished lot grade. Location of lot limits on the
ground shall be approximately the same as shown on the approved plans. The
degree of accuracy obtainable by working with a scale on the plan and then a
tape on the ground is acceptable. Precise engineering of lot limits is not
required either on the plans or on the ground. This is not to be construed as
permitting lots of a lesser size than the required minimum or permitting lesser
yard or setback dimensions than set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
   AA.   No manufactured home shall be connected to water, sewer, or electrical
service unless the manufactured home complies with the standards and
requirements prescribed by “Standards for Mobile Homes, USAS A119.1, 1963” and
amendments thereto, published by the United States of America Standards
Institute as applicable, which said publication is hereby adopted and by
reference made a part of this chapter, a copy of which is and shall remain on
file in the office of the Zoning Officer. Compliance with these standards shall
be determined by the Zoning Officer. A certificate, if issued by the
manufacturer of the manufactured home, shall be permanently affixed on a
readily visible location on the exterior of the manufactured home as prima
facia evidence of such compliance.
   BB.   The maximum ground coverage of the manufactured home park shall be 70
percent with the remaining 30 percent reserved for landscaping.
165.19   RESIDENTIAL SUBURBAN (RS-1) DISTRICT.
The intent of the RS-1 District is to provide for a transitional area between
agricultural land use and the more intensive urban residential land use. The
RS-1 District is intended for uses of land contiguous to, or in close proximity
to, developed areas.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, only
the following structures and uses shall be permitted in the RS-1, Residential
Suburban District.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Duplex Residential
Residential Animal Husbandry for Recreational Purposes
Single-Unit
Maternity Group Home
(Paragraph A – Ord. 857 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Crop Production
Home Occupations
Seasonal Sales of Horticultural Products (grown on the premises)
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Cemetery
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Religious Assembly
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be permitted
in the RS-1 District subject to review and approval of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Boarding and Lodging House
Limited Multi-Unit
Two-Unit
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Riding Stables
Visitor Habitation - Bed and Breakfast Inn
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Day Care Services(Limited)
Game Refuge
Major Utility Services
Primary or Secondary Education Services
Safety Services
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the RS-1 shall be
subject to the following minimum regulations.
Site Development Regulations
RS-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
RS-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                               1 acre
Lot Width                              150 feet
Front Yard Setback                     50 feet
Rear Yard Setback                      50 feet
Side Yard Setback                      20 feet
Street Side Yard                       35 feet
Maximum Building Height                35 feet from street grade
Maximum Ground Coverage                35 percent, including accessory
                                       buildings and structures
                                       May occupy portions of the required rear
                                       yard setback area, but shall not be
                                       placed closer than 10 feet to any lot
Detached Garages, Accessory Buildings, line.
and Other Structures                   Shall not occupy any portion of the
                                       required front, side, or street side
                                       yard setback areas.
                                       Shall not exceed 35 feet in height from
                                       street grade.
                                       Animal densities greater than 15 animals
                                       per acre of sheep, goats, and small or
                                       miniature animals shall not be allowed
                                       in the RS-1 District. Animal densities
                                       greater than five animals per acre of
                                       large animals such as cattle, horses,
                                       and swine shall not be allowed in the
                                       RS-1 District. Property owners shall be
                                       responsible for proper manure disposal
                                       practices to minimize flies, odors, and
                                       other health or nuisance concerns.
                                       The maximum number of animals per
                                       property shall not exceed 100.
                                       All animals and personal pets shall be
                                       restrained by means of chains, leashes,
                                       cages, buildings, fences, and similar
                                       restraints. Animals shall not be allowed
                                       to roam free of restraint so as to cause
                                       problems for neighboring property
                                       owners.
Residential Animal Husbandry For       Fences, pens, corrals, and similar means
Recreational Purposes                  of animal restraint shall not be allowed
                                       to occupy the required front yard or
                                       street side yard setback areas.
                                       Fences, pens, corrals, and similar means
                                       of animal restraint shall be allowed to
                                       occupy the required side yard or rear
                                       yard setback areas.
                                       In accordance with United Sates
                                       Environmental Protection Agency
                                       regulations concerning the proper
                                       disposal of dead animals, limited open
                                       burning is permitted in the RS-
                                       1 District. This open burning shall be
                                       used exclusively to incinerate animal
                                       carcasses which licensed rendering firms
                                       will not collect. These animal carcasses
                                       generally consist of sheep, goats, and
                                       small pet animals. Opening burning of
                                       leaves, yard waste, garbage, and other
                                       items is not allowed in the RS-
                                       1 District.
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.20   GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-1) DISTRICT.
The intent of the C-1 District is to provide for a commercial area to serve the
general shopping needs of the trade area and to permit uses which will
strengthen the Central Business District as the center of trade, service, and
governmental and cultural activities.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the following principal uses and structures
shall be permitted in the C-1 District.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Administrative Business Offices
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Commercial Recreation - Indoor Entertainment, Sports and Recreation
Communication Services
Consumer Repair Services
Financial Services
Food Sales
General Retail Sales
Laundry Services
Liquor Sales
Medical Offices
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Professional Office
Restaurant (Convenience and General)
Tavern
Visitor Habitation - Hotel/Motel or Bed and Breakfast Inn
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
Custom Manufacturing
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Administrative Services
Club or Lodge
Community Recreation
Cultural Services
Detention Facilities
Governmental Facilities
Hospital Services
Local Utility Services
Park and Recreation Services
Postal Facilities
Public Assembly
Safety Services
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be permitted
in the C-1 District subject to review and approval of the Board of Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
All Residential (provided that such uses be prohibited from occupying the first
ground floor or basement of any structure)
Single-Unit Residential, (with no more than 50 percent of the main floor
allowed for use as residential, and the property must abut a Residential Zoning
District on at least one side, the front or back).
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Commercial Recreation - Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Construction Sales and Services
Funeral Services
Research Services
Veterinary Clinic (defined as small animals)
(Paragraph B – Ord. 850 – Jan. 25 Supp.)
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
Warehousing and Distribution (Limited)
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Day Care Services (General)
Major Utility Services
Religious Assembly
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the C-1 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations.
Site Development Regulations
C-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
C-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                No minimum
Lot Width               No minimum
Front Yard Setback      No minimum
                        No minimum rear yard is required unless there is no
Rear Yard Setback       dedicated alley on the rear lot line, in which case a
                        rear yard of 16 feet shall be provided
                        No minimum side yard shall be required except when it
Side Yard Setback       abuts a lot zoned for residential purposes, in which
                        case a side yard of eight feet shall be required.
Street Side Yard        No minimum
Maximum Building Height 35 feet from street grade
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.21   HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C-2) DISTRICT.
The intent of the C-2 District is to provide for areas adjacent to major
traffic arteries where commercial uses catering to the motoring public are
permitted.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Only the following principal uses and structures
shall be permitted in the C-2 District.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Administrative and Business Office
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive Rentals
Automotive Repair Services
Automotive Sales
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Storage
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Cocktail Lounge
Commercial Off-Street Parking
Communication Services
Construction Sales and Services
Consumer Repair Services
Convenience Storage
Convenience Store
Drive-In Establishment (Including A Bank)
Equipment Repair Services
Equipment Sales
Financial Services
Food Sales
Funeral Services
General Retail Sales
Health Services
Hotel or Motel
Indoor Entertainment
Indoor Sports and Recreation
Laundry Services
Lumber Yard
Mobile Home and Recreational Vehicle Sales
Personal Improvement Services
Personal Services
Pet Services
Professional Offices
Restaurant (Convenience)
Restaurant (General)
Service Station
Vehicle Storage
Veterinary Services
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Administrative Services
Club or Lodge
College and University Facility
Community Recreation
Cultural Services
Day Care Services (General)
Day Care Services (Limited)
Guidance Services
Hospital Services
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facility
Park and Recreation Services
Postal Facility
Public Assembly
Residential Care Facility
Safety Services
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures shall be
permitted in the C-2 District subject to review and approval of the Board of
Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
Condominium Residential
Multiple-Unit Residential
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Churches
Kennels
Liquor Sales
Mobile Home Parks
Outdoor Entertainment
Outdoor Sports and Recreation
Radio and Television Towers
Research Services
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
Custom Manufacturing
Warehousing and Distribution (General)
Warehousing and Distribution (Limited)
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Cemetery
Convalescent Services
Detention Facility
Major Utility Facility
Military Installation
Primary Educational Facility
Railroad Services
Religious Assembly
Secondary Educational Facility
Transportation Terminals
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the C-2 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations
C-2 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
C-2 DISTRICT
Lot Area                10,000 square feet
Lot Width               80 feet
Front Yard Setback      50 feet
Rear Yard Setback       10 feet
Side Yard Setback       10 feet
Street Side Yard        15 feet (In the case that HWY 10 is on the side yard,
                        setback shall be 50 feet.)
Maximum Building Height 35 feet from street grade
Maximum Building Width  22 feet
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.22   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-1) DISTRICT.
The intent of the I-1 District is to provide for light industrial uses in a
planned industrial development.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Within the I-1 District, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or land shall be used for other than one
or more of the following uses:
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive and Equipment Services:
Automotive Repair Services
Equipment Repair Services
Vehicle Storage
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Storage
Kennels
Laundry Services
Personal Improvement Services
Research Services
Service Station
Transpiration Terminals
Veterinary Services (not including Animal Hospitals)
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
Custom Manufacturing
Light Manufacturing
Warehousing and Distribution (General)
Warehousing and Distribution (Limited)
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Railroad Facilities
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures shall be
permitted in the I-1 District subject to review and approval of the Board of
Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Automotive and Equipment Services - Equipment Sales
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
Scrap and Salvage
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Major Utility Services
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the I-1 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations
I-1 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
I-1 DISTRICT
Lot Area                10,000 square feet
Lot Width               80 feet
Front Yard Setback      50 feet
                        No minimum rear yard is required unless there is no
Rear Yard Setback       dedicated alley of the rear lot line, in which case a
                        side yard of 16 feet shall be provided.
                        No minimum side yard is required except when it abuts a
Side Yard Setback       lot used for residential purposes, in which case a side
                        yard of five feet shall be required.
Street Side Yard        40 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet from street grade, unless otherwise provided
Minimum Building Width  22 feet
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.23   HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (I-2) DISTRICT.
The intent of the I-2 District is to provide for uses and structures not
allowed in the other districts.
1.   Principal Permitted Uses. Within the I-2 District, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, no building or land shall be used for other than one
or more of the following uses.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
   B.   None
   C.   Commercial Type Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services
Automotive and Equipment Services
Automotive Repair Services
Equipment Repair Services
Vehicle Storage
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Consumer Repair Services
Construction Sales and Services
Convenience Storage
Kennels
Laundry Services
Research Services
Service Station
Transportation Terminals
Veterinary Services (not including Animal Hospitals)
   D.   Industrial Type Uses
Basic Industry
Custom Manufacturing
Light Manufacturing
Scrap and Salvage
Stockyards
Warehousing and Distribution (General)
Warehousing and Distribution (Limited)
   E.   Civic Type Uses
Local Utility Services
Maintenance and Service Facilities
Railroad Facilities
2.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures shall be
permitted in the I-2 District subject to review and approval of the Board of
Adjustment.
   A.   Residential Type Uses
None
   B.   Commercial Type Uses
Automotive and Equipment Services - Equipment Sales
   C.   Industrial Type Uses
None
   D.   Civic Type Uses
Major Utility Services
3.   Site Development Regulations. Each development in the I-2 District shall
be subject to the following minimum regulations:
Site Development Regulations
I-2 DISTRICT
Site Development Regulations
I-2 DISTRICT
Lot Area                10,000 square feet
Lot Width               80 feet
Front Yard Setback      50 feet
                        No minimum rear yard is required unless there is no
Rear Yard Setback       dedicated alley of the rear lot line, in which case a
                        side yard of 16 feet shall be provided.
                        No minimum side yard is required except when it abuts a
Side Yard Setback       lot used for residential purposes, in which case a side
                        yard of five feet shall be required.
Street Side Yard        40 feet
Maximum Building Height 50 feet from street grade, unless otherwise provided
 
4.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.26 of this chapter.
5.   Zoning Permits Required.   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
165.24   ADDITIONAL AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
The regulations set forth in this section qualify, supplement, or modify the
area and height regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
1.   Yard and Area Regulations
   A.   Through Lots: Buildings on through lots, extending from street to
street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
   B.   Visibility at Intersections: On a corner lot in any district, except
the (C) Commercial District, no fence, wall, hedge, tree or other planting or
structure that will obstruct vision between a height of two feet and 10 feet
above the center line grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected,
placed or maintained within the triangular area formed, by connecting the
right-of-way lines at points which are 25 feet distant from the intersection of
the right-of-way lines, and measured along the right-of-way lines.
   C.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to that of the principal (main) building may be erected or
established upon any lot or tract of land, provided they comply with the
following:
      (1)   No accessory buildings shall be erected in any front yard or
required side yard and no accessory building(s) shall be nearer to a lot line
(s) than would be required for the building wall of the main building on the
same lot,
      (2)   No detached accessory building in an R District shall be erected
within five feet of any principal (main) buildings or any property lines, and
shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the required rear yard,
      (3)   No accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes,
      (4)   No detached accessory buildings shall exceed the following heights:
R-1, R-2, R-3, and RS-1 Districts - 20 feet.
C-1 and C-2 Districts - 24 feet.
A-1 District- 20 feet where the principal use is for residential purposes.
I-1 District – 24 feet.
      (5)   An open unenclosed deck may project into a front yard for a
distance not exceeding eight feet.
2.   Hedges and Fences.
   A.   Fences and hedges in residential districts within three feet of lot
lines shall not exceed four feet in height in any required front yard, and
shall not exceed seven feet in height in any required side or rear yard,
subject to further restrictions of Subsection 1 above.
   B.   Fences in excess of seven feet will be allowed in the cases of tennis
courts and swimming pools, subject to further restrictions of Subsection 1
above.
   C.   Fences shall not be closer than six inches to any property line and
hedges shall not be planted closer than two and one-half feet to any property
line, except that they may be placed on the property line by written mutual
agreement of both adjacent property owners.
3.   Buildings to Have Access. Every building hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be on a lot or parcel having a frontage on a public street or
road, or shall be on a lot or parcel having deeded access to a public street or
road.
4.   Use of Public Right-of-Way. No portion of the public road, street, or
alley right-of- way shall be used or occupied by an abutting use of land or
structure for storage or display purposes, or to provide any parking or loading
space required by this chapter.
5.   Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings associated with construction work
may be permitted in any district during the period that the construction work
is in progress, but such temporary buildings shall be removed within 30 days
after completion or abandonment of the construction work.
6.   Height Requirements. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk-heads, fire
towers, monuments, ornamental towers and spires, radio or television or
necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to a height in accordance
with existing or hereafter adopted regulations of the City, provided, however,
that no structure, including the above, shall be permitted to extend into
approach zones, clear zones, or other restricted air space required for the
protection of the flying public.
165.25   ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS.
The regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement the use
regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
1.   Service Stations and Convenience Stores. Gasoline service stations shall
be subject to the following regulations:
   A.   Location of Ingress and Egress. No gasoline service station or
automobile repair shop shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 150
feet as measured along the public street in which there exists a K-12 school,
public playground, church, chapel, convent, hospital, public library, or the
property line of any residentially-zoned district.
   B.   Location of Oil Drainage Pits and Hydraulic Lifts. All oil drainage
pits and hydraulic lifts shall be located within an enclosed structure.
   C.   Gasoline Dispensing Pumps. Gasoline service stations and convenience
stores shall have their gasoline pumps, including other service facilities, set
back at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way. When located in commercial
districts, gasoline dispensing pumps shall not be considered as accessory
structures.
2.   Home Occupations. Home occupations, accessory uses conducted entirely
within a dwelling unit, which are clearly incidental to the use of the
structure for residential purposes and do not change the residential character
of the site, shall be subject to the following limitations:
   A.   The residential character of the building must be maintained.
   B.   Only one unrelated person living outside of the residence, and members
of the immediate family, may be employed in the home occupation, with the
exception of contracting businesses that are managed out of the home and work
conducted off the premises. Unrelated persons are allowed in this case.
   C.   In cases where a contracting business is managed in the home occupation
with work performed off-premises, there are no limitations on employees who
work at the off-site locations.
   D.   The use must be conducted as a secondary use and in such a manner as
not to give an outward appearance, nor manifest any characteristics, of a
business in the ordinary meaning of the term. The occupation must be conducted
entirely within the dwelling which is a bona fide residence of the
practitioners, or within an attached garage.
   E.   The use must not infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to
enjoy peaceful and healthy occupancy of their home for which purpose the
residential district was created and primarily intended.
   F.   The occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference, or waste run-off
outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling unit.
   G.   The occupation shall have no exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal building.
   H.   The occupation may have no more than one, flush mounted, non-
illuminated sign not exceeding three square feet in size.
   I.   The home occupation shall not generate customer related-vehicular
traffic substantially in excess of the normal anticipated residential traffic.
   J.   No more than 30 percent of the total floor area of the principal
building may be utilized by the home occupation. However, this regulation shall
not apply to daycare facilities.
   K.   Music lessons, when operated as a home occupation, shall be limited to
two students at any one time. Dance lessons, when operated as a home
occupation, shall be limited to no more than four students at any one time.
   L.   Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the following businesses or
occupations as home occupations: animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics,
hospitals, contractor’s yards, salvage yards, restaurants, rental outlets,
vehicular repair shops, or massage parlors. Daycare for more than six children
shall not be allowed as a home occupation.
   M.   Home occupation permits are required and are to be renewed by January 1
of each year. Annual permits will be at a cost of $25.00.
3.   Accessory Storage Buildings and Cargo Containers.
   A.   A zoning permit is required prior to construction of an accessory
storage building or the temporary placement of cargo container. The application
shall show that the construction of an accessory storage building or the
temporary placement of a proposed cargo container is accessory to the permitted
use of the property and meets the placement criteria for the zone.
   B.   Only accessory storage buildings defined in Subsection
165.24(1)(C) above shall be permitted as accessory storage containers on
property in any residential zone of the City, or on any property within the
City the primary use of which is residential. Cargo containers, railroad cars,
truck vans, converted mobile homes, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, bus
bodies, vehicles, and similar prefabricated items and structures originally
built for purposes other than the storage of goods and materials are not
permitted to be used as accessory storage building on property zoned
residential or on property the primary use of which is residential.
   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Subsection 3(B) of this
section, the temporary placement of cargo containers on residentially-zoned
properties, or on properties the primary use of which are residential, for the
limited purpose of loading and unloading household contents shall be permitted
for a period of time not exceeding 90 days in any one calendar year without
approval for a limited extension from the City Code Enforcement Officer.
Original permit holder is allowed two placements of the container within the
90-day period when listed on the original permit. Denial of any extension from
the Code Enforcement Officer can be appealed to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for an extension.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Subsection 3(B) of this
section, all contractors may use cargo containers for the temporary location of
an office, equipment, or materials storage structure during construction which
is taking place on the property where the cargo container is located, if the
use of the cargo container is authorized pursuant to a City zoning permit.
(Exception: With written approval from adjacent lot owner at the time of permit
application, container may be placed on adjacent property during construction.)
   E.   Cargo containers shall not occupy required off-street parking or City
rights-of-way.
   F.   The use of a cargo container as an accessory storage container is
limited to the following zoning districts:
      (1)   A-1 (Agricultural)
      (2)   RS-1 (Residential Suburban)
      (3)   C-2 (Highway Commercial)
      (4)   I-1 (Light Industrial)
      (5)   I-2 (Heavy Industrial)
   G.   A zoning permit is required prior to placement of an accessory storage
cargo container. The application shall show the proposed cargo container is
accessory to the permitted use of the property and meets the placement criteria
for the zone. (Exception: Placement on lessors property within a zoning
district listed in the above Subsection 3(F) is permitted without permit.)
   H.   The use of a cargo container as an accessory storage container is
further limited to properties in the zones identified above in Subsection 3(F)
only if the property upon which the cargo container is proposed to be located
is not primarily for residential purposes.
   I.   Cargo containers shall not be stacked above the height of a single
container device, except for placement within the I-1 or I-2 Districts.
   J.   Cargo containers shall not be used for off-site advertising and shall
remain properly maintained. (Exception: Owner or rental company advertising
allowed.)
   K.   Cargo containers shall meet the setback requirements of the underlying
zone. (Exception: For temporary placement in setback on construction sites with
an approved building permit.)
   L.   Cargo containers shall be in an approved designated area and on the
same property as the principal use and be included in the calculation of
overall lot coverage. (Exception: With written approval from adjacent lot owner
at the time of building permit application, container may be placed on adjacent
property during construction.)
   M.   As a condition of placement, cargo container sites shall be required to
meet all zoning regulations listed in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
   N.   Materials stored within cargo containers are subject to review by the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall conduct such investigation or inspection and
make such recommendations that he considers necessary as authorized by
Subsections
35.09(9) and
35.09(10) of this Code of Ordinances. Failure to timely eliminate any fire
hazards as recommended by the Fire Chief shall constitute a municipal
infraction.
165.26   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
Except in the C-1 and C-2 Districts, at the time of construction, alteration,
moving into, enlargement of a structure or building, or change in the use of
the land, minimum off-street parking spaces and loading areas shall be
provided, constructed, and maintained for all uses as follows:
Type of Use Minimum Parking/Loading Requirements
Type of Use                           Minimum Parking/Loading Requirements
Single-Unit Residential               1 space
Duplex Residential                    3 spaces
Multi-Unit Residential                1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Condominium Residential               1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhouse Residential                 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Mobile Home Residential               1 space per mobile home
Hotels, Motels                        1 space per room
Resorts                               1 space per rental unit or room
                                      1 space for each four hospital beds, plus
Hospital                              1 space for each two employees on the
                                      major shift
Public Assembly                       1 space for each six seats
Bowling Alleys                        5 spaces per alley
Skating Rinks, Dance Halls            1 space per 300 feet of gross floor area
General Retail Sales and Professional 1 space per 300 feet of gross floor and
Offices                               professional office area
Restaurants                           1 space for each four seats, plus 1 space
                                      for each two employees
Cocktail Lounges                      1 space for each two seats
                                      1 space per classroom, or 1 space for
Primary Education Facility            every six seats in the largest facility
                                      for public assembly, whichever is greater
                                      1 space per 10 students enrolled, or 1
Secondary Education Facility          space for every six seats in the largest
                                      facility for public assembly, whichever
                                      is greater
Industry                              1 space for every two employees on the
                                      largest shift
                                      1 space for each eight beds, plus 1 space
Convalescent Services                 for each three employees on the largest
                                      shift
Group Residential                     1 space for each two bedrooms
 
1.   Computation of Spaces.
   A.   In the case of any building, structure, or premises, the use of which
is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so
mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply, as determined by the
Zoning Administrative Officer.
   B.   Where fractional spaces occur, the parking spaces required shall be
construed to be the nearest whole number.
   C.   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is changed or enlarged
in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity,
or otherwise to create a need for an increase of 10 percent or more in the
number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis
of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is enlarged to the
extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building
or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth
herein.
   D.   In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall
equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses if computed separately.
2.   Location and Type of Parking Spaces. All parking spaces required herein
shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served, except that
where an increase in the number of spaces is required due to a change or
enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used
jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be
located and maintained no more than 300 feet from an institutional or other
non-residential building being served.
   A.   In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the
same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively
or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their
retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties
concerned, approved as to form and execution, and shall be filed with the
application for a building permit.
   B.   Off-street parking spaces may be located within the required front yard
in any C-1, C-2 or I-1 district; however, no off-street parking shall be
permitted in the required front yard in any R-1, R-2, R-3, or RS-1 district
except upon a driveway providing access to a garage, carport, or parking area
for the dwelling.
   C.   All required off-street parking areas in any C-1, C-2, or I-1 district
of more than five spaces shall be surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, or
gravel so as to provide a durable surface. They shall be graded and drained to
dispose of all surface water accumulation within the lot, and shall be arranged
to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading.
   D.   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking areas shall be
arranged to reflect light away from adjacent lots and uses of land.
   E.   No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet from any
street right-of- way. In case the parking lot adjoins an R-1, R-2, R-3, or RS-
1 district, is shall be at least five feet from the property line and shall be
effectively screened immediately by the use of a fence, hedge, other similar
methods, or by City approval.
3.   Off-Street Loading Spaces Required.
   A.   In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more,
which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display,
retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space plus one
additional loading space for each 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
   B.   Each loading space shall be no less than 10 feet in width and 25 feet
in length.
   C.   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or open
space, except where adjoining a residential district. If the loading space is
adjacent to a residential district, it shall be set back at least 10 feet from
said district and be effectively screened from view.
4.   General Parking Area and Surface Requirements. All off-street parking
areas as required in this section shall comply with the following area and
surface requirements:
   A.   Owners of two or more uses or parcels of land may agree to jointly
utilize the same parking spaces provided that satisfactory legal evidence is
presented in the form of deeds, leases, or contract documents to establish such
a joint area of use.
   B.   Parking spaces shall be surfaced with Portland cement, concrete,
asphaltic concrete, or equivalent hard surface; or two-inch thickness pit run
one inch screened gravel.
   C.   Enclosed parking areas or garages shall qualify to meet the minimum
parking space requirements under this section.
   D.   Maximum limit of vehicles on any listed R-1, R-2, R-3, or RS-1 zoned
lots is four in the allowable area of the lot. (Exclusion: Any vehicles stored
in an enclosed garage or accessory storage building.)
      (1)   Temporary parking in excess of four vehicles is permitted up to 10
days when in road ready condition.
      (2)   Vehicles in Subsections 4, 5, and 6 of this section are defined as
any motor vehicle road ready or temporally disabled motor vehicle. (Excludes:
Boats, campers, and trailers.)
5.   Failure to permanently maintain and provide parking spaces as required
under this section shall be deemed in violation of this Code of Ordinances and
subject to the penalty listed in Section
165.31 of this chapter.
6.   Front and Side Yard Parking Requirements Within All Residential Zoned
Districts.
   A.   No parking in Front yards, except on a surfaced driveway or auxiliary
parking area. (See Auxiliary parking options below.)
   B.   A driveway is considered the surfaced portion of the yard no wider than
the width of the garage.
   C.   Parking of vehicles is permitted on a surfaced area or "wing" off to
the side of a driveway. An auxiliary surfaced parking or driveway "wing" is
permitted on one side of the driveway, but not both sides. (See Auxiliary
parking options.)
   D.   Auxiliary "wing" parking areas shall not encroach into the right-of-
way.
   E.   Permanent parking in any City right-of-way is not permitted without
approval from the City.
   F.   Failure to permanently maintain and provide parking spaces as required
under this chapter shall be deemed in violation of this Code of Ordinances and
subject to the penalty listed in Section
165.31 of this chapter.
   G.   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
df99e756b5612ea92f0b8e4e99ebb81bf0bc1669/IMAGES/0-0-0-1977.png]
7.   Rear Yard Parking Requirements Within All Residential Zoned Districts.
   A.   Parking in the rear yard must have street or alley access with an
established driveway to an accessory building, and parking spaces shall be
surfaced with Portland cement, concrete; asphaltic concrete, or equivalent hard
surface; or two-inch thickness pit run one inch screened gravel.
   B.   Rear Yard parking with Front Yard access for an accessory building and
parking will need an established driveway consisting of Portland cement,
concrete, asphaltic concrete, or equivalent hard surface; or two-inch thickness
pit run one inch screened gravel.
   C.   Parking spaces must be free of all weeds as described in Chapters
50 and
52 of this Code of Ordinances. Dense growth of all weeds, grasses, vines,
brush, or other vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or
fire hazard.
   D.   Failure to permanently maintain and provide parking spaces as required
under this section shall be deemed in violation of this Code of Ordinances and
subject to the penalty listed in Section
165.31 of this chapter.
165.27   SIGN REGULATIONS.
This section is established to protect and promote health, safety, general
welfare, and order within the City through the establishment of comprehensive
and uniform standards, regulations, and procedures governing the type, numbers,
size, structure, location, height, lighting, erection, use, or display of
devices, signs, or symbols serving as a visual communications media to persons
situated within or upon public rights-of-way or private properties. The
provisions of this section are intended to encourage opportunity for effective,
aesthetically compatible, and orderly communications by reducing confusion and
hazards resulting from unnecessary or indiscriminate use of communications
facilities. Hereafter no sign shall be erected, constructed, altered, or
modified except as regulated by the provisions of this section.
1.   Definitions. The following terms, for the purposes of this section, have
the meaning stated herein:
   A.   “Address sign: means a sign communicating street address only, whether
written or in numerical form.
   B.   “Animated sign” means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical
position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression of
such movement or rotation.
   C.   “Billboard sign” means a sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
   D.   “Campaign sign” means a temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a
person running for a governmental office or promoting an issue to be voted upon
at a governmental election.
   E.   “Construction sign” means a temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is actively taking place, during the period of such
construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape
architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial
supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or
interest with respect to the structure or project. One sign shall be permitted
for each major street the project abuts.
   F.   “Directional sign” means a sign erected on public or private property
which bears the address and name of a business, institution, church, or other
use or activity plus directional arrows or information on location.
   G.   “Flashing sign” means any illuminated sign that has artificial light or
color which is not maintained at a constant intensity or color when such sign
is in use. A sign providing public service information, such as time, weather,
date, temperature or similar information, shall not be considered a flashing
sign.
   H.   “Free-standing sign” means any immovable sign not affixed to a
building.
   I.   “Governmental sign” means a sign which is erected by a governmental
unit.
   J.   “Information sign” means any sign giving information to employees,
visitors or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.
   K.   “Joint identification sign” means a free-standing sign which identifies
a subdivision, a multiple residential complex consisting of three or more
structures, a shopping center consisting of three or more separate business
concerns, an industrial area, an office complex consisting of three or more
structures, or any combination of the above.
   L.   “Nonconforming sign” means a sign which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or amendments thereto but
which does not conform to the regulation of this chapter.
   M.   “Projecting sign” means a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon
a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such
building.
   N.   “Real estate sign” means a business sign placed upon a property
advertising that particular property for sale, for lease or for rent.
   O.   “Roof sign” means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or
which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above
the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a
gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
   P.   “Sign” means the use of any words, numerals, pictures, figures,
devices, or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to
show an individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the
general public.
   Q.   “Sign area” means, in the case of messages, figures, or symbols
attached directly to a part of a building, that area which is included in the
smallest connecting geometric figures which can be made to circumscribe the
message, figure, or symbol displayed thereon.
      (1)   In all other cases, that entire area of the surface which bears the
advertisement, excluding any sign structure.
      (2)   In any case, only changeable copy areas of marquee or canopies
shall be considered in determining the total sign area.
   R.   “Sign structure” means the supports, uprights, bracing, and framework
for a sign, excluding sign area.
   S.   “Temporary sign” means any sign which is erected or displayed for a
specified period of time. The temporary use of portable or moveable signs,
search lights, banners, pennants, and similar devices shall be allowed in
excess of and in addition to the sign limitations of this section for
continuous periods of 10 consecutive days. No business proprietor shall be
allowed more than three such periods in any calendar year.
   T.   “Wall sign” means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does not
project more than 12 inches for such building or structure.
2.   Requirements. Billboards and signs in conjunction with principal permitted
uses are allowed subject to the following regulations. Only signs specifically
permitted shall be allowed in the various districts.
   A.   C-1 (General Commercial) District.
      (1)   Only one permanent type sign intended to be read from off the
premises will be allowed for each principal use;
      (2)   Maximum height of sign shall not exceed 35 feet from street grade.
      (3)   The following sign types are permitted:
         a.   Address Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot);
         b.   Campaign Signs (Sign area not to exceed 8 square feet);
         c.   Construction Sign (Sign area not to exceed 24 square feet).
         d.   Directional Signs;
         e.   Government Signs;
         f.   Informational Signs (Sign area not to exceed 2 square feet);
         g.   Joint Identification Signs.
         h.   Projecting Signs (Sign area not to exceed 9 square feet);
         i.   Real Estate Signs (Sign area not to exceed 24 square feet);
         j.   Roof Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot for each linear
foot of building frontage.
         k.   Temporary Signs (Sign area not to exceed 9 square feet);
         l.   Wall Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot for each linear
foot of building frontage);
   B.   C-2 (Highway Commercial) District.
      (1)   Free-standing signs must not impair sight distance or create a
traffic hazard;
      (2)   Free-standing signs must be located no more than 150 feet from the
business, product or service advertised on said sign;
      (3)   Only two permanent type signs will be permitted per development;
      (4)   Maximum height of sign shall not exceed 35 feet from street grade.
      (5)   The following sign types are permitted:
         a.   Address signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot);
         b.   Campaign Signs (Sign area not to exceed 8 square feet);
         c.   Construction Signs (Sign area not to exceed 24 square feet).
         d.   Directional Signs;
         e.   Free-Standing Signs (Sign area not to exceed 100 square feet).
         f.   Government Signs;
         g.   Informational Signs (Sign area not to exceed 2 square feet);
         h.   Joint Identification Signs (Sign area not to exceed 12 square
feet).
         i.   Projecting Signs (Sign area not to exceed 16 square feet);
         j.   Real Estate Signs (Sign area not to exceed 24 square feet);
         k.   Temporary Signs (Sign area not to exceed 9 square feet);
         l.   Wall Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot for each linear
foot of building frontage)
   C.   R-1, R-2, R-3, and RS-1 (Residential) Districts.
      (1)   Maximum height of sign shall not exceed 35 feet from street grade.
      (2)   The following sign types are permitted:
         a.   Address signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot);
         b.   Campaign Signs (Sign area not to exceed 6 square feet);
         c.   Construction Signs (Sign area not to exceed nine square feet).
         d.   Government Signs;
         e.   Joint Identification Signs (Sign area not to exceed 12 square
feet);
         f.   Real Estate Signs (Sign area not to exceed 6 square feet);
   D.   A-1 (Agricultural/Conservation) and I-1 (Light Industrial) Districts
      (1)   Free-standing signs may be located no more than 100 feet from the
business, product or service advertised on said sign;
      (2)   Maximum height of sign shall not exceed 35 feet from street grade.
      (3)   The following sign types are permitted:
         a.   Address Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot);
         b.   Campaign Signs (Sign area not to exceed 16 square feet);
         c.   Construction Signs (Sign area not to exceed 25 square feet).
         d.   Free-Standing Signs (Sign area not to exceed 100 square feet);
         e.   Directional Signs;
         f.   Government Signs;
         g.   Joint Identification Signs (Sign area not to exceed 36 square
feet).
         h.   Real Estate Signs (Sign area not to exceed 24 square feet);
         i.   Wall Signs (Sign area not to exceed 1 square foot for each linear
foot of building frontage);
3.   Special Exceptions. Any sign type may be granted special exception status
after review by the Board of Adjustment and subject to any conditions deemed by
the Board to be appropriate.
4.   Additional Regulations. In all districts, signs and billboards shall
adhere to pertinent State regulations and other local ordinances.
5.   General Sign Provisions.
   A.   Hazardous Signs: No sign permitted by this chapter shall, by reason of
its location, lighting, size, color or intensity, create a hazard to the safe,
efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No private sign shall
contain words which might be construed as traffic controls, such as “stop”,
“caution”, “warning”, etc., unless such sign is intended to direct traffic
within the premises.
   B.   Sign Maintenance: All signs and sign structures shall be properly
maintained and kept in a safe, orderly condition. In addition, all parts and
supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign structure which is rotted,
unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted,
repaired, or replaced by the property owner or agent of the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located, after written notice by the City.
   C.   Interference: No sign, nor any guys, stay or attachment thereto shall
be erected, placed or maintained by any person on rocks, fences, or trees; nor
in such a manner as to interfere with the effective use of firefighting
equipment or personnel, or any electric light, power, telephone, telegraph or
TV cable wires or supports thereof.
   D.   Signs in Right-of Way: No signs other than government signs shall be
erected or temporarily placed within any public rights-of-way except as may be
specifically provided herein.
   E.   Clearance: All signs located over public rights-of-way or any public or
private access route (sidewalk, mall, etc.) shall be located a minimum of 15
feet above grade level.
   F.   Safe Ingress and Egress: No sign or part thereof shall be erected or
maintained so as to prevent or deter free ingress and egress from any door,
window, or fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape.
   G.   Signs Required by Law: All signs required by law shall be permitted in
all districts.
   H.   Back to Back Signs: If a free-standing sign or sign structure is
constructed so that the faces are not back to back, the angle shall not exceed
30 degrees. If the angle is greater than 30 degrees, the total area of both
sides added together shall be the calculated sign area. Back to back signs
(when less than 30 degrees) shall be considered as one sign when debited
against the total number of signs permitted on one zoning lot.
   I.   Obsolete Signs: Obsolete signs which advertise an activity, business
product or service which is no longer produced or conducted on the premises
shall be removed within 90 days from date of notice provided by the City. The
owner of the property on which the sign is located shall have 90 days from date
of notice to remove any such sign. If after the expiration of the 90-day
period, the sign has not been removed, the City may cause the sign to be
removed and any expenses may be charged back to the property owner.
   J.   Illumination: All externally illuminated signs shall be constructed so
as to direct the source of light away from adjacent properties or public
streets.
   K.   Animated Signs: Animated signs may be allowed as a special exception
requiring a hearing before the Board of Adjustment.
   L.   Double Frontage: Lots having frontage on two streets or on a street and
an alley shall be permitted to provide the maximum number and square footage of
signs on each of the opposite ends of said lot, provided however, that not more
than the maximum number of square feet of signs per frontage may be viewed
simultaneously.
   M.   Permit Required: No sign except permitted signs as identified herein
shall be erected, altered, constructed or modified without first receiving a
valid sign permit from the City.
   N.   Sign Permit Application: The application for a sign permit shall
contain such information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement
of this chapter.
   O.   Permit Fees: To defray administrative costs of processing requests for
sign permits, the applicant for a sign permit shall pay to the City Clerk, a
fee in the amount established by the City Council.
6.   Permitted Signs. The following signs are allowed without a permit but
shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
   A.   Campaign Signs: Signs or posters announcing the candidate seeking
political office, advertising political issues or the data pertinent thereto.
These signs shall remain for no longer than 45 days prior and one day after the
election for which they were intended and shall be removed by the owner of the
property on which they are located. All signs shall be confined to private
property and shall not be attached to trees, utilities or rocks.
   B.   Construction Signs: A non-illuminated sign announcing the names of
architects, engineers, contractors, future use, and other individuals or firms
involved with the construction, alteration, or repair of such building (but not
including any advertisement of any product). Such signs shall be confined to
the site of the construction, alteration or repair and shall be removed within
two years of the date of issuance of the first building permit or when the
particular project is completed, whichever is sooner. One sign shall be
permitted for each major street the project abuts.
   C.   Directory Signs: A wall sign which identifies the business, owners,
manager, or resident occupant and sets forth the occupation or other address
information but contains no advertising. There may be one directory sign per
zoning lot not to exceed two square feet of area per business or resident
occupant.
   D.   Government Signs: Signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include
safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating
scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, when
signs are erected by or on order of a public officer or employee in the
performance of official duty.
   E.   Integral Signs: Name of buildings, date of construction, commemorative
tablets and the like, which are of the building or structure.
   F.   Parking Signs (on site): On-site directional and parking signs intended
to facilitate the movement of vehicles and pedestrians upon which the sign is
located. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet of area.
   G.   Real Estate Signs: Any on-site sign announcing the owner, manager,
realtor or other person directly involved in the sale or rental of the
property. Signs shall not measure more than six square feet in the residential
districts nor 24 square feet in the other districts. Only one real estate sign
may be allowed per zoning lot.
165.28   NONCONFORMITIES.
It is the intent of this section to permit legal nonconforming lots,
structures, or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. It is recognized that there exists within the districts
established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before the ordinance codified in
this chapter was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. Such uses are
declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district. A nonconforming uses of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or
a nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be
extended or enlarged after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter by
attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen
from off the premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not
be permitted generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include
the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of existing building
has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition or
removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, providing that work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
1.   Nonconforming Uses of Land. Where at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, lawful use of land exists
that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted
or amended such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the
exception of areas zoned commercial where the nonconforming land use is of
residential nature, whereas expansion of accessory buildings will be allowed
following the residential districts site development regulations.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   C.   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is
located.
2.   Nonconforming Lot of Record. In any district in which single-unit
dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of this chapter, a single-unit dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such lot must
be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots of the
same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
the requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving
area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
3.   Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter that
could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on
area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or
its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity. Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a way which
does not increase its nonconformity with the exception of areas zoned
commercial where the nonconforming land use is of residential nature, whereas
expansion of accessory buildings will be allowed following the residential
districts site development regulations.
   B.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than 50 percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall
be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   D.   Discontinuance. In the event that a non-conforming building or
structure or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the
same shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it
is located.
   E.   Exception for Existing Single-Unit Residential Dwellings. Existing,
legally-established, non-conforming single-unit residential dwellings located
in non-single-unit residentially-zoned districts may make alterations and
construct additions to the dwelling (so long as they meet the R-1 District’s
setback regulations and no additional dwelling units are constructed or
created.). Construction of the dwelling shall start within six months of its
approved building permit and shall be completed within one year of the start of
construction. This exception does not apply to mobile homes.
4.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land in Combination. Where a lawful
use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this
chapter that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located with the
exception of areas zoned commercial where the nonconforming land use is of
residential nature, whereas expansion of accessory buildings will be allowed
following the residential districts site development regulations.
   B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
building.
   C.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   D.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and land in
combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for a period of more than one
year, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter
be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   E.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   F.   A nonconforming lot of record which does not meet the required lot area
or lot width requirements may be developed for a single-unit dwelling so long
as the required yard setbacks are maintained.
5.   Repairs and Maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to
any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repairs or
replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing of the
building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the
time of passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety
upon orders of such official.
6.   Replacing Damaged Buildings. Any non-conforming building or structure
damaged more than 50 percent of its replacement value exclusive of the
foundation at the time of damage by fire, flood, explosion, war, riot, or Act
of God shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as before such
happening, but if less than 50 percent damage above the foundation, it may be
restored, reconstructed, or used as before provided it be started within one
year of such happening.
7.   Uses Under Exception Provisions Are Not Nonconforming Uses. Any use for
which a special exception is permitted, as provided in this chapter, shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a
conforming use in such district. Any expansion shall be with the Board of
Adjustment.
8.   Change of Tenancy or Ownership. There may be a change of tenancy,
ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of
structures, or of structures and land in combination.
165.29   SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
Allowable special exception uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered, upon
application for a special exception use permit in accordance with the rules and
procedures of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment will grant or
deny a special exception use permit in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and with the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a special
exception use permit, the Board of Adjustment will authorize the issuance of a
special exception use permit and may prescribe and impose appropriate
conditions, safeguards, and a specified time limit for the performance of the
special exception use permit.
1.   Application For Special Exception Permit. A request for a special
exception use permit for a special exception use or modification of a special
exception use may be initiated by a property owner or his or her authorized
agent by filing an application with the Zoning Administrative Officer upon
forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a
site plan and other such plans and data showing dimensions, arrangements,
descriptive data, and other materials constituting a record essential to an
understanding of the proposed use and proposed modification in relation to the
standards set forth herein. The application shall also be accompanied by a fee
as determined by resolution of the City Council.
2.   Application and Fee. Application for a Special Exception Use Permit shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrative Officer. The Board of Adjustment shall
provide a copy of the application for special exception for review and comment
of the Planning and Zoning Commission within five days after receipt of the
application. The application shall include the following:
   A.   Name and address of the owner and applicant.
   B.   Address and legal description of the property.
   C.   If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement
that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property.
   D.   The property address and the name and mailing address of the owner of
each lot within 200 feet of the subject property and a map with parcels keyed
to the ownership and address data certified by an licensed abstractor, land
surveyor or attorney.
   E.   A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the
proposed use, including any data pertinent to the findings required for
approval of the application.
   F.   Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement
plans, and such additional maps and drawings, all dimensions sufficiently
shown, as required to illustrate the following:
      (1)   The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner, and name of
person preparing the site plan.
      (2)   The location and dimensions of boundary lines, easements, and
required yards and setbacks.
      (3)   The location, height, bulk, general appearance, and intended use of
existing and proposed buildings on the site, and approximate location of
existing buildings on abutting sites within 50 feet.
      (4)   The location of existing and proposed site improvements including
parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, landscaped areas,
utility or service areas, fencing and screening, signs, and lighting.
      (5)   The location of watercourses and drainage features.
      (6)   The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and loading
spaces, and a calculation of applicable minimum requirements.
      (7)   The relationship of the site and proposed use to surrounding uses,
including pedestrian and vehicular circulation, current use of nearby parcels,
and any proposed off-site improvements to be made.
   G.   Any applicable fee established by the City Council.
3.   Procedures. A special exception shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until the following procedures have been fulfilled:
   A.   The Board of Adjustment shall provide a copy of the application for
special exception for review and comment to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   B.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide the Board of
Adjustment with their recommendations within 15 days after receipt of the
application.
   C.   After receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendations,
the Board of Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing in relation to the
special exception request. Notice shall be given of the public hearing as
required by State Statute by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City. Notice shall be given to a complete list of persons provided by
the applicant who are all of the owners of property within 200 feet of the
property in question.
   D.   The Board of Adjustment shall determine that it is empowered under this
chapter to grant the special exception as described in the application, and
that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public
interest pursuant to testimony presented at the public hearing and the review
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   E.   In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and punishable under Section
165.31 of this chapter.
   F.   The concurring vote of three members of the Board of Adjustment grants
a special exception use permit. No order of the Board of Adjustment granting a
special exception use permit shall be valid for a period longer than six months
from the date of such order, unless the Board of Adjustment specifically grants
a longer period of time or a building permit is obtained within the six month
period and construction is commenced.
4.   Standards. No special exception permit shall be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless such Board shall find:
   A.   That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special
exception use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare of the community.
   B.   That the special exception use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.
   C.   That the establishment of the special exception use will not impede the
normal and orderly development in improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district.
   D.   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, and/or
necessary facilities have been or will be provided.
   E.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   F.   The use shall not include any activity involving the use or storage of
flammable, or explosive material unless protected by adequate firefighting and
fire suppression equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in
the handling of any such material.
   G.   The use shall not include noise which is objectionable due to volume,
frequency, or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled.
   H.   The use shall not include vibration which is discernable without
instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   I.   The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter which is
discernable on any adjoining property.
   J.   The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust
vapors, or other substance which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or
other property or which causes soiling, discomfort or irritation.
   K.   The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare which is
visible from any adjoining property or from any public street, road, or
highway.
   L.   The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit
traffic hazards and congestion.
   M.   The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
burden on any public utilities or facilities unless provisions are made for any
necessary adjustments.
   N.   That the use will not be in conflict with the Comprehensive City Plan.
   O.   The use shall not interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring
permitted uses. If such interference is found provisions must be made for
increased setbacks (up to 500 feet) from property lines or screening of
incompatible use by the use of fences or hedges.
   P.   The ground coverage shall be such that no additional dust or storm run-
off is generated by the special exception use.
   Q.   The use shall not create a hazard to vehicular traffic. If any such
hazard is determined, provisions must be made to increase the required setback
in regard to open air storage.
   R.   The use shall not cause any permanent, irreparable environmental damage
to the parcel or neighboring lands.
   S.   The special exception use permit may be reviewed after a specified
period of time for compliance and for possible additional conditions.
   T.   Residential listed as special exceptions in commercial districts may be
required to provide the setbacks required in the R-2 district for the safety
and comfort of residents and for the provision of open space and off-street
parking.
5.   Supplemental Standards. In addition to the general standards outlined in
Subsection 4 above, specified uses shall adhere to standards as follows:
   A.   Salvage Yards: All salvage yards, including any area where waste, junk,
discarded or wrecked and salvaged materials are bought, sold, stored,
exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including dismantling or
“wrecking” of automobiles or machinery or other vehicles, shall be located in
the Light Industrial district under special exception use.
      (1)   The application for a special use permit shall be accompanied with
a proposed intent or covenant to meet the minimum requirements described
herein:
      (2)   The yards shall be at least 500 feet distant in all directions from
any residential building;
      (3)   The out-of-doors yards shall be screened by a solid wall or
uniformly painted solid fence not less than eight feet in height, or in lieu
thereof, a landscape buffer strip 50 feet wide with deciduous and evergreen
trees and large shrubs to provide a landscape screen at least 10 feet high, may
be planted;
      (4)   An off-street parking or service area in connection with the yards
may be located outside of the screened-in area.
   B.   Open-Air Sales Display and Storage: All open-air sales display and
storage, including used auto sales and storage, new auto sales and storage, new
and used farm implement and equipment sales and storage, new and used truck,
machinery, or equipment sales and storage, shall require a special use permit.
The application shall be accompanied with drawings and other documents
describing the intent, layout, and construction or installation in accordance
with the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   The sides and rear lot lines, when abutting properties used for
residential dwellings, may be required to be screened with a wall or fence with
its surface at least 50 percent solid and at least seven feet in height. The
fence shall not be required to extend beyond the front yard setback line;
      (2)   All lighting and lighted facilities shall be designed and arranged
so that they do not focus or glare directly on adjacent residential properties,
or public streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard.
      (3)   No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be
permitted closer than 75 feet to the street property line or residential
properties and less than 15 feet above ground or more than 35 feet above the
ground;
      (4)   The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of
weeds, debris, trash and other objectionable materials.
   C.   Planned Unit Development:
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations
is to encourage flexibility in the design and development of land in order to
promote its most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and economical
provisions of streets, utilities and public spaces; and to preserve the natural
and scenic qualities of open areas.
         a.   The procedure is intended to permit diversification in the
location of structure and improve circulation facilities and other site
qualities while ensuring adequate standards relating to public health, safety
and welfare and convenience both in the use and occupancy of buildings and
facilities in planned groups. A planned unit development to be eligible under
this chapter must be:
         b.   In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the City and with
the regulations of this chapter:
         c.   An effective and unified means of treating possible development
providing for preservation of scenic features and amenities of the site and the
surrounding area;
         d.   So designed in its space allocation, orientation, landscaping,
circulation system, materials and other features as to produce an environment
of stable and desirable character, complementing the design and values of the
neighborhood.
      (2)   Tract and Land Use.
         a.   Minimum Area. A planned unit development shall include no less
than five acres of contiguous land;
         b.   Open Space. A minimum of 25 percent of planned unit site area
shall be developed as public open space. Parking areas and vehicle access
facilities shall not be considered in calculating open space;
         c.   Land Use. At least 90 percent of the PUD site exclusive of open
space shall be devoted to those uses permitted in the zone district in which
the PUD is located. In Agriculture or R-1 Districts, at least 50 percent of the
dwelling units shall be one family detached units. Proposed land uses shall not
adversely affect surrounding development, and shall be in accordance with the
objectives and policies of the General Plan;
         d.   Unity of Control. In order that the purpose of these regulations
may be realized, the land and buildings and appurtenant facilities shall be in
single ownership, or under management or supervision of a central authority, or
otherwise subject to such supervisory lease or ownership control as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions herein.
      (3)   Application Procedures. Planned Unit Development shall be subject
to the approval of the Board of Adjustment based upon review and
recommendations by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The applicant shall file
a General Development Plan which shall include the following information:
         a.   A statement describing the general character of the intended
development.
         b.   An accurate map of the project area including its relationship to
surrounding properties and existing topography and key features.
         c.   A plan of the proposed project showing at least the following
information in sufficient detail to make possible the evaluation of the
criteria for approval, as follows:
         d.   The pattern of proposed land use including shape, size and
arrangement of proposed use areas, density and environmental character.
         e.   The pattern of public and private streets.
         f.   The location, size and character of recreational and open space
areas reserved or dedicated for public uses such as schools, parks, greenways,
etc.
         g.   A utility feasibility study.
         h.   Appropriate statistical data on the size of the development,
ratio of various land uses, percentage of multi-family units by number of
bedrooms, economic analysis of the development, expected staging, and any other
plans or data pertinent to evaluation by the City.
         i.   General outline of intended organizational structure related to
property owners association, deed restrictions and private provision of common
services.
      (4)   Specific Implementation Plan. A specific and detailed plan for
implementation of all or part of a proposed PUD after approval of the General
Development Plan must be submitted within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The specific implementation plan
shall be submitted for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval or disapproval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall include the
following detailed construction and engineering plans and related detailed
documents and schedules:
         a.   An accurate map of the area covered by the plan including the
relationship to the total general development plan.
         b.   The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, walkways and
parking facilities.
         c.   Detailed lot layout and subdivision plat where required.
         d.   The arrangement of building groups, and their architectural
character.
         e.   Sanitary sewer and water mains.
         f.   Grading plan and storm drainage system.
         g.   The location and treatment of open space areas and recreational
or other special amenities.
         h.   The location and description of any areas to be dedicated to the
public.
         i.   General landscape treatment.
         j.   Proof of financing capability.
         k.   Analysis of economic impact upon the community.
         l.   A development schedule indicating: (i) the approximate date when
construction of the project can be expected to begin; (ii) the stages in which
the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each
stage can be expected to begin; (iii) the anticipated rate of development; (iv)
the approximate date when the development of each of the stages will be
completed; and (v) the area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage.
         m.   Agreements, bylaws, provisions, or covenants which govern the
organizational structure, use, maintenance, and continued protection of the PUD
and any of its common services, common open space that will be provided at each
stage.
         n.   Any other plans, documents, or schedules requested by the City.
      (5)   Criteria Approval: As a basis for determining the acceptability of
a PUD application, the following criteria shall be applied to the precise
development plan for such district with specific consideration as to whether or
not it is consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter, has been
prepared with competent professional advice and guidance, and produces
significant benefits in terms of environmental design.
         a.   Character and Intensity of Land Use. In a PUD, the uses proposed,
and their intensity and arrangement on the site, shall be of visual and
operational character which:
            (i)   Is compatible to the physical nature of the site with
particular concern for preservation of natural features, tree growth, and open
space.
            (ii)   Would produce an attractive environment of sustained
aesthetic and ecological desirability, economic stability and functional
practicality compatible with the general development plans for the area as
established by the community.
            (iii)   Would not adversely affect the anticipated provision for
school or other municipal services.
Would not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing or
proposed facilities to serve it.
         b.   Economic Feasibility and Impact. The proponents of a PUD
application shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of its economic feasibility, of available adequate financing, and
that it would not adversely affect the economic prosperity of the City or the
values of surrounding properties.
         c.   Engineering Design Standards. The width of street rights-of-way,
width and location of street or other paving, location of sewer and water
lines, provision for storm water drainage or other similar environmental
engineering consideration shall be based upon determination as to the
appropriate standards necessary to implement the specific function in the
specific situation; provided, however, that in no case shall standards be less
than those necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare as determined by
the City.
         d.   Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space. In a PUD, adequate
provision shall be made for the permanent preservation and maintenance of
common open space either by private reservation or dedication to the public.
         e.   In the case of private reservation, the open area to be reserved
shall be protected against building development by conveying to the City as
part of the conditions for project approval an open space easement over such
open areas restricting the area against any future building or use except as is
consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and
recreational benefit of the development. Buildings or uses for noncommercial,
recreational or cultural purposes compatible with the open space objective may
be permitted only where specifically authorized as part of the development plan
or subsequently, with the expressed approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
following approval of building, site and operational plans by the Planning
Commission. All easements subject to acceptance by the City Council. The care
and maintenance of such open space reservation shall be assured by
establishment of appropriate management organization for the project. The
manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties
shall be included in any contractual agreement with the City and shall be
included in the title to each property.
         f.   Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation
shall be established in a manner acceptable to the City and made a part of the
conditions of the plan approval.
      (6)   Approval of the Specific Implementation Plan
         a.   Following a review of the specific implementation Plan, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment that they be approved with modifications, or disapproved.
         b.   Upon receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendation, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve the plan and
authorize the development to proceed accordingly, or disapprove the plan.
         c.   In the event of approval of the Specific Implementation Plan, the
building, site and operational plans for the development, as approved, as well
as all other commitments and contractual agreements with the City offered or
required with regard to project value, character and other factors pertinent to
an assurance that the proposed development will be carried out basically as
presented in the official submittal plans, shall be recorded by the developer
within 90 days in the County Recorder’s Office. This shall include posting a
performance bond or certified check with City guaranteeing that required
improvements will be constructed according to the approved implementation
schedule. This shall be accomplished prior to the issuance of any building
permit.
         d.   Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use shall first
be submitted for approval to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Planning
Commission and if such change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration
of the original plan, the procedures in above shall be required.
         e.   If construction of the PUD does not commence and continue in
reasonable accordance with the development schedule, then the PUD shall be
voided.
165.30   ENFORCEMENT.
1.   Administrative Officer. The purpose of this section is to confirm the
existing Zoning Administrative Officer, and it shall be the duty of said
officer to enforce this chapter. Such officer may be a person holding other
appointive office in the City, or in another governmental agency.
2.   Zoning Compliance.
   A.   No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose whatsoever, until a permit is issued by the Zoning Administrative
Officer stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected or structurally altered, without a permit being issued
therefore by the Zoning Administrative Officer. No permit shall be issued to
make a change unless the changes are in conformity with provisions of this
chapter.
   C.   Nothing in this part shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming
use as hereinbefore authorized, unless a discontinuance is necessary for the
safety of life or property.
3.   Application For Compliance Permit. Compliance permits shall be obtained
from the Zoning Administrative Officer before starting or proceeding with the
erection, construction, moving into, or the structural alteration of a building
or structure, including billboards. Permits shall be kept on file in the office
of the Zoning Administrative Officer, and copies shall be furnished on request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected. Compliance permits shall be issued to complying applicants within
seven days after application is made.
4.   Plats. Each application for a compliance permit shall be accompanied by a
plat in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, the
dimensions of the required yards, parking and open spaces, and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
5.   Construction and Use To Be As Provided In Application, Plans, and Permit.
Compliance permits issued on the basis of plans and applications, approved by
the Zoning Administrative Officer, authorize only that use, arrangement and
construction. Use, arrangement and construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as
provided by Section
165.31 of this chapter.
6.   Fees. Before receiving a compliance permit the owner or his agent shall
pay to the City the permit fee as provided by resolution of the Council. Such
fee shall be based on valuation. The City government shall be exempt from
paying any scheduled fees.
7.   Special Exceptions. A compliance permit for a special exception may be
issued by the Administrative Officer after review by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and upon order of the Board of Adjustment.
165.31   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
1.   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of, this chapter, upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $200.00. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes
a separate offense.
2.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or
land is used in violation of this chapter, the City Attorney, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceed in the name of the
City to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, conduct, business, or use in or
about said premises.
165.32   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
Appointments to the Board shall be for a term of five years and in such a
manner that the term of no more than two members shall expire in any one year.
Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired portion of the
term. In the event of the absence from the City or the incapacity of a member,
the Mayor may appoint a substitute who shall serve as a member of the Board,
with the same powers and authority as the regular member, until such member has
returned or has become capacitated for further service. All members of the
Board shall serve without compensation.
1.   Code Enforcement Officer To Act As Secretary of Board. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall serve as the Secretary of the Board. In the absence
of the Secretary, the Chairperson of the Board may appoint one of the members
of the Board to act as Secretary Pro-Tem for the meeting. The Board shall have
the power to call on any City department for assistance in the performance of
its duties, and it shall be the duty of such department to render such
assistance as may reasonably be required.
2.   Board May Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Board may adopt, from time to
time, subject to approval by the City Council, such rules and regulations as it
may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
3.   Board Meetings, Chairperson, Quorum. The Board shall annually elect its
own Chairperson at the first of each fiscal year. Such Chairperson, or in his/
her absence, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. There shall be a fixed place of meeting and all of the
three members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of
three members of the Board shall be necessary on all matters upon which it is
required to pass under the provisions of this chapter. All meetings of the
Board shall be conducted in a manner so as to comply with the open meetings
requirements of this code and Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
4.   Secretary To Keep Records. The Secretary of the Board shall keep minutes
of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question. If a
member is absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact. The
Board shall keep record of its examination and other official actions, which
shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk as a public record.
5.   Appeals To Board Of Adjustment. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any
person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or board of the City. Such
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the
Board, by filing with the Secretary of the Board a written notice of appeal,
specifying the grounds thereof. Notice of such appeal shall be given as
required by the Board except in cases of appeal of zoning enforcement action
and notice of such appeal shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, as provided by the regulations of the Board.
The Secretary of the Board shall give prompt notice of such appeal to officers,
departments, or board affected who shall, forthwith, transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all papers and documents constituting the record upon which the
action appealed was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the enforcing officer certifies to the Board
after the notice of the appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by
reason of facts stated in the appeal a stay would in his or her opinion cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of
record on application of notice to the enforcing officer and due cause shown.
The final disposition of any appeal shall be in the form of a resolution by the
Board either reversing, modifying, or affirming the decision or determination
appealed from. A copy of such resolution shall be filed with the enforcing
officer.
6.   Authority Of Board. The Board of Appeals in specific cases shall have the
following powers.
   A.   Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, or determination made by the officer, department, or
board of the City in the enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Appeals In Special Zoning Cases. To authorize upon appeal in the
following special cases such variance from the terms of the ordinances as will
not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing special conditions a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed
and substantial justice done. However, nothing herein shall be construed as
giving the Board the right, power, or authority to change the limits or extent
of any zoning district, or to grant permission for the erection or use of any
building or the use of any land for a purpose which is specifically prohibited
herein.
      (1)   The erection and use of any accessory building on a lot in any
residential district before the erection of a principal building on such lot;
provided such use is temporary and for a period of time not to exceed one year
and is not used as a dwelling.
      (2)   The extension of an existing building or use into a more restricted
district immediately adjacent, under such conditions as will safeguard the
character of the more restricted district, provided that such extension shall
not be permitted more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in
which such building or use is authorized.
      (3)   The extension or enlargement of an existing use located in a
district against such use, either by the extension or enlargement of an
existing building or use of land, or by the erection of an additional building
where such extension or enlargement is necessary incident to the trade,
business, or industry existing on the effective date of this chapter, provided
that such extension or enlargement will not prove detrimental to or tend to
alter the character of the neighborhood.
      (4)   The erection of buildings or the use of land not in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, in the case of an undeveloped section of the
City for a period not to exceed one year in any case, where such building or
uses are clearly incidental to and necessary for residential development or are
temporary only and will not tend to permanently alter the character of such
section of any adjoining or nearby section.
      (5)   The erection and use of a building or the use of land in any
district by a public service corporation or for public purposes, which the
Board considers reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare.
      (6)   To permit any use in a district which is not specifically
prohibited in such district, and that is in keeping with and appropriate to the
uses authorized in such district by the provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   The substitution of a nonconforming use for another under the
limitations of “nonconforming use substituted.”
   C.   Variances In Zoning Ordinance Provisions. The Board may in specific
cases upon appeal grant variance in the literal interpretation of the
provisions of the ordinance, within the limits set forth herein, provided such
variance meets the following specified conditions:
      (1)   The variance will not authorize a use that is prohibited in the
district in which the property in question is located.
      (2)   The circumstances creating the need for the variance are unique to
the property in question and are not caused by the owner in any way.
      (3)   The variance will not substantially or permanently injure adjacent
property in the same district.
      (4)   The variance will not weaken the general purposes of this chapter
or the regulations herein established for the specific district.
      (5)   The variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of
this chapter.
      (6)   The location and construction of public buildings after receiving a
report from the Planning and Zoning Commission approving same.
7.   Confirmation of Existing Board of Adjustment. The members of the existing
Board of Adjustment are hereby confirmed to continue their appointed terms of
office. Future members of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the
City Council for a term of five years. Members of the Board of Adjustment may
be removed from office by the City Council for cause upon written charges and
after a public hearing. Any vacancy shall be filled by the City Council.
8.   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall
adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the
provisions of this chapter. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
Chairperson, or in his absence the acting chair-person, may administer oaths
and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official
actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the
office of the Board. The presence of three members shall constitute a quorum.
9.   Hearings, Appeals, Notice. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning
interpretation or administration of this chapter may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the City affected by a decision of the
Administrative Officer. Such appeals should be taken within a reasonable time,
not to exceed 60 days, by filing with the Administrative Officer and with the
Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Administrative Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record from which the action appealed was taken. The Board of
Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public
notices thereof, as well as due notice to the parties of interest, and decide
the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney. A fee to be determined by resolution of the
City Council shall be paid to the Administrative Officer at the time the notice
of appeal is filed, which the Administrative Officer shall forthwith pay to the
credit of the General Revenue Fund of the City.
10.   Stay Of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action which was appealed, unless the Administrative Officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal
is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on the application,
on notice to the Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
11.   Powers and Duties. The Board of Adjustment shall have the following
powers and duties:
   A.   Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Administrative Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide only such exceptions as the
Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this
chapter.
   C.   Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to the special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms
of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustments unless and
until:
      (1)   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this chapter;
         c.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant.
         d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of
neighboring lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
      (2)   Notice of public hearing shall be given to immediately adjacent
property owners and to those required by law.
      (3)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or
by agent or attorney.
      (4)   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements
of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and
that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
      (6)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
      (7)   The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a fee to be
determined by resolution of City Council.
   D.   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter.
Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and punishable under Section
165.31 of this chapter.
12.   Decisions Of the Board Of Adjustment. In exercising the above mentioned
powers, the Board of Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity
with the terms of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify, order requirements, decision, or determination as ought to be made and
to that end shall have powers of the Administrative Officer from whom the
appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Administrative Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to affect any
variation in application of this chapter.
13.   Appeals From the Board Of Adjustment Any person or persons, or any board,
taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the community aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek review of such decision of the
Board of Adjustment by a court of record in the manner provided by the laws of
the State of Iowa and particularly by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
165.33   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
This chapter and the Official Zoning District Map created by said chapter may
be amended from time to time. However, no amendment shall become effective
unless it shall have been proposed by, or shall have been first submitted to,
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have 45 days in which to submit
its report to the City Council. If the Commission fails to submit a report
within the 45-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed
amendment.
2.   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before adoption of any
proposed amendment to the ordinance codified in this chapter. A notice of such
public hearing shall be published not less than seven days prior to the date
established for such hearing along with notification of the owners of all
property within 200 feet of the property for which the change is requested. In
no case shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting following the published notice. Such notice
shall include the time and place for the public hearing.
3.   In case the Planning and Zoning Commission does not approve the change, or
in a case of a protest filed with the City Council against a change in district
boundaries signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the
lots included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent thereto
and within 200 feet of the boundaries thereof, such amendment shall not be
passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the
City Council.
4.   Application For Change in Zoning District Boundaries.
   A.   Any person may submit to the Council, an application requesting a
change in the zoning district boundaries as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
Each application shall be filed with the Administrative Officer accompanied by
a fee as determined by resolution by the City Council and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The legal description and local address of the property.
      (2)   The present zoning classification and the zoning classification
requested for the property.
      (3)   The existing use and proposed use of the property.
      (4)   The names and addresses of the owners of all property within 200
feet of the property for which the change is requested.
      (5)   A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present
zoning classification is no longer appropriate.
      (6)   A plat showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions and use
of the applicant’s property and all property within 200 feet thereof, including
streets, alleys, railroads, and other physical features.
   B.   All fees shall be deposited to the General Revenue Fund of the City.
Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the
fee to the applicant.
   C.   Upon receipt of the application by the Administrative Officer a copy
shall be forwarded immediately to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study
and recommendation. The Commission shall, prior to making a recommendation,
determine the following:
      (1)   Whether or not the current district classification of the property
to be rezoned is valid.
      (2)   Whether there is a need for additional land zoned for the purpose
requested.
      (3)   Whether the proposed change is consistent with the current land use
plan, considering such factors as:
         a.   Whether the rezoning would result in a population density or
development which would in turn cause demand for services and utilities in
excess of the capacity planned for the area;
         b.   Whether the rezoning would result in the generating of traffic in
excess of the capacity of existing or planned streets in the vicinity.
         c.   Whether there is an intent on the part of the applicant to
develop the property to be rezoned diligently and within a reasonable time.
5.   The Commission shall report its determinations and recommendations to the
Council within 45 days from receipt of the application, except that when no
report is issued within that time, the application will be deemed approved by
the Commission. The Council shall then hold a public hearing as provided in
Subsection 2 of this section.
165.34 MIXED USE OVERLAY ZONE
The intent of the Mixed Use Overlay Zone (MUO) is intended to allow greater
flexibility of development alternatives, especially attractive higher density
residential development and live-work buildings, in appropriate areas of the
City. More specifically, the intent of the Mixed Use Overlay Zone is to
accomplish the following objectives:
1.   To encourage mixed use projects that combine residential with
nonresidential uses in the same building or building site area as a means to
create an active street life and enhance the vitality of businesses;
2.   To provide a meaningful blend of residential and nonresidential uses that
enhances and builds upon the City’s commercial base;
3.   To provide additional housing options for people, including but not
limited to, young professionals and older people, who want to live near their
workplaces and/or near retail and other non-residential uses;
4.   To encourage consolidation of small parcels into viable, block-size mixed
use development in designated areas;
5.   To ensure on-site compatibility of residential and non-residential uses;
and
6.   To ensure compatibility of mixed use projects with surrounding uses and
development patterns.
7.   Superimposed Nature of Mixed Use Overlay Zone. The Mixed-Use Overlay Zone
shall be in nature of an overlay zone. Land classified in the Mixed Use Overlay
Zone shall only be classified in the C-2, Highway Commercial Zone. Property so
classified shall be identified on the zoning map by both the underlying zone
and the Mixed Use Overlay Zone. The regulations set forth in this chapter of
the Mixed Use Overlay Zone shall be in addition to those regulations set forth
in the underlying zone. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of
the Mixed Use Overlay Zone and the provisions of the underlying zone, the
provisions of the Mixed Use Overlay Zone shall prevail when a mixed use project
is being developed. If the Mixed Use Overlay Zone is silent in relation to any
development standard, the development standard identified in the underlying
zone shall prevail.
8.   Special Focus Area. With application of the Mixed Use Overlay Zone, the
City seeks to take advantage of development opportunities in key areas of the
City, each of which faces unique opportunities and constraints. A description
of the desired purpose of these areas is described in this section to provide
guidance for those seeking to construct mixed use development in such areas.
   A.   Albany Place SE Area.
That part of the W ½ SW ½ of Section 4, Township 94 North, Range 44 West of the
5th P.M., in the Incorporated City of Orange City, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows: Beginning at a point 1032.9 feet North and 250 feet East
of the Southwest corner of said SW 1/4; Thence East 238 feet; thence North 18°
10’ West, 378 feet; thence North 19° 37’ West, 134 feet; thence North 22° 24’
West, 300 feet; thence North 49° 57’ West, 50 feet; thence North 75° 24’ West,
178.3 feet to a point on the Section line; thence South 539.8 feet; thence East
250 feet; thence South 300 feet to the point of beginning, subject to public
highway.
(Paragraph A - Ord. 839 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
9.   Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the (MUO)
Mixed Use Zone:
   A.   All mixed use development in accordance with the provisions of this
section requires site plan review pursuant to the standards of this title. Site
plans shall be subject to Planning and Zoning Commission review and approval.
   B.   Property may be developed solely for residential uses or solely for
uses permitted or conditionally permitted in accordance with the provisions of
the underlying zoning district.
      (1)   If developed in accordance with the provisions of the underlying
zoning district, site plan review shall not be required for such development
unless required by another provision of this title.
      (2)   If developed solely for residential purposes, development shall be
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for residential development
and site plan review shall be required.
   C.   If property is developed with a mix of residential and nonresidential
uses within the same project area in accordance with the provisions of this
section:
      (1)   Residential:
         a.   Single-family dwellings, duplex’s;
         b.   Multi-family dwellings containing three or more dwellings;
         c.   Townhouses and condominiums containing three or more dwellings.
      (2)   Commercial:
         a.   Food sales and service;
         b.   Retail sales and service;
         c.   Professional, administrative, and business uses;
         d.   Recreational facilities.
10.   Special Exception Uses. The following uses and structures may be
permitted in the (MUO) zone subject to review and approval from the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
   A.   Bars and nightclubs;
   B.   Public assembly:
      (1)   Lodges and meeting halls,
      (2)   Theaters (cinema and otherwise).
11.   Uses Prohibited. All uses not listed are prohibited, unless determined to
be similar pursuant to this chapter.
12.   Accessory Uses. Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the
permitted uses and structures are permitted in accordance with Chapter 165 (
165.25(C)) of this ordinance.
   A.   Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other recreational
facilities in conjunction with a residence.
   B.   Temporary building(s) or structure(s) incidental to construction work
may exist in accordance with Chapter 165 (
165.25(3)) of this ordinance.
   C.   Signs permitted in accordance with Chapter 165 (
165.25) of this ordinance.
   D.   Parking as provided for in Chapter
165.27 of this ordinance.
13.   Height and Lot Requirements. The height and minimum lot requirements
shall be as follows:
 
             Lot Area  Lot Width Front  Side Yard Rear Yard Max     Max Lot
             (sq. ft.) (feet)    Yard   (feet)    (feet)    Height  Coverage
                                 (feet)                     (feet)  (%)
Multi-Family 7,500     *         30     25        *         35      *
Townhouse,   2.500 per *         30     25        25        35
Condominiums unit**
Permitted    6,500     *         30     *         *         35      *
Uses
Accessory                        *      *         *         20      *
Buildings
* Lot and yard requirements are dependent upon the designated district usage
and may vary depending upon areas being conserved or special amenities being
used or established and will be reviewed upon submittal of the MU District.
** Minimum lot size is 7.500 square feet.
14.   Supplemental Requirements. The Planning and Zoning Commission, in its
minutes, shall set forth its reasons for recommendation of approval or denial
of the application for a (MUO) Zone approval, along with specific evidence and
facts showing that the proposal meets or does not meet the following
conditions.
   A.   Said (MUO) Zone shall be allowed only in the C-2, Highway Commercial
Zoning.
   B.   Said (MUO) Zone shall be in general conformity with the provisions of
the Orange City Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
   C.   Said (MUO) Zone shall not have a substantially adverse effect on the
development of the neighboring area.
   D.   The minimum size allowed for a (MUO) Zone by type of use shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Residential – Commercial (combination), four (4) acres.
   E.   Height and yard requirements shall be reflected on the development plan
and shall promote an efficient and creative use of land.
   F.   Use limitations in a (MUO) Zone no building, structure, land, or
premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected, constructed, or
altered, except for any use permitted in this district. All uses must be
approved as shown on the development plan as specified in this district.
   G.   Standards and Conditions for Development.
      (1)   A development proposed for land classified as a (MUO) Zone shall be
consistent with the following general standards for use of land, and the use,
type, and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open space,
public facilities, and the development plan shall, where applicable, reflect
compliance.
      (2)   The applicant shall satisfy the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council that there is the ability to carry out the proposed plan,
including financial assurances and the phasing of the project, and shall
prepare and submit a schedule of construction, if necessary. The proposed
construction shall begin within a period of 12 months following the approval of
the final application by the City Council. A minimum of 50% of the total
planned construction shown on the final plan shall be completed within a period
of five (5) years following such approval or the approval shall expire. If the
approval expires under this section, the applicant shall show good cause to the
Planning and Zoning Commission to extend the plan approved.
      (3)   The developer shall provide and record plats, easements, and
covenants.
      (4)   The site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to
carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development.
The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be
adequate to serve the residents or occupants of the proposed development.
      (5)   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
the parking and loading regulations of the City of Orange City.
      (6)   All residential and commercial buildings shall be set back not less
than 25 feet from the perimeter of the land zoned (MUO) Zone. Additional
setback from a heavily traveled thoroughfare may be required, when found
reasonable by the Planning and Zoning Commission for protection of health,
safety, and general welfare.
      (7)   The (MUO) Zone shall include such provisions for the ownership and
maintenance of the common areas as are reasonably necessary to ensure its
continuity, care, conservation, and maintenance, and to ensure that remedial
measures will be available to the City Council if the common open space is
permitted to deteriorate or is not maintained in a condition consistent with
the best interests of the (MUO) Zone or of the entire community.
      (8)   Common areas as defined under this zoning district shall mean land
area of the site not covered by buildings, parking, structures. Common areas
shall include open space that is accessible and available to all owners or
residents in common pursuant to an owner’s association.
15.   Application for Approval of Mixed Use Zone. An application for a (MUO)
Zone shall be handled in the manner prescribed for amending this ordinance. The
same requirements for notice, advertisement of public hearing, protest, and
adoption shall be required as zoning changes.
   A.   The full legal description of the boundaries of the property or
properties to be included in the (MUO) Zone.
   B.   A vicinity map showing the general arrangement of streets within an
area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the proposed (MUO) Zone.
   C.   When a (MUO) Zone includes provisions for common space and/or
recreational facilities, a statement describing how much such open space and/or
facility be owned and maintained when not under the ownership of a governmental
entity. The controlling entity shall provide the City of Orange City with
copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of such entity.
   D.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet within 45 days of an
application being filed. Plans shall be filed with the City at least four (4)
weeks prior to a scheduled Planning and Zoning meeting. After the application
for a (MUO) Zone is filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a
public hearing on said district after giving required notice for hearings and
amendments. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend disapproval,
approval, or approval with amendments, conditions or restrictions.
16.   Final Approval. The City Council with recommendation from the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall or shall not approve the Mixed Use Overlay Zone.
17.   Amendments. The (MUO) District may be amended by 51% of the owners of the
property within the (MUO) Zone.
18.   Zoning Permits. Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of Section
165.30 of this chapter.
(Section 165.34 - Ord. 836 - Oct. 22 Supp.)
 
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
 
166.01 Title            166.07 Preliminary Plan
166.02 Purpose          166.08 Final Plat Requirements
166.03 Definitions      166.09 Minimum Improvements Required
166.04 Jurisdiction     166.10 Variations and Exceptions
166.05 Procedure        166.11 Violation and Penalty
166.06 Design Standards 166.12 Changes and Amendments
 
166.01   TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, referred to, and cited as “The Land Subdivision
Regulations of the City of Orange City, Iowa. “
166.02   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the community and these regulations are designed to lessen
congestion in the streets and highways; to further the orderly layout and use
of land; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provision for
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, and other public
requirements; and to facilitate the further subdivision of larger tracts into
smaller parcels of land. These regulations are made with reasonable
consideration, among other things, of the character of the City, with a view of
conserving the value of the buildings placed upon land, providing the best
possible environment for human habitation, and for encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City as it relates to the limit of
service existing municipal capital improvement commitments, either planned or
existing for the City and the unincorporated area of Sioux County within the
extra territorial plat jurisdiction area.
166.03   DEFINITIONS.
For this purpose, certain words and terms are herewith defined.
1.   “Administrative Officer” means the person officially designated by the
City Council as the officer responsible for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
2.   “Alley-service” means a service roadway providing a secondary means of
public access to the abutting property intended only for the services access of
utilities and not to be used for general traffic circulation.
3.   “Alley-vehicular” means a public or private way permanently reserved as a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.
4.   “Building line” means a line on a plat between which line and a property
line no structure, including any projection above the juncture of the ground
and building may be erected.
5.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
6.   “Culs-de-sac” means minor streets with only one outlet and culminated by a
circular or looped connection.
7.   “Easement” means a grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose or purposes, of a strip or parcel of land to the general public, a
corporation, or persons.
8.   “Extraterritorial plat approval jurisdiction” means the unincorporated
area within one mile of the corporate limits of the City.
9.   “Improvements” means the furnishing of all materials, equipment, work, and
services, including plans and engineering services, staking, and supervision
necessary to construct all the improvements required in Sections
166.04 and
166.05 of this chapter or any other construction that may be provided by the
subdivider. All of such materials, equipment, and services shall be provided at
the subdivider’s cost and expense, although he may enter into a contract with
individuals and firms to construct or complete such improvements.
10.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
for transfer of ownership or for building development.
11.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City in an amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required
by this regulation in the final plat, said cost being estimated by the
consulting City Engineer or Planning and Zoning Commission, and said surety
bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the City that the
said improvements will be constructed in accordance with this regulation.
12.   “Plan” means a map or drawing which shows the general arrangement of the
scheme or design for the subdivision of land, dedication of streets, other
rights-of-way or easements which shall contain general dimensioning and not
including detailed accurate lot dimensions curvatures and other engineering
data.
13.   “Right-of-way” means the width between property lines of a road, street,
parkway, alley, pedestrian walkway, or other public system.
14.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular
traffic, and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
15.   “Street” means all property dedicated or intended for public or private
use for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefore, and
whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise
designated for the movement of vehicles.
   A.   “Arterial streets and highways” means those streets and highways which
are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
   B.   “Collector streets” means those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
   C.   “Minor streets” means streets not designated as arterial or collector
street in major thoroughfare plan for the City.
16.   “Subdivider” means any person, individual, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other group of combination
acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision as defined herein.
17.   “Subdivision” means the division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or
as contiguous units of the last preceding tax roll into three or more parts any
one of which is less than five acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that:
   A.   The division or partition of land into parcels of more than five acres,
not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange,
does not create additional building sites shall be exempted; or
   B.   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any
street or streets, except private streets serving industrial structures; or
   C.   The division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by
owners, occupants, or lease holders or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm, drainage, or other public
facilities.
166.04   JURISDICTION.
It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, agent, or person having
control of any land within the City and the extraterritorial plat jurisdiction
area to create a subdivision unless by a plat in accordance with the
regulations contained herein. Such plat shall first be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or disapproval. After report and
recommendation of the Commission are made and filed, such plats shall be
submitted to the City Council for its approval or disapproval. No plat shall be
recorded and no lots shall be sold from such plat unless and until approved as
herein provided and all public lands and rights dedicated. The design and
layout of all subdivisions shall conform with the requirements of Section
166.06 hereof. The subdivider shall submit a preliminary and final plan in
accordance with the specification of this chapter.
SUBDIVIDER PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SUBDIVIDER                              PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
STEP (1) Gathers information and data
on existing conditions; studies site
suitability and development
opportunities; discusses financing,
planning and marketing with those
interested; with his land planner,
develops a preliminary sketch form
which is submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for advice and
assistance.
                                        STEP (2) Commission reviews preliminary
                                        plan and program as they relate to the
                                        community master plan, design
                                        standards, improvement requirements,
                                        informs and discusses with subdivider
                                        the results of review .
STEP (3) Arrives at preliminary
conclusions; if he decides to continue,
reaches tentative agreements or
understandings with those associated
with him, and others concerned such as
the lender and the F.H.A.; prepares a
preliminary plan for submission with
his application for approval.
                                        STEP (4) Reviews application and
                                        preliminary plan for conditional
                                        approval to determine conformity to
                                        subdivision standards. Grants
                                        conditional approval, subject to
                                        conditions agreed upon, or disapproves.
STEP (5) Prepares working drawings for
required minimum improvements and gets
approval of Administrative Officer.
STEP (6) Prepares final plat and
submits it, with other required
material and documents, with
application for approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
                                        STEP (7) Reviews application and grants
                                        approval of final plat, or informs
                                        subdivider what is lacking to obtain
                                        approval for recording.
STEP (8) CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL, PENDING PERFORMANCE BOND
STEP (9) Records the approved final
plat and documents.
STEP (10) Posts evidence of recording
certified check or performance bond and
receives certified approval from City
Clerk.
STEP (11) Proceeds with his development
plans and improvements and thereafter
his sales of lots and houses.
 
166.05   PROCEDURE.
The design and layout of all subdivisions shall conform with the requirements
of this chapter. The subdivider shall make improvements and shall submit
preliminary and final plats, all in accordance herewith.
1.   Consultation with Officials and Agencies. Before the subdivision plan is
prepared, the subdivider shall consult with:
   A.   The Planning and Zoning Commission to become thoroughly familiar with
all the subdivision requirements and with all applicable zoning regulations and
proposals of the Comprehensive Plan of the City;
   B.   The Planning and Zoning Commission and Public Works Director regarding
roads and drainage or other construction, and the availability of sanitary
sewers and water lines; and
   C.   The State Department of Health regarding all sanitation including wells
and septic tanks when water and sanitary sewer are not available.
2.   Pre-application Procedures. Previous to the filing of an application for
conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to
the Planning and Zoning Commission plans and data as specified in Section
166.07. This step does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat
with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.   Within 30 days, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall inform the
subdivider that the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do not
meet the objectives of these regulations. When the Commission finds the plans
and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations it shall express its
reasons therefore.
4.   Preliminary Plan.
   A.   The subdivider shall first prepare and file with the Commission four
copies of a preliminary plan conforming to the requirements set forth in this
chapter. The Commission shall forthwith refer two copies to the Public Works
Director and Administrative Officer. Before any preliminary plats are
considered, annexation within the City limits must occur.
   B.   Hearing. A hearing on the proposal will be held before the Commission
at its first meeting following the filing. No hearing shall be held by the
Commission until notice thereof, which shall include the time and place, shall
be given to interested parties by the City Attorney in behalf of the Commission
by publication of notice of said hearing in a newspaper having general
circulation in the City for at least one insertion a week prior to the date of
said hearing and by mailing a notice to the person or persons who filed the
preliminary plans to the address set forth in the filing papers.
   C.   The Administrative Officer and Public Works Director shall carefully
examine said plan as to its compliance with the laws and regulations of the
City, the existing street system, and good engineering practices, and shall,
within 15 days, submit findings in duplicate to the Commission together with
one copy of the plan received.
   D.   The Commission shall, upon receiving the reports, as soon as possible,
but not more than 30 days thereafter, consider said report and pass upon the
plan. It shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of
approval, modification, or disapproval. In the case of modification or
disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefore. The Commission shall
forthwith return one copy of the approved preliminary plan to the subdivider.
   E.   The approval of the preliminary plan by the Commission is revocable and
does not constitute final approval or acceptance of the subdivision by the City
Council or authorization to proceed on construction of improvements within the
subdivision but shall constitute approval of layout and general engineering
proposals and plans.
5.   Final Plat.
   A.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Commission, the subdivider
may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and detailed construction
drawings and specifications for the improvements required under this
regulation.
   B.   Before submitting the final plat to the Commission for approval, the
subdivider shall furnish all plans and information as listed in Sections
166.08 (Final Plat) and
166.09 (Minimum Improvements Required) and obtain the approval of the
Administrative Officer and Public Works Director which shall be endorsed,
thereon.
   C.   For final plat approval, the subdivider shall submit to the Commission:
      (1)   Nine copies of the final plat.
      (2)   A performance bond in the amount approved by the Administrative
Officer.
      (3)   One copy of the certified approved plans, profiles, cross sections,
and specifications .
      (4)   A certificate from the Administrative Officer that the final plat
is substantially in accord with the preliminary plan as approved by the
Commission.
      (5)   Where any municipal improvement system is planned for larger
installations than what the subdivider needs for a particular subdivision, the
Administrative Officer and Public Works Director, shall submit estimates of
costs or also suggested negotiable financing arrangement to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, who shall in turn consider such negotiations and submit
their recommendations to the City Council.
   D.   When the final plat has been passed upon by the Commission, six copies
of the final plat and performance bond shall forthwith be transmitted to the
City Council, together with a certificate showing the action of the Commission.
   E.   When the final plat has been approved by the City Council, the
performance bond accepted, and all six copies duly certified, two copies shall
be delivered to the Commission; two copies to the Administrative Officer and
one to the City Clerk for their respective files, and one to the subdivider for
filing with the County Recorder. If said plat is disapproved by the City
Council, such disapproval shall point out, in writing, wherein said proposed
plat is objectionable.
6.   Recording.
   A.   The passage of the resolution accepting the plat shall constitute final
approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plat, but the owner
shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
Sioux County, Iowa, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording in
the office of the City Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being
in full force and effect.
   B.   Upon receipt of the duly certified copies of the final plat by the
Commission, the Recording Secretary of the Commission will transmit copies of
the plat, as determined by the Administrative Officer, to the subdivider, City
Clerk, and Public Works Director or Administrative Officer.
7.   Final Approval in Effect.
   A.   Receipt of the duly certified final plat and submission of a
performance bond or certified check by the subdivider shall constitute the
final act to enforce approval and is authorization that he may proceed with the
installation and construction of the required improvements .
   B.   The City Council will return the performance bond to the subdivider
upon certification by the Administrative Officer, of satisfactory completion of
the installation and construction of the required improvements by the City
Council. Prior to certification, the subdivider shall file with the
Administrative Officer plans, profiles, and cross sections of the required
improvements as they have been built, which drawing shall be clearly noted with
the words “AS-BUILT.”
166.06   SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.
1.   Streets. All new streets shall be of the hard-surface Portland concrete
type conforming to the standards and specifications approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, and shall further conform to the following regulations:
   A.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
   B.   Where such is now shown in the Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas, or
      (2)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Planning and Zoning Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.
   C.   The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall be not less than
the minimum width established herein or as otherwise determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission based on traffic engineering studies. The street and
alley arrangement shall not cause a hardship to adjacent property owners to
provide for access to adjacent property.
   D.   Where the parcel of land is subdivided into larger tracts than
ordinarily used for building lots, such parcel shall be divided so as to allow
for the opening and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets. Easements
providing for the future opening and extension of such streets or thoroughfares
may, at the discretion of the City Council, be made a requirement of the plat.
   E.   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   F.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require marginal access street,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation
along the real property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
   G.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-
way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   H.   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except
where their control is definitely placed in the City under conditions approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission .
   I.   Streets with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
   J.   A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
   K.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet for minor and
collector streets, and of such greater radii as the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall determine for special cases.
   L.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 10
degrees.
   M.   Property lines at street intersections shall be platted with a radius
of 10 feet or an acceptable chord length, or of a greater radius where the
Planning and Zoning Commission may deem it necessary.
   N.   Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the Planning and Zoning Commission
finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when
the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half-street is adjacent to a
tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within
such tract.
   O.   Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer
than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac, having
a minimum outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a street property
line diameter of at least 125 feet.
   P.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2.   Street Grades. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the
following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves:
 
STREET TYPE       PERCENT GRADE
Arterial or Major 5
Collector         7
Minor             10
Marginal Access   15
 
3.   Street Right-of-Way.
   A.   Street right-of-way widths for major streets will be shown on the Major
Streets Plan of the Comprehensive Plan or unless otherwise noted, shall be a
continuation of the adjoining existing arterial street.
   B.   Street right-of-way widths for minor street shall be 75 feet for
streets designed for on-street parking and a minimal 35 feet shall be dedicated
whenever subdivided property adjoins a half street as designated by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The remainder of the street shall be dedicated.
No homes shall be constructed on half streets.
4.   Alleys. Vehicular alleys may not be provided in a residential block.
Service alleys may be provided in a residential block. Alleys are required in
the rear of all business lots unless other adequate provisions are made for
service and deliveries, and shall be at least 20 feet wide.
5.   Blocks. No block shall be longer than 1,200 feet. Where blocks are over
750 feet in length, a cross walk with a right-of-way of at least 10 feet in
width may be required near the center of the block.
6.   Lots.
   A.   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to topography and
to the character of surrounding development.
   B.   However, no residential lot shall be less than 70 feet in width at the
building line, or less than 6,500 square feet in area.
   C.   In any subdivision where neither a public sewer nor a public water
supply is available, no lot shall have an area of less than 20,000 square feet
or a width of less than 125 feet measured at the building line. Where a public
water supply is available but individual sewage disposal devices are used, no
lot shall have an area of less than 12,000 square feet or a width of less than
100 feet.
   D.   Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the
establishment of front building lines on both adjoining streets.
   E.   In all lots so far as possible, the side lines shall be at right angles
to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, except where a
variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot layout.
   F.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations
in relation to topography, sound site planning, and proper land use.
7.   Public Sites and Open Spaces. Where an area being subdivided includes
lands, proposed to be used for parks or schools under the duly adopted
Comprehensive Plan of the City, the subdivider shall indicate the location of
such areas on the subdivision plat. Park sites within the City limits are to be
purchased within two years of the recording date of the subdivision by the City
at the appraised raw land value prior to subdivision plus one-half of the cost
of grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any streets that are
contiguous to the site. School sites are to be reserved for four years, giving
the public school system the right to purchase the land at the appraised raw
land value prior to subdivision, plus one-half the cost of grading and paving,
including curbs, of any streets contiguous to the site. Should the park or
school sites not be purchased within the time limit specified above, the
subdivider may then sell them for an alternate purpose as shown on the approved
subdivision plat.
8.   Character of Development. The Commission and City Council may require that
certain minimum regulations regarding type and character of development be
incorporated in the owner’ s declaration of plat. Such regulations shall be
intended to protect the character and development of the platted subdivision as
well as that of the surrounding development.
9.   Easements Along Streams and Watercourses. Wherever any stream or surface
watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider
shall, at his own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of
surface water and shall also provide and dedicate to the City an easement along
said streams and watercourses, meeting the approval of the Commission.
10.   Easements for Public Utilities. Public rights-of-way dedicated for
alleys, parks, and service roads, may be used for public utilities. All
easements to be granted for utilities shall be constructed as either pedestrian
walkways, park-ways, plazas, open spaces, or playgrounds as may be deemed
appropriate by the Commission. All easements and rights-of-way for parks or
service roads or alleys shall be not less than eight feet and granted by each
adjoining owner. Larger dimensions may be required where it is necessary for
extension of main sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer are
located in the same easement. No buildings or structures will be permitted on
any part of an easement without approval of the Commission and authorization of
the City Council.
11.   Buffer Zones Between Subdivisions. Where an area being subdivided borders
an existing subdivision and the proposed subdivision will have a different
zoning designation than the existing subdivision, a buffer zone between the two
districts may be required, especially where the existing subdivision is zoned
residential. The buffer zone shall be continuous in length along the boundary
of the proposed subdivision in the area where different adjoining designations
occur. The buffer zone shall be of adequate width to allow the placement of
fences, trees, landscaping, green spaces, etc. to provide an aesthetically
pleasing separation between the different districts. The area designated as the
buffer zone may contain required easements for utilities, etc., but the width
of the buffer zone shall be in addition to any required yard setbacks as set
forth in this chapter. Where a public street right-of-way separates the
proposed and existing subdivisions, such public street right-of-way may be
considered an adequate buffer zone.
166.07   PRELIMINARY PLAN.
1.   Pre-Application Plans and Data.
   A.   General subdivision information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and proposed developments as necessary to supplement the
drawings required below. This information may include data on existing
covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number
of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
playground, park areas, and other public areas, proposed protective covenants
and proposed utilities and street improvements.
   B.   Location map shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
existing community facilities which serve or influence it. Include development
name and location; main tropic arteries; public transportation lines; shopping
centers; elementary and high schools; parks and playgrounds; principal places
of employment; other community features such as railroad stations, airports,
hospitals, and churches; title, scale; north arrow; and date.
   C.   Sketch plan on topographic survey shall show in simple sketch form the
proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch made directly on a
print of the topographic survey. In any event, the sketch plan shall include
either the existing topographic data listed in Subsection 2 below or such of
these data as the Commission determines is necessary for its consideration of
the proposed sketch plan.
2.   Preliminary Plan Specifications. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a
scale of not more than 100 feet or 200 feet to the inch and shall show the
following graphic and descriptive items:
   A.   Title.
      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision. The names shall not duplicate or
too closely approximate, phonetically or otherwise, the name of any other
subdivision or street in the City.
      (2)   Existing adjoining subdivision names.
      (3)   Names and addresses of developer and planner who made the
preliminary plan.
      (4)   North point, scale, and date.
   B.   Existing Data.
      (1)   Location map.
      (2)   Boundaries of the proposed subdivision indicated by a heavy solid
line, and the approximate acreage-comprised therein. Streets, buildings, water
courses, tree masses, and other existing features within the area to be
subdivided and similar information regarding existing conditions of land
immediately adjacent thereto.
      (3)   Location, widths, and names of all existing or platted streets
indicated as to dedicated, undedicated, constructed, or unimproved, official
thoroughfares, or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way,
easements, parks, and other public open spaces, permanent buildings, section
and corporation lines, within or adjacent to the tract.
      (4)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other underground items
within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes, grades, and
locations indicated.
      (5)   Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of
unsubdivided land (shown by dashed lines).
      (6)   Contours or ground elevations on a 100 foot grid referred to the
City’s benchmark with intervals sufficient to determine the character and
topography of the land to be subdivided, but in no case shall the intervals be
more than five feet.
   C.   Proposed Items Pertaining to the Plan.
      (1)   Preliminary layout of streets, including names and widths of
alleys, cross-walkways, and easements.
      (2)   Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of lots.
      (3)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use, and the conditions of such dedication or reservation.
      (4)   A brief written description of the improvements to be installed in
the subdivision.
      (5)   Indication as to proposed use of lots and zoning.
      (6)   An outline of any protective covenants and restrictions that are to
be placed upon the lots.
      (7)   Preliminary layout and written and signed statements explaining how
and when the subdivider proposes to provide and install all required sewers or
other disposal of sanitary wastes, pavement, sidewalks, and drainage
structures.
      (8)   Preliminary layout and written and signed statements of the
appropriate officials of the availability of gas, electricity, and water to the
proposed subdivision.
166.08   FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch to 100
feet or less in ink on tracing cloth and shall be prepared by a registered
surveyor. The plat shall show:
1.   The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
2.   The name or names of the owners, subdividers, and surveyor.
3.   The date, scale, and north point, and a key map showing the general
location of the proposed subdivision.
4.   The legal description of the area being platted.
5.   Accurate distances and bearings of all boundary lines of the subdivision
including all sections, U. S. Survey, and Congressional Township lines.
6.   Center lines of all proposed and adjoining streets with their right-of-way
width and names.
7.   Lines of all lots with a simple method of numbering to identify all lots
and blocks.
8.   All building lines and all easements provided for public service, together
with their dimensions and any limitations of the easements.
9.   Any and all dimensions necessary for accurate location of the boundaries
of the site to be developed and of all streets, lots, easements, and dedicated
areas. Those dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
10.   All radii, arcs, points of tangency, central angles, and lengths of
curves.
11.   Certification by a registered land surveyor that the final plat, as
shown, is a correct representation of the survey as made.
12.   All survey monuments and benchmarks, together with their description.
13.   Private restrictive covenants and their period of existence.
14.   The accurate outline, dimensions, and purposes of all property which is
offered for dedication or is to be reserved for acquisition for public use, or
is to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in
the subdivision.
15.   Every plat shall be accompanied by a complete abstract of title and an
opinion from an attorney at law showing that the fee title is in the proprietor
and that the land platted is free from encumbrance, or is free from encumbrance
other than that secured by the bond provided for in Sections
166.04 and
166.05, and a certified statement from the County Treasurer in which the land
lies that it is free from taxes, and from the Clerk of the District Court that
it is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics’, or other liens as
appears by the record in his office, and from the Recorder of the County that
the title in fee is in such proprietor and that it is free from encumbrance or
free from encumbrance other than that secured by the bond provided for in
Sections
166.04 and
166.05, as shown by the records of his office.
16.   Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrance hereunder and
the location thereof with reference to the land platted may be shown by drawing
on the plat.
166.09   MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
1.   Improvement Plans, Profiles, and Cross Sections. The sub divider shall
submit to the Administrative Officer the following plans, profiles, and cross
sections, drawn to a horizontal scale of one inch to 100 feet or less and a
vertical scale of one inch to 20 feet or less, and specifications for the
construction of the improvements for the subdivision as required in this
regulation. All elevations shall be referred to mean sea level.
   A.   The plan and profiles of each street with tentative grades and street
intersection elevations.
   B.   The cross sections of proposed streets showing the width of roadways,
present and proposed grade lines, and location and size of utility mains. The
cross sections shall be taken and platted at intervals of not more than 100
feet along the centerline unless otherwise required by the Administrative
Officer, and shall extend out to the sides to that point where the proposed
grade intersects the existing grade. In no case shall these cross sections be
extended less than the full width of the right-of-way.
   C.   The plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers and storm water sewers
with grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of the proposed water
distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire
hydrants.
   D.   Specifications for the required improvements. Standard specifications
approved by the Administrative Officer may be used.
2.   Improvements Required. The subdivider shall install and construct all
improvements required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision of the Administrative Officer and Public Works Director and to the
satisfaction of the City Council.
   A.   Street Improvements.
      (1)   All streets and public ways shall be graded to their full width,
including side slopes, and to the appropriate grade as shown in the improvement
plans or approved by the consulting City Engineer or Administrative Officer.
Where the streets serve lots having an area of less than 20,000 square feet, it
shall be surfaced to a width of not less than 31 feet with a gravel base of not
less than three inches of a good grade of pit run gravel which meets the
approval of the Street Commissioner. All of such construction shall be in
accordance with standards and specifications of the consulting City Engineer.
Concrete curbs shall be installed along each side of the pavement.
      (2)   Where lots are 20,000 square feet or more in area, minimum
pavements of 20 feet in width conforming to the above standards, but without
curbs and gutters, may be used, but usable shoulders with a slope of one-half
inch per foot shall be provided among any 20 foot pavement.
      (3)   If fly ash or cement is needed to firm up the subgrade beneath the
roadway, the City will pay up to $15.00 per square yard towards this cost of
the subdivider at the end of the project and the work is done to City
specifications. This reimbursement will be reviewed with the costs of the
project and with the need for such materials is determined by a third party
soil evaluation company, the City and Project Engineer prior to the start of
the project. The City will issue a determination of assistance for this portion
of the project prior to the start of the project.
      (4)   The City will pay 50 percent of the storm sewer infrastructure
costs for these improvements in the subdivision. This reimbursement will be
reviewed with the costs of the storm sewer portion of the project and with the
need of the design determined by the City and Project Engineer prior to the
start of the project. The City will issue a determination of assistance for
this portion of the project prior to the start of the project.
   B.   Pedestrian Walkways. Sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet and a
minimum thickness of four inches of Portland concrete cement may be installed;
provided, however, that where the property is platted in lots having an area of
at least 20,000 square feet and a width of at least 100 feet, the City Council
may waive these requirements. The sidewalks shall be constructed to the grade
approved by the City Council after receiving the report and recommendation of
the Administrative Officer.
   C.   Major Arterial Streets. All major arterial streets shall be six-inch or
eight-inch concrete as determined by the design load and approved by the
consulting City Engineer or the Administrative Officer. The width shall be as
shown on the Official Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Water Supply. Where a public water main is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall continue with such water main and provide a water connection
for each lot in accordance with standards, procedure, and supervision of the
Municipal Water Department. Main sizes shall be determined by the Public Works
Director. Water main connection shall be done to the instruction of the Public
Works Director to fit into any looping or extension plan. A share of the total
cost of water main extensions may be borne by the City. The exact amount borne
shall be determined by negotiation with the subdivider with decision of the
City Council as final. Fire hydrants shall be installed as specified by the
Municipal Utilities, and their use will be regulated by all ordinances
pertaining thereto. In subdivisions more than 300 feet from an existing main,
pending availability of a public water supply, wells or a private water supply
system shall be constructed to insure that an adequate supply of potable water
will be available to each lot.
   E.   Sanitary Sewers.
      (1)   Where existing sanitary sewers are within 200 feet of an existing
municipal sanitary sewer, the subdivider shall install sanitary sewerage in
accordance with plans approved by the consulting City Engineer.
      (2)   In other cases, where lots are less than 20,000 square feet and
where plans for installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the
subdivision have been prepared by the City or other agency, the subdivider may
be required to install sewers in conformity with such plans. In such cases,
until a connection can be made with the public sewer system, the use of a
primary sewage treatment plan will be permitted, provided such disposal
facilities are constructed in accordance with the requirement of the Iowa
Department of Health.
      (3)   In subdivisions where the lots are 20,000 square feet or more, a
minimum width of 100 feet, and are not served by a public supply of potable
water, the subdivider may install individual disposal devices for each lot at
the time improvements are erected thereon. If a lot is served by a public
supply of potable water, has an area of not less than 12,000 square feet and a
width of 80 feet or more, the subdivider also may install individual disposal
services. All such individual sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in
accordance with regulations and requirements of the Iowa Department of Health.
      (4)   The City will pay 50 percent of the sanitary sewer infrastructure
costs for these improvements in the subdivision. This reimbursement will be
reviewed with the costs of the project and with the need of the design for
sanitary sewer determined by the City and project engineer prior to the start
of the project. The City will issue a determination of assistance for this
portion of the project prior to the start of the project.
   F.   Storm Drainage. All necessary improvements, including storm sewers or
open drainage ditches, shall be made to provide for the adequate disposal of
storm water and to maintain any natural drainage course. All construction shall
be in accordance with plans approved by the consulting City Engineer or by
other officials having jurisdiction.
   G.   Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at block corners, point of curves,
change in direction along lot lines, and at each lot corner in accordance with
City specifications. Monuments shall be marked by three-fourths inch diameter
iron pins or one-half inch diameter rebar, at least 30 inches long.
166.10   VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is
surrounded by such development of unusual conditions that the strict
application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in
real difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may vary or modify such requirements so that the subdivider may
develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the
public welfare and interests of the City and surrounding areas are protected
and the general intent and spirit of these regulations preserved. Any
regulations or provisions of this chapter may be changed or amended from time
to time by the City Council, provided, however, that such changes or amendments
shall not become effective until after study and report by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice
of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general circulation at least
30 days prior to such hearing.
166.11   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the
recorder of Sioux County or shall be any validity until it has been approved in
the manner prescribed herein, and it shall be unlawful for the County Recorder
to record any part of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City
Planning and Zoning Commission until the plat has been approved as required
herein and such approval has been endorsed in writing on the plat. It shall be
unlawful for the owner, or the agent of an owner, to transfer or sell any land
by reference to or by other use of a plat or description unless such plat has
been approved as required herein. Whomever willfully violates any of the rules
and regulations prescribed herein, or fails to comply with any order issued
pursuant thereto, shall forfeit and pay not less than $10.00 nor more than
$1,000.00 civil penalty.
166.12   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
Any regulations or provisions of this chapter may be changed and amended from
time to time by the City Council, provided, however, that such changes or
amendments shall not become effective until after a study and report by the
City Planning and Zoning Commission and until after a public hearing has been
held, public notice of which shall have been given in a newspaper of general
circulation of at least 10 days prior to such hearing.
