CITY CODE
OF
OXFORD, IA
Code current through:
Ord. 2022-04, passed January 10, 2023
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Oxford, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2022-04, passed January 10, 2023. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2023-05
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE V, “PUBLIC ORDER,” CHAPTER 2, “PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS
AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS,” OF THE OXFORD MUNICIPAL CODE, TO INCREASE THE FEES
FOR LICENSES AND TO PROVIDE FOR PERMITS AND FEES FOR FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDORS
IN CONJUNCTION WITH RAGBRAI.
 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF OXFORD, IOWA:
 
SECTION 1.    That Title V, Chapter 2, “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants,” of the Oxford Municipal Code, be and the same is hereby amended by
repealing Chapter 2, “Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants,” and
enacting in lieu thereof a new Section to be codified the same to read as
follows:
 
CHAPTER 2
 
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
 
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS. For use in this Chapter the following terms are
defined:
 
   a)   “Peddler” shall mean any person or persons that carry goods or
merchandise who sells or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or
merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.
 
   b)   “Solicitors” shall mean any person who solicits or attempts to solicit
from house to house or upon the public street an order for goods, subscriptions
or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
 
   c)   “Transient Merchant” shall mean a person, firm, corporation which
engages in a temporary or itinerant merchandising business or in the course of
such business, hires, leases or occupies any building or structure whatsoever.
Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or
conduct of such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the
name of any local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, shall not exempt any
person, firm or corporation from being a transient merchant. The term transient
merchant does not apply to vendors providing or selling food, beverages or
other merchandise in Oxford in connection with the 2023 RAGBRAI event.
 
SECTION 2. LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in
the business of a transient merchant in this City without first obtaining a
license as herein provided shall be in violation of this Ordinance.
 
SECTION 3. EXEMPTIONS. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to
newspaper delivery persons, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Campfire, Future Farmers
of America, 4-H Club Members and students of the Clear Creek School District
conducting projects sponsored by their organization, or persons who offer for
sale products of their own raising at an established location.
 
SECTION 4. RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPT. Authorized
representatives of religious and charitable organizations desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature shall be exempt from the operation of this
Ordinance. A charitable organization shall be required to submit in writing to
the city clerk, the name and description of the activity being undertaken, the
names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the
period during which such activities are to be carried on and the number of
persons performing such activities. If the city clerk shall find that the
organization is a bonafide charitable organization a license shall be issued
free of charge.
 
SECTION 5. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed
with the city clerk for a license under this Ordinance. Such application shall
set forth the applicant’s name, permanent and local address, business address,
if any, and physical description. The application shall also set forth the
applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the
applicant’s business, the last three places where business was conducted and
the length of time sought to be covered by the license. A fee of $100.00 shall
be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the administrative
costs associated with the application approval.
 
SECTION 6. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. If the city clerk finds that the application is
truthful and in conformance with Section 5 of this Ordinance the clerk shall
issue the license upon payment of the license administrative fee and the
posting of the bond as required in Section 7 below.
 
SECTION 7. BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this Ordinance shall be
issued, the applicant shall post a bond of $5,000.00 with the city clerk. Such
bond shall be conditioned to indemnify and pay the City for any penalties or
costs occasioned by the enforcement of this Ordinance and shall not be retired
until after lapse of six months from the expiration of the license.
 
SECTION 8. DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each peddler or solicitor shall at all times
while doing business in the City keep the license in his or her possession.
Each transient merchant shall publicly display the license with the merchant’s
place of business.
 
SECTION 9. LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of
this Ordinance are not transferable in any situation and are personal to the
applicant.
 
SECTION 10. REBATES ON LICENSES. There shall be no rebates or refunds on the
license fees paid to the City.
 
SECTION 11. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The city council, after notice and hearing,
may revoke any license issued under this Ordinance when it has been determined
that the licensee is conducting business in violation of this Code or has made
fraudulent or incorrect statements in the obtaining of the license or has
conducted business in any unlawful manner.
 
SECTION 12. PENALTY. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a criminal
citation or municipal infraction citation.
 
ARTICLE II
 
RAGBRAI ORDINANCE
 
SECTION 1. FOOD VENDOR – PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, club, group, organization,
corporation or entity of any kind shall sell food to the public in the City of
Oxford, Iowa, during the 2023 RAGBRAI event, unless said person or entity shall
first obtain a Food Vendor Permit from the City during regular business hours
at the City Hall at 205 North Augusta Avenue, Oxford, Iowa. However, any person
or entity which shall be in possession of a valid permit issued by the State of
Iowa for the sale of food to be consumed on its premises as of July 4, 2023,
shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section, unless sales will be
made from a place other than an entity’s regular place of business. Any vendor
who is in business as previously stated may offer their usual products for sale
from a street or alley right-of-way which is contiguous to the lot or property
from which they normally offer such products for sale, provided that the street
or alley right-of-way has been approved for such sales by the city council.
 
SECTION 2. FOOD VENDOR FEES. The fee for a Food Vendor Permit shall be $500.00.
Businesses and vendors that have an existing brick and mortar business in
Oxford shall not be required to obtain a Food Vendor Permit. If, in the
judgment of city officials, after consultation with RAGBRAI committee members,
enough permits have been issued prior to July 15, 2023, to serve the public,
the City may decline to issue any additional permits. In any event no permits
shall be issued after July 15, 2023.
 
SECTION 3. VENDOR LOCATIONS. A food vendor that has been granted a Food Vendor
Permit shall locate its temporary sale facility at and only at the location
determined by Oxford city officials, as advised by the official RAGBRAI Food
Vendor Committee. Holders of Food Vendor Permits for sales from the temporary
facilities located on premises not owned or ordinarily leased by them may not
set up any part of their vending operation prior to 10:00 a.m. on the 27th day
of July, 2023. All such food vending locations and temporary facilities removed
by 8:00 p.m. on the 29th   day of July, 2023. Locations where possible will be
assigned in the order of date and time of the permit application.
 
SECTION 4. HEALTH REGULATIONS.    Any person or entity issued a Food Vendor
Permit pursuant to this Ordinance shall comply with the Iowa Department of
Health and Johnson County Department of Health rules and regulations pertaining
to the sale and dispensing of food for consumption at its premises which is the
location assigned by the City. A representative of each Food Vendor Permit
holder must attend a food safety class, if one is available, within five weeks
prior to the 2023 RAGBRAI event, regardless of vending location. No permits
will be issued to perspective vendors without proof of attendance at this
class.
 
SECTION 5. NON-FOOD VENDOR – PERMIT REQUIRED.    No person, club, group,
organization, corporation or entity of any kind shall sell merchandise to the
public in the City of Oxford, Iowa, during the 2023 RAGBRAI event, unless said
person or entity shall first obtain a non-food vendor permit from the City
during regular business hours at the city offices located at the City Hall, 205
North Augusta Avenue, Oxford, Iowa. However, any person or entity which shall
be in possession of a valid sales tax permit issued by the State of Iowa for
the sale of goods and services from its location in Oxford, Iowa, as of July 1,
2023, shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section, unless sales will
be made from a place other than the entity’s regular place of business. Any
merchandise vendor who is in the business as previously stated above, may offer
their usual products for sale from a street or alley right-of-way which is
contiguous to the lot or property from which they normally offer such products
for sale, provided that the street or alley right-of-way has been approved for
such sales by the city council.
 
SECTION 6. NON-FOOD VENDOR FEES. The fee for a Non-Food Vendor Permit shall be
$500.00. If, in the judgment of city officials, after consultation with RAGBRAI
committee members, enough permits have been issued prior to July 15, 2023, to
serve the public, the City may decline to issue any additional permits. In any
event no permits shall be issued after July 15, 2023.
 
SECTION 7. NON-FOOD VENDOR LOCATION. A non-food vendor that has been granted a
Non-Food Vendor Permit shall locate its temporary sale facility at and only at
the location determined by Oxford city officials, as advised by the official
RAGBRAI Non-Food Vendor Committee. Holders of Non-Food Vendor Permits for sales
from the temporary facilities located on premises not owned or ordinarily
leased by them may not set up any part of their vending operation prior to 10:
00 a.m. on the 27th day of July, 2023. All such food vending locations and
temporary facilities removed by 8:00 p.m. on the 29th day of July, 2023.
Locations where possible will be assigned in the order of date and time of the
permit application.
 
SECTION 8. GLASS CONTAINERS. To promote public safety during the 2023 RAGBRAI
events, all beverages sold in Oxford, Iowa, by any business, vendor permittee,
restaurant, service station, convenience store, grocery store or other
establishment, during the 2023 RAGBRAI event, shall be sold exclusive in non-
glass containers.
 
SECTION 9. NUISANCE. The erection of a temporary facility for the sale of food
or merchandise, or the sale of food or merchandise without a vendor’s permit as
required above, in violation of any of the provisions of the Ordinance shall be
deemed a nuisance. If a nuisance is determined to exist, an order to abate the
nuisance may be given by any authorized peace officer or public official acting
upon the authority of the City of Oxford, Iowa. Such an order shall be issued
to the owner or representatives of the owner who may be present at the location
of the nuisance. The owner or the owner’s representatives shall take immediate
action to abate the nuisance. If such action is not immediately taken, the city
official may take the necessary action to abate the nuisance, including but not
limited to dismantling of any sales facility and removal of all products and
equipment to the city offices located at City Hall. The confiscated products
and equipment will be returned to the person producing proof of ownership on
the next business day following the 2023 RAGBRAI event. Any person determined
to have created a nuisance in violation of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
simple misdemeanor and shall be subject to a criminal citation and/or a
municipal infraction.
 
SECTION 10. CERTAIN ORDINANCES SUSPENDED. During the period of the 2023 RAGBRAI
event from 12:00 p.m. on the 28th day of July, 2023 through 9:00 p.m. on the
28th day of July, 2023, provisions of the Oxford Municipal Code which may
otherwise prohibit the placing of such temporary facilities for the sale of
food, merchandise or other goods, which is permitted under this article, the
issuance of permits for peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, the use
of city parks and streets and similar Code provisions are hereby suspended to
the extent necessary to permit the 2023 RAGBRAI event to take place as
generally planned by the RAGBRAI Committee. All ordinance provisions suspended
by this Code Section shall resume and become effective again at 9:00 p.m. on
the 28th day of July, 2023.
 
SECTION 11. STREET CLOSINGS. During the period beginning at 6:00 a.m. on the
28th day of July, 2023 and ending at 10:00 p.m. on the 28th day of July, 2023,
and without prior council approval regarding the blocking of any streets, any
city official or person acting on behalf of the City may place barricades or
roadblocks on any City street, alley, or roadway to redirect vehicle traffic in
order to enhance the proper and safe flow of bicyclists, pedestrians and
vehicular traffic within the city limits of the City of Oxford, Iowa.
 
SECTION 12. REPEALER. All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict with
the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION 13. SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or
part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
 
SECTION 14. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in effect after its final
passage, approval and publication as required by law.
 
PASSED AND APPROVED this ______ day of ________________, 2023.
 
 
                  CITY OF OXFORD
 
 
                By:_________________________________________
                  Heather Johnson, Mayor
 
 
             ATTEST:________________________________________
                                               Adriane Sedlacek, City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE # 2025.01
AMENDING GARBAGE RATES
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF OXFORD, IOWA:
 
SECTION 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to change the rate for the
monthly residential garbage service.
 
SECTION 2. Amended. 4-3-5(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Oxford,
Iowa, is amended and the following adopted in lieu thereof:
 
1.   For each dwelling used for residential occupancy, and for each dwelling
unit up to and including four separate units: twenty dollars ($20.00) twenty-
three dollars per month.
 
SECTION 3. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
 
SECTION 4. Severability. If any section, provision or part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid, such adjudication shall
not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole, or any section, provision
or part thereof not adjudged unconstitutional or invalid.
 
SECTION 5. Effective Date. This ordinance shall be effective from and after its
final passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
 
First Reading Passed: 04-08-2025
Second Reading Passed:
Third Reading Passed:
 
      ________________________________
      Mayor
 
ATTEST:
 
____________________________________
City Clerk    
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2015-02
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF OXFORD, CITY CODE
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Oxford, IA., as
follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Oxford, IA., prepared by Sterling Codifiers, containing the
compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes
made to said ordinances, under the direction of the Governing Body of the City,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official Code and law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted
in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which shall be
maintained in the Office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and
available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly
open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the Governing
Body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official City Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
PASSED this 9th day of September, 2015.
APPROVED this 9th day of September, 2015.
/s/         
    Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/         
    City Clerk
Roll Call Vote:
AYES: Jiras, Weppler, Cooling, Ealy, Morlan
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OXFORD CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of Oxford. This code of ordinances
shall be known and cited as the OXFORD CITY CODE and is hereby published by
authority of the council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most
recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents 1 . (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 380.8.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2015 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2015 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the
city clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances; Exclusions
1-2-2: Court Proceedings
1-2-3: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Repeal; Exclusions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior to
the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in
this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
      1.   Ordinances promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of
the city's indebtedness.
      2.   Appropriation ordinances providing for the levy of taxes or
prescribing salaries for city officers.
      3.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
      4.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants, or accepting the beneficial interest in
any trust.
      5.   Ordinances establishing street grades, or naming or vacating
streets, alleys or other public places.
      6.   Improvement ordinances.
      7.   Zoning map ordinances.
      8.   Legal descriptions of urban revitalization areas and urban renewal
areas.
      9.   Franchise ordinances.
      10.   Ordinances relating to elections.
      11.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city.
      12.   All special ordinances.
   B.   Continuing Effect: All such ordinances, as listed in subsection A of
this section, shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if
fully set out herein. (2015 Code)
1-2-2: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2015 Code)
1-2-3: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code
or any part thereof or any portion adopted by reference therein is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof or
any portion adopted by reference therein. The city council hereby declares that
it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Rules Of Construction
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code, the following rules shall be observed, unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council or repugnant to the context of the provisions:
   A.   Tense And Numbers: Words used in the present or past tense include the
future as well as the present and past, the singular number includes the plural
and the plural number includes the singular.
   B.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   C.   Interpretation: All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring an
officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be
construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless
the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
   E.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Terms: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the context and the approved usage of the language; technical
words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed according to such meaning.
   G.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Oxford".
   H.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2015 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined otherwise in another
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
CITY: The city of Oxford, county of Johnson, state of Iowa.
CODE: The city code of the city of Oxford.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of Oxford, Iowa.
COUNTY: Johnson County, Iowa.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of Oxford.
IC: Iowa Code, as amended.
PERSON: Shall include and be applied to corporations, associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, municipalities and bodies politic and corporate
as well as to individuals.
STATE: The state of Iowa. (2015 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections of this code are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section or
subsection and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or
subsections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any section or subsection hereof,
nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections or subsections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanors: The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be
unlawful or a misdemeanor by this code, or the omission or failure to perform
any act or duty required by this code, unless another penalty is specified,
shall be punishable by a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) for a misdemeanor or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a serious
misdemeanor, or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days 1 .
   B.   Infractions: A municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable by a
civil penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
violation or if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. However,
notwithstanding Iowa Code section 364.3, a municipal infraction arising from
noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40
CFR section 403.8, by an industrial user may be punishable by a civil penalty
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation
exists 2 .
   C.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsections A
and B of this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that
established by state statute for the same offense. (2015 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. IC § 364.3.
2 2. IC § 364.22.
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or
such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   B.   One Recovery Only: In all cases where the same offense is made
punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues. (2015 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the city council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2015
Code)
CHAPTER 5
CITY CHARTER
SECTION:
1-5-1: Title
1-5-2: Purpose
1-5-3: Form Of Government
1-5-4: Powers And Duties
1-5-5: Mayor And City Council
1-5-6: Copies On File
1-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the CHARTER OF THE CITY OF OXFORD, IOWA. (Ord. 48,
11-9-1976)
1-5-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a charter embodying the form of
government existing on July 1, 1975. (Ord. 48, 11-9-1976)
1-5-3: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The form of government of the city is the mayor-council form of government.
(Ord. 48, 11-9-1976)
1-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city council and mayor and other city officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 48, 11-9-
1976)
1-5-5: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Number And Term Of Council: The council consists of five (5) council
members elected at large, for terms of four (4) years. (Ord. 48, 11-9-1976;
amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Term Of Mayor: The mayor is elected for a term of two (2) years. (Ord.
48, 11-9-1976)
1-5-6: COPIES ON FILE:
The city clerk shall keep an official copy of this charter on file with the
official records of the city clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
secretary of state of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the charter available at
the city clerk's office for public inspection. (Ord. 48, 11-9-1976)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Time Of Elections; Voting Places
1-6-2: Elective Officials; Nominating Procedure
1-6-3: Time Of Taking Office
1-6-4: Appointment Of Clerk And Other Officials
1-6-5: Qualifications; Oath; Insurance
1-6-6: Failure To Qualify
1-6-7: Vacancy In Office
1-6-8: Staggered Four Year Terms
1-6-9: Council; Powers And Duties
1-6-10: Mayor; Powers And Duties
1-6-11: Meetings
1-6-1: TIME OF ELECTIONS; VOTING PLACES:
Except as hereinafter provided, or by change of Iowa law, all regular municipal
elections shall be held on the Tuesday next, after the first Monday in
November, of odd numbered years. Voting places shall be fixed by the city
council and at least one voting place provided for each precinct, or ward, as
the case may be. The election shall be conducted in the manner provided by law
for general elections. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970)
1-6-2: ELECTIVE OFFICIALS; NOMINATING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Nominating Method: All candidates for elective municipal offices shall
be nominated under the provisions of Iowa Code chapter 45, as amended. (Ord.
66, 8-12-1981)
   B.   Nominations By Petition: Nominations for elective municipal offices of
the city may be made by filing a valid petition pursuant to the provisions of
Iowa Code section 376.4. (Ord. 66, 8-12-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Adding Name By Petition: The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot
by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the
same office.
   D.   Preparation Of Petition: Each petitioning voter shall add to his
signature, his residence address, and the date of signing. Before filing said
petition, there shall be endorsed thereon or attached thereto the affidavit of
at least one of the signers of said petition, which affidavit or affidavits
shall show:
      1.   The name and residence including street and number, if any, of said
nominee, and the office to which he is nominated.
      2.   That each of the signers are qualified voters of the state and
entitled to vote for such nominee for such office.
      3.   That each of the petitioners voluntarily signed said petition. Such
a petition when so verified shall be known as a nomination paper.
   E.   Filing; Presumption; Withdraws; Objections: The time and place of
filing nomination petitions, the presumption of the validity thereof, the right
of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdraw, and
the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the
eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the appropriate provisions
of state law relating to nominations by nonparty political organizations. (Ord.
66, 8-12-1981)
1-6-3: TIME OF TAKING OFFICE:
All officers elected at any regular municipal election shall take office on or
before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the second secular day of January
following their election. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970)
1-6-4: APPOINTMENT OF CLERK AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
At the first meeting of the new city council, the council shall appoint a city
clerk and such other officials as by law required. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970)
1-6-5: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; INSURANCE:
All officers shall qualify by taking and subscribing to an oath to support the
constitution of the United States and the state of Iowa, and the ordinances of
the city, and shall be insured as provided by law. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970; amd.
2015 Code)
1-6-6: FAILURE TO QUALIFY:
On the failure, refusal or neglect of any officer mentioned to subscribe to his
oath of office and file his bond, if bond be required of him, on or before the
first regular meeting of the city council which comes at least ten (10) days
after said person shall have been notified of his election to office, the
council shall declare said office vacant and proceed as in other cases of
vacancy. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970)
1-6-7: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
   A.   Elective Offices: In case of a vacancy in any elective offices caused
by resignation, death or otherwise, the city council may appoint any qualified
elector to fill such vacancy, and the council shall vote by ballot and the
person receiving the majority of the votes of the whole number of members shall
be declared elected to fill such vacancy.
   B.   Appointive Offices: In case of a vacancy in any appointive office, such
vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was
made. (Ord. 2, 4-16-1970)
1-6-8: STAGGERED FOUR YEAR TERMS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for staggered four
(4) year terms for council members of the city as provided in Iowa Code section
376.2.
   B.   Manner Of Staggering: At the first regular city election after the
adoption of this section, the terms of the council members shall be staggered
as follows:
      1.   The majority of the elective council members who receive the highest
number of votes are elected for four (4) year terms. The remainder are elected
for two (2) year terms.
      2.   In case of a tie, the mayor and clerk shall determine by lot which
council members are elected for four (4) year terms.
   C.   Four Year Terms: Council members elected at each election subsequent to
the first election following the adoption of this section will be elected for a
four (4) year term, and the number of council members elected at each election
will alternate between three (3) members and two (2) members. (Ord. 67, 7-8-
1982)
1-6-9: COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Legislative Powers: All legislative and other powers granted to cities
shall be exercised by the city council except those conferred upon some other
officer by law or ordinance. Neither council nor the members thereof shall
exercise any executive functions, unless expressly conferred upon it by law.
   B.   Control Of Finances And Property: The council shall have the management
and control of the finances and of the property, real and personal, belonging
to the city.
   C.   Conflict Of Interest: No member of the council shall be interested,
directly or indirectly, in any contract or job of work or material or the
profits thereof or services to be performed for the city except as provided by
law, and all restrictions concerning this matter will be in accordance with the
laws of the state.
   D.   General Powers; Transmit Documents To Successor In Office: The council
shall have all the powers and perform all the duties that may be provided by
the council and the ordinances of the city or laws of the state, and each
member shall transmit to his successor in office all books, papers, records,
documents and property belonging to the city, in his custody or appertaining to
his office. (Ord. 3, 4-16-1970)
1-6-10: MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Presiding Officer: The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city
council. (Ord. 4, 4-16-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Mayor Pro Tem To Preside: If at any meeting the mayor is not present,
the mayor pro tem shall preside. (Ord. 4, 4-16-1970)
   C.   Maintain Office; Custodian Of Seal: The mayor shall keep an office at
some convenient place in the city to be provided or designated as such by the
council. The mayor shall keep the corporate seal thereof in his charge, or in
the charge of whomever he may designate, and the seal may be attached to any
transcripts, orders or certificates which it may be necessary or proper to
authenticate. (Ord. 1, 4-16-1970; amd. Ord. 4, 4-16-1970; 2015 Code)
   D.   Execute Documents: The mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses and
permits granted or issued by the authority of the council, authenticate all
ordinances in the ordinance record book, and do such other acts as may require
his signature or certificate.
   E.   Signing Of Ordinances And Resolutions: The mayor shall sign every
ordinance or resolution passed by the council before the same shall be in
force, and if he refuses to sign any such ordinance or resolution, he shall
call a meeting of the council within fourteen (14) days thereafter, and return
same, with his reasons therefor. If he fails to return such ordinance or
resolution with his reasons, as herein required, such ordinance or resolution
shall become operative without such signature. Upon the return of any such
ordinance or resolution by the mayor to the council, it may pass the same over
his objection, upon a call of the yeas and nays, by not less than two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the council.
   F.   Appointment Of Officials; Sign Contracts: The mayor shall have the
power to appoint all members of boards and commissioners and such other
officers as he is authorized by law to appoint, with the approval of the city
council, and sign all contracts in behalf of the city.
   G.   Conflict Of Interest: The mayor shall not be interested, directly or
indirectly, in any contract or job of work or material, or the profits thereof,
or services to be performed for the city, except as may be provided by law.
   H.   Books And Records Open To Inspection: All books and records required by
law or ordinance to be kept by the mayor shall at all times be open to
inspection of the public.
   I.   Official Representative: The mayor shall act as the official
representative of the city and he shall be recognized as the official head of
the city by the courts and officers of the state upon whose service a civil
process may be made. The mayor shall have and exercise all the powers and
perform all the duties provided by law.
   J.   Other Powers And Duties: He shall have such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be provided by the council, the ordinances of the city
or the laws of the state, and shall transmit to his successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property, together with an invoice of the
same in his custody or appertaining to his office. (Ord. 4, 4-16-1970)
1-6-11: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings; Open To Public: All meetings of the city council
shall take place at a designated location by the council and shall at all times
be open to the public. The time and place for all regular meetings of the
council shall be set by resolution of the council.
   B.   Special Meetings; Notice: The mayor, or any three (3) members of the
council, shall call special meetings by notice to each of the members,
personally served, or left at its usual place of residence, of which service a
record shall be made by the city clerk. Such notice shall state the time and
purpose of such special meeting. This procedure shall include, but shall not be
limited so as to prevent it from being changed from time to time by resolution
of the city council.
   C.   Quorum: Three (3) members of the council shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, but two (2) members or more may adjourn from time
to time.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The rules of parliamentary practices comprised in
"Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the sessions of the city council, all
cases in which they are applicable, and where they are not inconsistent with
the standing rules of the council, or the laws of the state. (Ord. 3, 4-16-
1970)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Compensation
1-7-2: City Clerk; Powers And Duties
1-7-3: City Treasurer; Powers And Duties
1-7-4: Public Works Director; Powers And Duties
1-7-1: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Presentation; Allowance By Council: The compensation of the officials
shall be paid upon presentation of bills therefor, and allowance of the same by
the city council.
   B.   Compensation As Fixed By Law:
      1.   Mayor And Council: The mayor and the council shall receive as
compensation for attendance of regular or special meetings such fees of office
as fixed by law or ordinance, and in any event such fees shall not exceed that
which is allowed by the state.
      2.   Clerk: The city clerk shall receive as compensation such fees of his
office as fixed by law or ordinance, or by resolution of the council.
      3.   Treasurer: The city treasurer shall receive as compensation such
amount as is fixed by law or ordinance, or by resolution of the council.
      4.   Other Officers And Employees: All other officers, employees, or
appointees, where no salary is fixed by ordinance or law, shall receive such
compensation as the council shall fix by resolution.
   C.   Increase Or Decrease During Term: The salary compensation of any
officer shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he shall
have been elected, or appointed, nor shall any change of the compensation
affect any officer whose office shall be created by the council during his
existing term unless the office be abolished. Any increases in salaries shall
be in compliance with the ordinances of the city, or laws of the state. (Ord.
9, 4-16-1970)
1-7-2: CITY CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city clerk shall:
   A.   Attend Meetings; Keep Minutes: Attend all meetings of the city council
and in no event have the right to vote on any question before it. He shall make
an accurate record of all proceedings had, rules and ordinances adopted by the
council, and the same shall at all times be open to the public.
   B.   Custody Of Records: Have custody and be responsible for the safety of
all records, resolutions and orders of the council, all contracts, documents or
papers in which the city is a party in interest, drafts of ordinances and
bylaws, and reports of various officers who may be required to file reports of
their offices.
   C.   Financial Statements; Records Destruction: Supply the city treasurer
with a statement of all warrants issued after each meeting, giving the number
and amount of each, and upon order of the council, destroy all records and
papers other than proceedings, ordinances and instruments having to do with
real estate and bond issues which are more than ten (10) years old, or offer
such of same as may be of historical interest to a historical society or public
library.
   D.   Duties Required By Council: Perform such duties as may be required by
the council.
   E.   Elections: Perform such duties in respect to elections and other
matters as required by law.
   F.   Other Powers And Duties: Have such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be provided by the council, the ordinances of the city or the
laws of the state, and shall transmit to his successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property, together with an invoice of the same,
in his custody or appertaining to his office. (Ord. 5, 4-16-1970)
1-7-3: CITY TREASURER; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city treasurer shall:
   A.   Keeper Of Finances: Receive and safely keep all monies and securities
belonging to the city, and give to any person paying the same, receipts
therefor in duplicate, specifying the date, amount and upon what account paid,
and shall disburse the same only on the warrants of the city clerk.
   B.   Reports:
      1.   Make returns monthly, or more often, if required by the city
council, to the officer drawing the warrant showing the warrant paid and the
amount of principal and interest paid.
      2.   Make a written report under oath to the council, at its regular
meeting in each month, showing the balance in each fund of the corporation at
the end of the preceding month.
   C.   Use Of Funds For Private Purposes: Not loan or use in any manner for
private purposes, any funds coming into his hands as treasurer.
   D.   Other Powers And Duties: Have such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be provided by the council, the ordinances of the city or the
laws of the state, and shall transmit to his successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property, together with an invoice of the same,
in his custody or appertaining to his office. (Ord. 6, 4-16-1970; amd. 2015
Code)
1-7-4: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The public works director shall:
   A.   General: Be superintendent of all of the improvements upon the streets,
alleys, public grounds, waterworks system and sewer system, located in the city
and shall be under the direction and supervision of the mayor and city council.
   B.   Report Violations: Report all persons refusing to comply with or
violating any ordinance in relation to any of the public works. He shall make
all necessary repairs upon any of the public works, keep them safe and
operational, and at each regular meeting of the council, if required by it,
report fully regarding his acts and the condition of the public works.
   C.   Conflict Of Interest: Not be interested directly or indirectly in any
contract or job of work or material, or the profits therefrom, or services to
be performed for the city.
   D.   Other Powers And Duties: Have such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be provided by the council, the ordinances of the city or the
laws of the state, and shall transmit to his successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property, together with an invoice of the same,
in his custody and appertaining to his office. (Ord. 8, 4-16-1970)
CHAPTER 8
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8-1: Membership
1-8-2: Constitution And Bylaws
1-8-3: Officers
1-8-4: General Duties
1-8-5: Failure To Attend Fire
1-8-6: Demolition Of Buildings
1-8-7: Authority To Require Assistance
1-8-8: Prohibited Acts
1-8-9: Violation; Penalty
1-8-1: MEMBERSHIP:
The fire department shall consist of a volunteer fire company. The city council
may from time to time limit the number of members in the volunteer fire
company. The volunteer fire company as now existing shall be the fire
department under this chapter. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927)
1-8-2: CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS:
The company shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they may deem best
calculated to accomplish the object hereby contemplated and such constitution
and bylaws and any changes or amendments to such constitution and bylaws,
before being effective, must be approved by the city council. (Ord. 12, 2-8-
1927)
1-8-3: OFFICERS:
The company shall elect a chief and such other officials as their constitution
and bylaws may provide, but the election of chief and other officers shall be
subject to the approval of the city council. In case of the absence of the
chief of the fire department, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and
have and exercise all the powers of chief. The city council shall have power to
require a report of attendance of members at regular meetings of the fire
department. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927; amd. 2015 Code)
1-8-4: GENERAL DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the fire department to take charge of all fire
department apparatus committed to its care and in the case of fire, to proceed
to the place of the fire with the apparatus and there work and manage the same
under the direction of the chief in the most effective manner, until the fire
is extinguished. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927)
1-8-5: FAILURE TO ATTEND FIRE:
If any firefighter refuses or neglects to attend any fire without submitting an
excuse as shall be sufficient and satisfactory to the company, or shall neglect
or refuse to do his duty as firefighter, or obey the orders of the chief or his
proper commanding officer, or shall leave his post of duty while at a fire
without the permission of the chief, he shall be subject to expulsion from the
fire department. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927)
1-8-6: DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS:
The fire chief may order any building, erection or fence torn down or blown
down whenever he shall deem it necessary to arrest the progress of or to
extinguish a fire. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927; amd. 2015 Code)
1-8-7: AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE ASSISTANCE:
Any officer of the fire department may require the service of any person,
automobile, or truck to assist in conveying any fire department equipment to
the scene of any fire. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927; amd. 2015 Code)
1-8-8: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Hindering Firefighters: It shall be unlawful to hinder any officer or
firefighter in the performance of his duty at a fire, going to or returning
from the same, or while attending to his duties as a member of the fire
department.
   B.   Use Of Fire Equipment: It shall be unlawful to take or use any fire
apparatus, tools or equipment for private use.
   C.   Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful to cut, injure, deface, or
destroy, any wires, poles, signal boxes, fixtures, or other apparatus connected
with the fire department, belonging to the city. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927; amd. 2015
Code)
1-8-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 12, 2-8-1927; amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created; Appointment
2-1-2: Term Of Office; Vacancy; Compensation
2-1-3: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission of seven (7)
members who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the
city council. (Ord. 87-80, 9-14-1987)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCY; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Term: The term of office of said members shall be five (5) years,
except that the members first named shall hold office for such terms, not
exceeding five (5) years, that the terms of not more than one-third (1/3) of
the members will expire in any one year.
   B.   Vacancy: Any vacancy occurring on the commission caused by resignation
or otherwise shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term.
   C.   Compensation: All members of such commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the
approval of the council. (Ord. 87-80, 9-14-1987)
2-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning and zoning commission shall possess the following powers, in
addition to any others conferred by law:
   A.   To make such surveys, studies, maps, plans or plats of the whole or any
portion of the city and of any land outside thereof, which, in the opinion of
such commission, bears relation to a comprehensive plan, and shall submit such
plan to the city council with its studies and recommendations, and it may
publish the same.
   B.   To make recommendations for the location or erection of statuary,
memorials, or works of art in public places.
   C.   To make recommendations upon plans, plats, or replats of subdivisions
which show streets or alleys intended to be dedicated for public use.
   D.   To make recommendations for a street, park, alley, or other public
improvements, or the vacation thereof.
   E.   To carry on comprehensive studies of present conditions and the future
growth of Oxford in order to guide and accomplish a coordinated, adjusted, and
harmonious development of Oxford in accordance with the present and future
needs thereof, to the end that the health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare may be best promoted.
   F.   To conduct public hearings upon the adoption of such comprehensive plan
or any amendment thereto.
   G.   To prepare a comprehensive plan regarding the height, number of
stories, size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of ground that
may be occupied; the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density
of population; and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for
trade, industry, residence, or other purposes and to this end shall prepare a
preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon and after such hearings
have been held, to submit its final report and recommendations to the city
council.
   H.   To recommend to the city council from time to time as conditions
require, amendments, supplements, changes or modifications in the comprehensive
plan prepared by it. (Ord. 87-80, 9-14-1987)
   I.   To do all things necessary or advisable in order to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter and all other ordinances relating to the
city as they now exist or as the same may be hereafter amended or supplemented.
(Ord. 87-80, 9-14-1987; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-2-1: Purpose
2-2-2: Public Library
2-2-3: Board Established; Appointment
2-2-4: Qualifications Of Trustees
2-2-5: Term; Vacancy; Compensation
2-2-6: Powers And Duties
2-2-7: Library Account
2-2-8: Annual Report
2-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a free
public library for the city and for the creation and appointment of a city
library board of trustees, and to specify that board's powers and duties. (Ord.
64, 3-11-1981)
2-2-2: PUBLIC LIBRARY:
There is hereby established a free public library for the city to be known as
the Oxford Public Library. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
2-2-3: BOARD ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
The board of trustees of the Oxford Public Library, hereinafter referred to as
the board, consists of seven (7) members. Three (3) board members shall be
appointed by the mayor, with approval of the city council. The remaining four
(4) members shall be appointed by the Nemora Club so long as it exists. (Ord.
64, 3-11-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
2-2-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES:
All of the members of the board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the immediate area and all shall be over the age of eighteen (18). (Ord. 64, 3-
11-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
2-2-5: TERM; VACANCY; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Terms Of Office: All appointments to the board shall be for six (6)
years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1.
Appointments shall be made every two (2) years of one-third (1/3) the total
number as near as possible, to stagger the terms. The present incumbents are
confirmed in their appointments and terms. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
   B.   Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if he/she moves
permanently from the immediate area or if he/she is absent from six (6)
consecutive regular meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or
temporary absence from the immediate area. Vacancies in the board shall be
filled by names submitted by the library board with approval by the mayor, and
the new trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is
made. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
2-2-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   A.   To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary, and such
other officers as it deems necessary.
   B.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
   C.   To direct and control all the affairs of the library.
   D.   To provide librarian(s), and such assistants as may be necessary for
proper management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, that prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian/
assistants shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the board voting in favor thereof. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
   E.   To remove by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board the librarian and
provide procedures for the removal of assistants for misdemeanor, incompetency
or inattention to duty, subject, however, to the provisions of Iowa Code
chapter 35C. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
   F.   To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the library within
budgetary limits set by the board.
   G.   To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents of the city and to
fix charges therefor.
   H.   To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the library and the business of the board, fixing and enforcing
penalties for violations.
   I.   To have control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for library
purposes made available by gift or otherwise, and of all other monies belonging
to the library including fines and rentals collected, under the rules of the
board.
   J.   To accept gifts or real property, personal property, or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said
property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the
conveyance of said property; and to expend funds received by them from such
gifts, for the improvement of the library.
   K.   To keep a record of its proceedings.
   L.   To enforce the performance of conditions on gifts, devises and bequests
accepted by the city by action against the city council.
   M.   To have authority to make agreements with the local county historical
associations, where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to
care for such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The
trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials
for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment
of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds
allocated for library purposes. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
2-2-7: LIBRARY ACCOUNT:
All monies appropriated by the council from the general fund for the operation
and maintenance of the library shall be set aside in an account for the
library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders of the board, signed by
its president and secretary. The warrant writing officer is the city clerk.
(Ord. 64, 3-11-1981; amd. 2015 Code)
2-2-8: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close
of the municipal fiscal year. This report shall contain statements of the
condition of the library, the number of books added thereto, the number
circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the library during the year, together with such further
information required by the council. (Ord. 64, 3-11-1981)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applications
3-1-2: Persons Subject To License
3-1-3: Forms
3-1-4: Signatures
3-1-5: Inspections Or Investigations
3-1-6: Term Of License
3-1-7: Building And Premises
3-1-8: Change Of Location
3-1-9: Nuisances
3-1-10: Posting Of License
3-1-11: Revocation Of License Or Permit; Hearing
3-1-12: Appeal Procedure
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made
in writing to the city clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be
required by the issuing official. (2015 Code)
3-1-2: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the city. (2015 Code)
3-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the city clerk. (2015 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the
city clerk in absence of any provision to the contrary. (2015 Code)
3-1-5: INSPECTIONS OR INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the
city necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the city clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time
of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation
or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. All
investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by some officer
designated by the mayor. (2015 Code)
3-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year, where
no provision to the contrary is made. (2015 Code)
3-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the city. (2015 Code)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk; provided, the building
requirements of this code are complied with. (2015 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2015 Code)
3-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business. (2015 Code)
3-1-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; HEARING:
   A.   Authority: Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by
the mayor during the life of such license or permit for the violation by the
licensee or permittee of any provision relating to the license or permit, the
subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed. The mayor shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the
suspension of any business license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen
(15) days.
   B.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted,
the mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license or permit should be revoked.
   C.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee by certified mail at his last known address or personally
served at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   D.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and
recommendation.
   E.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the city, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the mayor
after notice and hearing as provided in subsections C and D of this section for
any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or state law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit, or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the city;
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (2015 Code)
3-1-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the city to
issue a license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall
have the right to appeal the city's decision to the city council. Such appeal
shall be requested by submitting a written request to the mayor within five (5)
days of the action of the city which is appealed.
   B.   Council Consideration: The city council shall consider the appeal at
its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be
entitled to present his appeal orally or in writing. The council shall act on
the appeal within seven (7) days of the hearing and shall either uphold the
action of the city or shall direct the issuance of a license or permit which
the city has denied or the reissuance of a license or permit which the city had
revoked. (2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: Application For License; Fee
3-2-4: Term Of License
3-2-5: Display Of License; Conduct Of Licensee
3-2-6: Exemptions
3-2-7: Consent Or Invitation Required
3-2-8: Time Limit On Peddling
3-2-9: Violation; Penalty
3-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the activities of peddlers,
solicitors and transient merchants within the corporate limits of the city by
requiring registration and a license to engage in any such activities and
providing for the enforcement thereof, and penalties for the violation hereof.
(Ord. 11, 4-16-1970)
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
definitions herein set out, the word "shall" is always mandatory:
LICENSE: A formal written permission issued pursuant to ordinances of the city
of Oxford, Iowa, to any person to sell, offer for sale, or solicit for the sale
of any goods in any manner set out herein.
PEDDLER: Any person who carries in his possession goods or merchandise which he
sells, or offers for sale, with immediate delivery, when such sale or offer to
sell is made from house to house or upon the public streets, within the limits
of the city of Oxford, Iowa.
SOLICIT: The sale or offer for sale by a solicitor of any goods or merchandise
by taking orders therefor with delivery at a future date, and is one who
attempts to solicit from house to house, or upon the public streets, within the
limits of the city of Oxford, Iowa.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant
merchandising business and in the course of the business hires, leases or
occupies any building or structure within the limits of the city of Oxford,
Iowa. To be temporarily associated with any local merchant, dealer, trader, or
conduct any business in connection therewith, shall not exempt said person from
being considered a transient merchant within this chapter. (Ord. 11, 4-16-1970)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
All applications hereunder shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form
provided and the license application shall be accompanied by such fee as set by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 11, 4-16-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
3-2-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days, and such licenses are not transferable. (Ord. 11, 4-
16-1970)
3-2-5: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; CONDUCT OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall display his license at all times when he is engaged
in his business and it shall be a misdemeanor for any licensee in the course of
business to harass, intimidate, threaten or coerce any individual, or
misrepresent any material fact to induce a sale or attempt to engage in any
foregoing prohibited forms of conduct. (Ord. 11, 4-16-1970)
3-2-6: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to authorized representatives of religious or
charitable organizations who use the public streets to solicit voluntary
contributions from house to house for their respective organization, or
newspaper employees who sell newspapers on the public streets, or persons who
sell wholesale to merchants within the corporate limits of the city, or
farmers, gardeners, and other persons who sell or distribute fresh fruits,
meats, fish and vegetables. (Ord. 11, 4-16-1970)
3-2-7: CONSENT OR INVITATION REQUIRED:
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by peddlers,
solicitors, hawkers, itinerant vendors and transient vendors of merchandise and
service, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant
of the private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for merchandise
or services, or for the purpose of selling, disposing or providing the same, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2015 Code)
3-2-8: TIME LIMIT ON PEDDLING:
No person shall engage in peddling as herein defined prior to nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of any day; provided, that no
person shall engage in peddling at any time on a Sunday or any state or
national holiday. (2015 Code)
3-2-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant who fails to register and obtain a
license as required by this chapter, or having obtained a license hereunder
fails to display it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; provided, however, that each offense or violation of this
chapter shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 11, 4-16-1970;
amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DANCE HALLS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definition
3-3-2: License Required; Fee
3-3-3: License Denial
3-3-4: Peace Officer; Presence Required
3-3-5: Hours Of Operation
3-3-6: Minors Restricted
3-3-7: Indecent Acts Prohibited
3-3-8: Refusal To Leave Premises
3-3-1: DEFINITION:
A public dance hall, within the meaning of this chapter, shall be any building,
hall, room, enclosure, platform, floor, or place where any dance is conducted
or permitted, and for admission to which or for participation in which,
anything of value is charged or required, or to which the public generally is
admitted with or without the payment of a fee, or to which the public is
invited by general or private invitation. Provided, that any dance conducted by
any fraternal or patriotic order, association or club, or by any school,
church, charitable or religious organization, wherein admission is confined to
its own members, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16,
7-21-1970)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful to use, or permit to be used, any public dance hall for a
public dance without first securing a license for the use of the same. A fee
for the issuance of the license shall be as set by resolution of the city
council, and shall be paid at the time that the mayor issues the license. (Ord.
16, 7-21-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
3-3-3: LICENSE DENIAL:
The mayor may refuse to issue any license provided for by this chapter whenever
it appears to him that the public dance sought to be held will not be in good
taste, good order, or good morals. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970)
3-3-4: PEACE OFFICER; PRESENCE REQUIRED:
No license will be issued if the applicant has not arranged to have at least
one qualified peace officer present, said peace officer having first been
approved by the sheriff of Johnson County. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970)
3-3-5: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to keep open, or operate a dance between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. within the city limits. Any
person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
3-3-6: MINORS RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any person who has not reached the age of
fourteen (14) years to attend or to remain at any public dance unless such
person is accompanied by the parents, guardian, or other responsible person
having proper custody of said minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to
falsely represent himself or herself to be the parent, guardian or other person
having proper custody of such minor in order that said minor may attend or
remain at any public dance. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970)
3-3-7: INDECENT ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a dance license is issued, or for
any person conducting or having charge of a dance hall, to allow or permit
therein any indecent act to be committed or any disorder or conduct of a gross,
violent or vulgar character. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970)
3-3-8: REFUSAL TO LEAVE PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to leave such dance, or otherwise
to disobey any order of a peace officer given in the discharge of his duties to
preserve order at such dance, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 16, 7-21-1970)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definition Of Nuisance
4-1-2: Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-3: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-4: Nuisance Abatement
4-1-5: Abatement Of Nuisance By Written Notice
4-1-6: Request For Hearing
4-1-7: Abatement By City; Collection Of Costs
4-1-8: Abatement In Emergency
4-1-1: DEFINITION OF NUISANCE:
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a
nuisance. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-2: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which are
deemed to be nuisances in the city:
   A.   Injurious Or Dangerous Premises: Erecting, continuing or using any
building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive
smells, or other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health,
comfort or property of individuals or the public.
   B.   Filthy Substances On Premises: Causing or suffering any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   C.   Obstructing Waterways: Obstructing or impeding without legal authority
the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
   D.   Polluting Or Diverting Waterways: Corrupting or rendering unwholesome
or impure the water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   E.   Obstructing Public Ways With Fences Or Buildings: Obstructing or
encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   F.   Signs Or Billboards Obstructing View Of Public Ways: Billboards,
signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or
private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part
of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or
street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof.
   G.   Storing Of Flammables: Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles
within the fire limits of the city, unless in a building of fireproof
construction.
   H.   Emission Of Dense Smoke, Fumes, Ash: Emission of dense smoke, noxious
fumes, or fly ash.
   I.   Dense Growth Of Weeds Or Vegetation: Dense growth of all weeds, vines,
brush, or other vegetation in the city so as to constitute a health, safety, or
fire hazard.
   J.   Diseased Trees: Trees infected with Dutch elm disease, emerald ash
borer, and other diseased trees.
   K.   Object Or Structure Endangering Aerial Navigation: Any object or
structure hereafter erected within one thousand feet (1,000') of the limits of
any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place, which may
endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take off and landing, unless
such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on
which the same is located.
   L.   Places Of Ill Repute: Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Iowa Code chapter 723A or
places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Iowa
Code section 124.101, subsection 5, in violation of law; or houses where
drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or
permitted to the disturbance of others.
   M.   Storing Of Junk, Junk Vehicles Or Junk Machinery: Storing,
accumulating, or allowing to remain on any private property any junk, junk
vehicle, or junk machinery, as set forth in chapter 2 of this title.
   N.   Other Nuisances: Any other nuisance described as such in the laws of
the state of Iowa or the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-3: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or the
laws of the state of Iowa. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-4: NUISANCE ABATEMENT:
Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case by case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure in this chapter or the municipal
infraction procedure in section
1-4-1 of this code, or the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-5: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE:
Whenever the city determines that a nuisance exists, the city or its authorized
agent may notify the owner, occupant, or agent, of the nuisance by certified
mail. The written notice must contain the following information:
   A.   A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
   B.   The location of the nuisance.
   C.   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
   D.   An order to abate the nuisance or request a hearing within a stated
time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances, but the maximum time
for the abatement of the nuisance shall not exceed thirty (30) days.
   E.   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the city will abate it
and assess the costs against the property owner. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-6: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the city council
as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must be made in
writing and delivered to the city clerk within the time stated in the notice,
or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be
abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the council at a time and place
fixed by the council. The findings of the council shall be conclusive and, if a
nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered to be abated within a
reasonable time under the circumstances. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-7: ABATEMENT BY CITY; COLLECTION OF COSTS:
If the person notified to abate a nuisance neglects or fails to abate as
directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping an
accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be
filed with the city clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.
The clerk shall then send a statement of the total expense incurred by
certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within thirty
(30) days, the clerk shall certify the costs to the county treasurer and such
costs shall then be collected in the same manner as property taxes. (Ord. 2014-
03, 4-8-2014)
4-1-8: ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY:
If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance, the city may perform any action that may be
required under this chapter without prior notice. The city shall assess the
costs as provided in section
4-1-7 of this chapter after notice to the property owner under section
4-1-5 of this chapter, and the hearing provided in section
4-1-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-03, 4-8-2014)
CHAPTER 2
JUNK, JUNK VEHICLES AND JUNK MACHINERY
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Storage Or Accumulation Prohibited
4-2-4: Exceptions
4-2-5: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-2-6: Notice To Abate
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, welfare, and safety of
the citizens of the city by preventing the storage of junk, junk vehicles, and
junk machinery upon private property, except in places otherwise authorized,
and by providing for the removal and abatement thereof, as well as the
enforcement and penalties for the violations thereof. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-8-2014)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ENCLOSED STRUCTURE: Any structure, building, or portion thereof built for the
enclosure of property, containing a roof and having exterior walls, and
constructed in a manner as to obscure the view of any contents therein from any
street or adjacent property, and being of a permanent nature.
JUNK: All old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other nonferrous metal; old
or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used
lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or
parts of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or
scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or
discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a
side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
JUNK MACHINERY: Any equipment or machinery of any nature which, because of its
defective, rotted, rusted, loose or missing parts, or dismantled or partially
dismantled condition, constitutes a threat to the public health or safety of
the citizens of Oxford.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any vehicle that has any one or more of the following
characteristics:
   A.   Not capable of being driven from the place of its location under its
own power without additional parts or repairs thereon;
   B.   Inoperable because of missing or broken parts or components, including,
but not limited to, a windshield, window glass, headlight, taillight, fender,
door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, driver's seat, trunk, trunk lid, trunk
handle, tailpipe, fuel tank, engine, or drive shaft;
   C.   A habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects;
   D.   Encourages or creates the growth of weeds or other vegetation that
cause health problems to the citizens of Oxford;
   E.   Constitutes a threat to the public health and safety because of its
defective or obsolete condition;
   F.   Not currently licensed; or
   G.   Not moved for a period of thirty (30) days.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes,
without limitation, a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor,
buggy, wagon, farm machinery, trailer, semitrailer, or any combination thereof.
(Ord. 2014-02, 4-8-2014)
4-2-3: STORAGE OR ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on
any private property, within the corporate limits of the city, any junk, junk
vehicle, or junk machinery. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-8-2014)
4-2-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk, junk vehicle, or junk
machinery stored within:
   A.   A garage or other enclosed structure; or
   B.   An auto salvage yard or junkyard lawfully operated within the city.
(Ord. 2014-02, 4-8-2014)
4-2-5: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
It is hereby declared that any junk, junk vehicle, or junk machinery located
upon private property, unless excepted by section
4-2-4 of this chapter, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the
citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Iowa Code section 657.1. If
any junk, junk vehicle, or junk machinery is kept upon private property in
violation hereof, the owner of, or person occupying, the property upon which it
is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation. (Ord. 2014-02, 4-8-
2014)
4-2-6: NOTICE TO ABATE:
Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter, the city or its authorized agent
may initiate abatement procedures as outlined in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord.
2014-02, 4-8-2014)
CHAPTER 3
SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Garbage Container Requirements
4-3-4: Times Of Collection; Container Location
4-3-5: Collection Fees And Lien For Nonpayment
4-3-6: Collection For Residential Dwellings
4-3-7: Collection Of Tires, Appliances And Yard Waste
4-3-8: Certain Waste Not Subject To Collection
4-3-9: Prohibited Practices
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the city by regulating the storage, collection,
transportation, hauling, and disposal of solid wastes. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-
1990)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
APPLIANCES: Machines common to residential household use, and includes
refrigerators, stoves, microwave ovens, dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes
dryers, water heaters, furnaces, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, console
television sets, stereo systems, lawn mowers; and any device containing a
gasoline engine, an electric motor, or electric capacitor.
BUILDING DEMOLITION MATERIALS: Waste material from the construction,
destruction, or demolition of residential, commercial, or industrial buildings
or structures including brick and foundation materials.
BULKY RUBBISH: Nonputrescible refuse consisting of combustible and/or
noncombustible waste materials which are either too large or too heavy to be
safely and conveniently loaded into solid waste transportation vehicles by
solid waste collectors.
CITY: The city of Oxford, Iowa, or its designated agent, including any hauler
operating under contract with the city of Oxford, Iowa.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste resulting from the operation of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, agricultural, or other establishment.
DEMOLITION: Substantial destruction of a building or structure, and substantial
removal of the interior of a building or structure.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: Disposal plastic, or paper sacks specifically
designed for storage of solid waste.
DWELLING: A building which is wholly or partially used or intended to be used
for residential occupancy. No dwelling may contain more than four (4) dwelling
units to qualify for residential solid waste pick up.
DWELLING UNIT: Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable rooms located
within a dwelling and forming a single unit possessing facilities which are
used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating of
meals.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving, or consumption of food.
HAULER: Any designated business enterprise engaged by contract with the city
for the purpose of collecting and disposing of waste materials as defined by
this chapter.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Includes, but is not limited to, pathological waste, explosive
waste, pesticides, containers, toxic radioactive materials, and those wastes
included by definition in Iowa Code section 455B.411(3a) and rules of Iowa
department of natural resources.
OCCUPANT: Any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others, shall be
in actual possession of any dwelling unit or any other improved or other
unimproved real property, or either as owner, landlord, tenant, resident or
operator.
OPERATOR: Any user, responsible party, occupant, entity, business, firm,
corporation, governmental entity, association, partnership, venture, or any
combination thereof, or any agent, fiduciary, or representative thereof, who
occupies, possesses, uses, or owns property within the city of Oxford, Iowa,
and/or who stores or generates solid waste within Oxford, Iowa.
OWNER: Any recognized interest of ownership in real or personal property,
including legal and equitable property interest.
PERSON: Individual person, user, responsible party, entity, business, firm,
corporation, partnership, venture, or any combination thereof, or any agent,
representative, or fiduciary thereof.
PREMISES: Includes any interest in real property, including, but not limited
to, buildings and improvements, whether intended for or used for residential,
commercial, or industrial use.
REFUSE: Solid waste not required to be recycled or reused.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste resulting from the maintenance and
operation of a dwelling.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person, persons, or governmental entity, who applies
for, who obtains, or who is issued an account for solid waste service, and
includes any person who pays an individual account for solid waste collection
service. "Responsible party" shall also mean an account holder of the above
account. If more than one person is listed on an account, both persons shall be
deemed "responsible party" for purposes of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid
state, including, but not limited to, garbage and refuse.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A receptacle used by a person to store solid waste
during the interval between solid waste collections.
STORAGE: Keeping, maintaining, or storing solid waste from the time of its
production until the time of its collection and removal.
TRANSPORTATION: The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or
processing to the city of Oxford's disposal site.
YARD WASTE: Grass, leaves, trees, brush, and garden residue. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-
13-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
4-3-3: GARBAGE CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Containers Required: Unless provided by Hauler, the resident, occupant,
operator, or owner of every dwelling unit and residence producing solid waste
shall provide containers of sufficient number and adequate quality for the
storage of all solid waste, sufficient to properly serve each dwelling unit and
residence. Such solid waste containers shall be maintained in reasonable
repair.
   B.   Placement And Maintenance: The occupant, resident, operator, or owner
of every dwelling unit and residence shall place all solid waste to be
collected in proper solid waste containers, and shall maintain such solid waste
containers and the areas surrounding said containers in a reasonably clean,
neat, and sanitary condition at all times.
   C.   Specifications For Containers: Residential refuse shall be stored in a
solid waste container. The container shall have handles, bails, or other
suitable lifting devices or features. The container shall be of a type
originally manufactured for residential solid waste, with tapered sides for
easy emptying, made of lightweight, sturdy construction. Disposable solid waste
containers are also appropriate. If Hauler provides containers to residents,
such containers shall be used. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-1990; amd. Ord. 2020-02, 3-
10-2020)
4-3-4: TIMES OF COLLECTION; CONTAINER LOCATION:
Solid waste containers shall be placed for collection at a place approved by
the hauler and city council, but not before three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the
day before the regularly scheduled collection day. Waste collection by the
hauler shall not be less than one time per week. Refuse containers must be
physically separated from yard waste containers a distance of not less than ten
feet (10') as measured along the curb, in order to enable the solid waste
collector to easily identify differing contents as well as differing
containers. Yard waste containers must be clearly marked as such. (Ord. 1990-
86, 6-13-1990)
4-3-5: COLLECTION FEES AND LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the
following:
   A.   Schedule of Fees: The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, which includes recycling, shall be:
      1.   For each dwelling used for residential occupancy, and for each
dwelling unit up to and including four separate units: twenty dollars ($20.00)
per month.
   B.   Payment of Bills: All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a water bills as contained in Section
8-1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
8-1-7 if the service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained
in Section
8-1-7 and Iowa Code 384.84 relating to lien noticed shall also apply in the
event of a delinquent account.
   C.   Lien for nonpayment: The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste
collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute
a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. (Ord.
1990-86, 6-13-1990; amd. Ord. 2020-02, 3-10-2020)
4-3-6: COLLECTION FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS:
The city shall collect all residential refuse resulting from the operation and
maintenance of a dwelling when each dwelling or dwelling unit is located on its
own lot with frontage on a public street. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-1990)
4-3-7: COLLECTION OF TIRES, APPLIANCES AND YARD WASTE:
   A.   Appliances And Tires: Appliances and tires discarded from use at
premises to which collection services are provided by the city will be
collected by the city at such residential premises, but only upon prior request
and arrangement with the collector of solid waste for the city. The owner,
responsible party, occupant, or operator of such premises will be billed for
such collection and disposal of each such appliance and tire in the amount
provided by the ordinances of the city.
   B.   Bulky Rubbish; Tree And Brush Limbs:
      1.   Prior Request; Weight And Bulk Limitation: Bulky rubbish from
premises to which collection services are provided by the city will be
collected, but only upon the prior request and arrangement with the collector
of solid waste for the city; provided, that the bulky rubbish does not exceed
reasonable limitations of weight and bulk, as determined by the city council.
Tree and brush limbs shall be collected as bulky rubbish.
      2.   Commercial Tree Service: Tree and brush limbs created by commercial
tree service operations or by the clearing of land for construction will not be
collected.
   C.   Yard Waste: Residential yard waste shall be collected separately from
other solid wastes. However, collection of yard waste by the city is not
mandatory. All yard waste shall be composted on the premises or placed in
degradable bags, containers, or packages, which are acceptable to the station
used by the hauler for the city, and set out for the city. Only residential
yard waste properly stored in degradable bags, containers, or packages, which
are acceptable to the station used by the hauler for the city, and free from
all other solid waste shall be collected for disposal. Unbagged or improperly
bagged residential yard waste shall not be collected by the city. (Ord. 1990-
86, 6-13-1990)
4-3-8: CERTAIN WASTE NOT SUBJECT TO COLLECTION:
The city will not collect lead acid batteries, waste oil, commercial solid
waste, hazardous waste, or any substance determined by the city council to be
hazardous or unacceptable for collection. The city will not collect any
substance which will not be accepted by the city disposal site. (Ord. 1990-86,
6-13-1990)
4-3-9: PROHIBITED PRACTICES:
   A.   Unlawful Deposits In Containers: It shall be prohibited for any person,
responsible party, operator, resident, occupant, or entity or any agent, or
representative thereof, to deposit any solid waste in any solid waste container
other than in a solid waste container either owned by the depositor, or
profitably and lawfully leased by the depositor. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-1990)
   B.   Prohibited Materials; Cost Of Removing: No person, occupant,
responsible party, resident, operator, or entity shall obtain or attempt to
obtain city collection of solid waste or other substances or materials herein
declared not subject to collection. Each such separate attempt by such
offending parties shall constitute a separate offense of this provision. The
cost to the city for retrieving such substances or materials from the
collection vehicle or from the city disposal site and/or for cleaning up the
collection vehicle or disposal site, shall be chargeable to the responsible
party for the solid waste collection account for the residence, dwelling or
premises where such substances or materials were placed for collection, or
where actually collected. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-1990; amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Violation: Violation of any subsection of this section or any provision
adopted by the city council shall constitute a misdemeanor, and each violation
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1990-86, 6-13-1990)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN BURNING AND INCINERATORS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Purpose
4-4-2: Permit Requirements
4-4-3: Location Restricted
4-4-4: Attendance And Equipment
4-4-5: Offensive Smoke, Odors And Nuisances
4-4-6: Violation; Penalty
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of incinerators and open
burning within the city limits. (Ord. 1988-83, 12-14-1988)
4-4-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Suspension Of Requirement: Bonfires and outdoor
rubbish fires are prohibited within the city limits without a permit to kindle
or maintain such fire. The city council may suspend the requirements of this
subsection by resolution, outlining the dates and hours that bonfires and
outdoor rubbish fires are allowed.
   B.   Application For Permit: Any person may apply to the city council for a
permit to allow the person to kindle or maintain a bonfire or outdoor rubbish
fire within the city limits. Any such application for a permit should be
accompanied by such plans as to allow the council to make an informed decision
regarding the permit.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: A permit issued by the city council shall allow
the person to kindle or maintain a bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire as
designated in the permit. Such a permit may not be construed as permission to
violate any law or ordinance, nor shall such a permit take the place of any
other license or permit required by law.
   D.   Term Of Permit; Nontransferable: A permit issued by the council shall
remain in effect until revoked or until the expiration date of the permit, as
designated therein. The permit is nontransferable in any manner, and any
deviation from the specifications designated in the permit shall require a new
permit.
   E.   Compliance With Permit And Laws: All permittees, and agents and
employees of permittees, shall carry out the proposed activities in compliance
with the permit and all other laws and ordinances.
   F.   Display Of Permit: Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises
of the bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire, and shall at all times be subject to
inspection by any authorized person.
   G.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit; Hearing: Any permit issued may be
suspended or revoked when it is determined after a hearing by the city council
that:
      1.   It is used by a person other than the original permittee.
      2.   It is used for a location different than the location allowed for in
the permit.
      3.   Any condition of the permit has been violated.
      4.   The permittee does not comply with any order or notice served upon
him.
      5.   There has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to material
facts in the application or plans on which the permit was based. (Ord. 1988-83,
12-14-1988)
4-4-3: LOCATION RESTRICTED:
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire or
authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained unless: a) the location of
the fire is not less than fifty feet (50') from any structure, or b) the fire
is contained in an approved waste burner located not less than fifteen feet
(15') from any structure. (Ord. 1988-83, 12-14-1988)
4-4-4: ATTENDANCE AND EQUIPMENT:
Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires shall be attended by an adult until such
fire is extinguished. This person shall have an adequate water supply or other
fire extinguishing equipment ready available for use. (Ord. 1988-83, 12-14-
1988)
4-4-5: OFFENSIVE SMOKE, ODORS AND NUISANCES:
No bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire shall be kindled or maintained which causes
or creates a dense smoke or odor. No fire shall be kindled or maintained which
constitutes a nuisance either under state law or under city ordinance. (Ord.
1988-83, 12-14-1988)
4-4-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any permittee who violates, disobeys, or omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after
proper notice shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1988-83, 12-14-1988;
amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 5
WEEDS AND EXCESSIVE VEGETATION
SECTION:
4-5-1: Destruction Or Cutting Required
4-5-2: Notice To Destroy Or Cut
4-5-3: Destruction Or Cutting By City
4-5-4: Collection Of Cost
4-5-5: Penalty
4-5-1: DESTRUCTION OR CUTTING REQUIRED:
   A.   Weeds, vines, brush or other growth which constitutes a health, safety
or fire hazard, on any lot or parking adjacent thereto, shall be destroyed by
the owner or persons in possession of the lot; or, in lieu of destruction,
weeds and growths specified herein shall be frequently cut.
   B.   The mayor, or other authorized city officer, shall determine the
necessary frequency of cutting and shall determine whether or not the cutting
is properly done. (Ord. 2002-103, 8-13-2002)
4-5-2: NOTICE TO DESTROY OR CUT:
   A.   Service Of Notice: Upon the failure of the owner or the person in
possession of such lot to destroy, to keep cut, or to properly cut the weeds
and growths specified herein, the mayor or other authorized city officer shall
cause to be served upon the owner, agent, or person in possession of such
property a written notice to destroy or cut the vegetation designated.
   B.   Contents Of Notice: The notice to destroy or cut shall contain:
      1.   An order to destroy or cut the weeds and growths within a stated
time which shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
      2.   The location of the weeds and growths.
      3.   A statement of actions necessary to destroy or properly cut the
weeds and growths.
      4.   A warning that if the weeds and growths are not destroyed or
properly cut, the city will destroy or cut the weeds and growths and assess the
cost against such person.
   C.   Method Of Notice: The notice to destroy or cut shall be sent by
certified mail, or it may be served according to any lawful means of service
provided by the Iowa rules of civil procedure. Service may be completed by
service upon either the owner of the property or the lawful occupant. (Ord.
2002-103, 8-13-2002)
4-5-3: DESTRUCTION OR CUTTING BY CITY:
If the person so notified neglects or fails to destroy or cut the weeds and
growths specified herein as directed, the mayor, or other officers initiating
the notice, may cause the weeds and growths specified herein to be destroyed or
cut. The city shall keep an accurate account of the expense incurred. The
expense account shall be fully itemized, verified, and filed with the city
clerk. Such expenses shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 2002-103, 8-13-2002)
4-5-4: COLLECTION OF COST:
The city clerk shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing
to abide by the notice to destroy or cut, and if the amount shown by the
statement has not been paid within one month, the clerk shall certify the costs
to the county auditor and it shall then be collected with, and in the same
manner as, general property taxes as provided by Iowa Code. (Ord. 2002-103, 8-
13-2002; amd. 2015 Code)
4-5-5: PENALTY:
The city may elect, at its sole discretion, to prosecute any violation either
as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2002-103, 8-13-2002)
CHAPTER 6
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Enforcement Officer
4-6-2: General Definition Of Unsafe
4-6-3: Unsafe Building
4-6-4: Notice To Owner
4-6-5: Conduct Of Hearing
4-6-6: Posting Of Signs
4-6-7: Right To Demolish; Municipal Infraction
4-6-8: Costs
4-6-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-
8-2014)
4-6-2: GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE:
All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-
04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-3: UNSAFE BUILDING:
"Unsafe building" means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
   A.   Various Inadequacies: Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of: 1) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 2)
faulty construction; 3) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of
the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 4) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or 5) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   B.   Manifestly Unsafe: Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   C.   Inadequate Maintenance: Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   D.   Fire Hazard: Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the fire
marshal or fire chief to be a fire hazard.
   E.   Abandoned: Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
(6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-4: NOTICE TO OWNER:
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an "unsafe building" as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within forty eight (48) hours or such
reasonable time as the circumstances require, to commence either the required
repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure
or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90)
days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement
officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require the building, structure,
or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the
required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the
enforcement officer.
   A.   Notice Served: Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Iowa Code section 364.12(3)(h), if the
owner is found within the city limits. If the owner is not found within the
city limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   B.   Hearing: Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-5: CONDUCT OF HEARING:
If requested, the council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   A.   Notice: The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   B.   Owner's Rights: At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   C.   Determination: The council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-6: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read:
   DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.
   CITY OF OXFORD, IOWA.
Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal or
repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer, and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-7: RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION:
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the council. As an alternative to
this action, the city may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
4-6-8: COSTS:
Costs incurred under section
4-6-7 of this chapter shall be paid out of the city treasury. Such costs shall
be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special
assessment against the land on which the building or structure is located, and
shall be certified to the county treasurer for collection in the manner
provided for other taxes. In addition, the city may take any other action
deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred. (Ord. 2014-04, 7-8-2014)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Immoral Acts
5-1-2: Disturbing The Peace
5-1-3: Disorderly Conduct
5-1-4: Offenses Against Public Property
5-1-5: Offenses Relating To Streets And Sidewalks
5-1-6: Penalty
5-1-1: IMMORAL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts:
   A.   Be, or be found, in a state of intoxication.
   B.   Be, or be found, in a state of vagrancy.
   C.   Maintain, keep or operate any building or place where intoxicating
liquor is illegally kept, sold or given away.
   D.   Publicly, or in the hearing of others, curse, swear, or use profane,
blasphemous, obscene, abusive or vulgar language.
   E.   Make any personal or insulting remark to or about anyone passing along
the street or sidewalk.
   F.   Appear on any street or in a public place in a state of nudity or in
any indecent or obscene dress.
   G.   Make any indecent exposure of the person, or commit any indecent or
lewd act.
   H.   Sell or offer for sale any indecent, lewd or obscene book, picture,
publication or thing.
   I.   Perform or present any indecent, immoral or obscene play, picture,
publication or thing.
   J.   Print, write, stamp or paint anything obscene, indecent, immoral or
vulgar.
   K.   Allow, suffer or permit in any house, room or place owned, controlled,
or occupied, any prostitution or lewdness.
   L.   Solicit for immoral purposes.
   M.   Molest or annoy any female person in any public place or solicit her to
ride in any motor vehicle.
   N.   Play, maintain, run or operate any game, punchboard, slot machine or
any machine or device or contrivance of any kind for money or other things of
value.
   O.   Allow, suffer or permit in any house, room or place owned, occupied, or
controlled, any gambling or game of chance. (Ord. 19, 7-21-1970)
5-1-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts:
   A.   Disturb the peace of any street, alley, public ground, religious or
public assembly, public or private building or any neighborhood, private family
or person, by loud or disagreeable noise, or by indecent, profane or obscene
language, conversation or conduct, or by quarreling, assaulting, fighting, or
by any other means.
   B.   Join any group or company of persons on any sidewalk or street so as to
obstruct the free passage thereon, or the entrance to any public building,
place of business or church.
   C.   Give a false alarm of fire or a false call for police or, without
reasonable cause therefor, call for the service of any police officer, peace
officer, or member of the fire department.
   D.   Refuse to assist any police officer or peace officer in making any
arrest when thereto lawfully required by any peace officer or police officer,
and no person shall rescue, or take from the custody of any police officer or
peace officer nor prevent the arrest of any person, nor resist, oppose,
obstruct or impede any member of the police force or peace officers in the
discharge of his duty.
   E.   Falsely claim or represent to be an officer or, without authority,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an
officer.
   F.   Discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver, or firearm of any
description, without first having obtained permission in writing from the
mayor, unless the person doing the same is an officer acting within the duties
of his office.
   G.   Carry any concealed weapon, either revolver, pistol, razor, dirk,
knife, metal knuckles or other dangerous weapon.
   H.   Be concerned with, or join or participate in, any assemblage, meeting,
concert, parade, procession or other exercise or display upon any street,
alley, highway or public ground without written permit issued to one or more of
the participants thereof by the mayor. (Ord. 19, 7-21-1970)
5-1-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to define and prohibit
disorderly conduct within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Definitions: For use within this section, the following words are
defined:
    CITY: Includes all of that area now within the corporate limits of the city
of Oxford, Iowa, and further includes such areas as may be annexed in the
future and at such time as they legally become a part of the corporate limits
of the city of Oxford, Iowa.
   PERSON: Includes any individual, association of individuals, group of
individuals, and including an organized or unorganized group of individuals.
   C.   Prohibited Acts: For purposes of this section, the following act or
acts are deemed disorderly conduct and no person shall, within the limits of
the city, commit such act or acts; and further, no person shall allow such act
or acts to be committed within or upon any house or premises owned by him, or
occupied or controlled by him:
      1.   Disturb the peace of any person or persons, or provoke a breach of
peace, or use any unseemly profane, indecent or obscene language, or be guilty
of any violent or offensive conduct or assault, beat or strike another or make
or cause to be made loud noises of any nature which may disturb or annoy any
persons in the vicinity.
      2.   Permit or allow in any house, apartment, hotel, motel building or
room, therein controlled by him, any drunkenness, lewd or obscene or indecent
conduct or behavior, or permit lewd or disreputable persons, either male or
female, together, and be entertained with food or drink on such premises.
      3.   Conduct himself in a lewd, indecent or immoral way, or engage with
another person or persons in any boisterous, offensive conduct which is
shocking or degrading to the public morals and decency.
      4.   Accost, address offensive remarks to, pester, or attempt to force
any company upon any other person with whom he is unacquainted, or acts in an
otherwise offensive manner toward such person on the streets or in any public
place within the city.
      5.   Obstruct or encumber any street corner or other public place by
loafing or lounging in or about the same after being requested to move on by
any peace officer and, further, no person shall at any time, without proper
authority, remove, alter, or change in any manner any street traffic or
obstruction signs or other city or publicly owned property. (Ord. 23, 9-1-1970)
5-1-4: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts:
   A.   Start, maintain or allow a fire of any kind on any street surface.
   B.   Hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public improvements
or work.
   C.   Remove or cause to be removed any dirt, sand, stone, rock, tree, shrub,
plank, sidewalk, or fence from any street, alley, highway, lot or ground
belonging to the city without permission from the council.
   D.   Dig into or in any manner break any sidewalk, curb, pavement, street,
alley, or public ground, without replacing the same in as good a condition as
found.
   E.   Tear down, deface or destroy any house number, street sign or other
sign.
   F.   Knock down, remove or destroy any barricade erected by authority of the
city council or city officer on any street or part of street to protect persons
or animals on and using the same, or drive on or over any curb or parking to
pass around the same.
   G.   Tear down or destroy any resolution, order, ordinance, advertisement or
official notice posted by order of the city council or any public officer or by
the person entitled to possession of the property.
   H.   Deface, mark or in any way injure or meddle with any fire hydrant,
valve or other appurtenance of the waterworks system, or attempt to work or
operate them without authority.
   I.   Make any connection with the waterworks system, unless the person
making the connection is a licensed plumber or other person designated by the
council acting under a permit issued by the proper authority.
   J.   Make, or cause to be made, any excavation in any street, alley or
highway for the purpose of laying any drain, water or sewer connection, without
first obtaining a permit for the same.
   K.   Make or attempt to make any connection with the waterworks system
without first obtaining a permit for the same.
   L.   Fail or neglect to keep trees or branches therefrom from falling into
or in any manner damaging electric light, telephone or other wires, while the
same is being cut down or removed.
   M.   Break, deface, injure or destroy or assist in breaking, defacing,
injuring or destroying any tree, building, bridge, pavement, or other property
belonging to or controlled by the city.
   N.   Sweep, throw, cast or lay ashes, garbage, cinders, straw, paper, dirt,
filth, or rubbish of any kind whatsoever, or garbage in or upon any street or
public place, vacant lot, or plot, except where ashes or dirt may be used for
filling a lot or plot under the direction of the public works director.
   O.   Paste, write, print, stamp, nail or affix to any building, erection,
fence, tree, lamppost, sidewalk, telephone, telegraph or other pole, or to any
other improvement, any poster, show bill, handbill, or other printed notice or
sign. (Ord. 19, 7-21-1970)
5-1-5: OFFENSES RELATING TO STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to commit any of the following acts:
   A.   Throw any projectile from any sling, catapult, or air gun or shoot an
arrow with any bow or crossbow upon any street, alley or other public place.
   B.   For any person, or vehicle meeting another, on any street or sidewalk
to refuse to give one-half (1/2) of the street or sidewalk so as to allow an
uninterrupted passage of such person or vehicle.
   C.   Place or allow to remain upon any street, alley or sidewalk for a
longer period of time than twenty four (24) hours, any boxes or equipment used
in a trade or business.
   D.   Place upon or suffer to be placed upon any sidewalk any goods, wares or
merchandise, for sale or for show, or to suspend the same in any manner over
the sidewalk so as to interfere in any manner with the free and uninterrupted
passage of the sidewalk by pedestrians, and in no case shall more than two feet
(2') of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
   E.   Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault or fail
properly to protect, or guard all openings on or within six feet (6') of any
street, alley, sidewalk or highway.
   F.   Erect or maintain awnings, unless all parts of the same be elevated at
least seven feet (7') above the upper surface of the sidewalk and the roof or
covering made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron
frames or brackets firmly and securely fastened to the building, without any
posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk, or hinder or interfere
with the free passage of pedestrians thereon.
   G.   Erect or keep any stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables, or other
substances or commodities on any sidewalk, street, or alley, or use or occupy
any part of a street or alley with any vehicle for the sale therefrom of any
article without written permission from the mayor.
   H.   Scatter waste or place paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk.
   I.   Leave any paper removed or coming from billboards on any street or
sidewalk, or scatter show bills, handbills or other advertising on the
sidewalk, streets or alleys.
   J.   Throw, place or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, placed or
deposited, any glass, nails, or other sharp substances, ashes, straw, paper,
sweepings, brush, weeds, spoiled fruit or vegetables, refuse, or rubbish of any
kind upon any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, gutter, drain or public ground.
   K.   Throw, place or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown, placed or
deposited upon any street, alley or highway or into any gutter or drain, or
upon any lot, park or ground, any paper, hay, straw, leaves, shavings, waste,
excelsior, boards or other inflammable substances without causing the same to
be burned. (Ord. 19, 7-21-1970)
5-1-6: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 19, 7-21-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS AND FIREARMS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Fireworks
5-2-2: Firearms
5-2-3: Penalty
5-2-1: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this chapter, the definition of the term
"fireworks" shall be the same definition as set out in the provisions of Iowa
Code section 727.2, as amended.
   B.   Sale Or Use Prohibited: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or
use or explode any "fireworks", as above defined, within the city limits.
   C.   Pyrotechnic Display; Council Permission Required: In the event any
person or organization desires to give a pyrotechnic display of fireworks, said
person or organizations shall, at least thirty (30) days before the date set
for such display, make application to the city council setting forth the nature
of the display, the place where said display will be produced and the time and
date of such display. If, in the judgment of the council, said display will not
be a fire hazard, it may issue a permit for said display subject to such
regulations as it may deem advisable. (Ord. 21, 9-1-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
5-2-2: FIREARMS:
   A.   Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
any gun, pistol, or other firearm, or any air rifle, slingshot, bow and arrows,
toy pistol, toy gun, or toy arms loaded with leaden or other dangerous
missiles, at any time within the city limits.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to any peace officer in the execution of his duties as such officer.
(Ord. 21, 9-1-1970)
5-2-3: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 21, 9-1-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Running At Large
5-3-3: Certain Animals Restricted Within City
5-3-4: Number Of Dogs And Cats Limited
5-3-5: Impoundment Procedure; Redemption
5-3-6: Damaging Property; Disturbing Persons
5-3-7: Vicious Dogs And Cats
5-3-8: Infected Animals
5-3-9: Responsibility Of Owner
5-3-10: Summons Issued
5-3-11: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
ANIMALS: All living creatures, not human.
AT LARGE: Any animal found off the premises of its owner and not under the
control of a competent person, not being restrained on a leash, restrained in a
motor vehicle, or house, veterinary hospital, or kennel.
LICENSED DOG: Any dog bearing a currently valid tag under Iowa Code chapter
351.
OWNER: Any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal. (Ord. 51,
9-11-1978)
5-3-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow dogs, cats, swine, sheep or other
similar animals or fowl to run at large in the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 51, 9-11-1978)
5-3-3: CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED WITHIN CITY:
It shall be unlawful for a person to keep within the city such animals as bees,
cattle, horses, swine, sheep, fowl, rabbits for breeding, deer and any other
animal which might tend to disrupt the peace and good order of the community
unless the above described animals are kept on property zoned agricultural.
(Ord. 52, 2-13-1979)
5-3-4: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep upon property zoned residential
more than two (2) dogs, except for pups, and no more than two (2) cats, except
for kittens. In the event that either a female dog or a female cat has pups or
kittens, the above regulation of two (2) dogs and two (2) cats shall not apply
until such pups or kittens are eight (8) weeks of age, at which time they will
be considered dogs or cats, and fall under the dog and cat limitation. (Ord.
2003-102, 7-8-2003)
5-3-5: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURE; REDEMPTION:
   A.   Notification Of Impoundment; Redemption Fees: Any dog found at large,
or any dog found without proper immunization tags shall be impounded. The owner
of any licensed dog shall be notified, and upon payment of the impounding
costs, kennel costs, dogcatcher fees, and such other fees and costs as the city
council may establish, such animal shall be returned. (Ord. 86-75, 3-27-1986)
   B.   Disposal Of Unclaimed Licensed Dog: If the impounded licensed dog is
not recovered by its owner within seven (7) days after notice, the dog shall be
disposed of by the kennel personnel, or as otherwise ordered by the mayor.
   C.   Redemption Of Unlicensed Dog: Any impounded unlicensed dog may be
recovered by the owner upon proper identification and by producing at the time
of recovery a current license from Johnson County, and also a record of
immunization against rabies administered within two (2) years of the date of
recovery. Upon said showing and paying the impounding costs, kennel costs,
etc., within seven (7) days after impounding, the dog shall be returned to its
owner.
   D.   Disposal Of Unlicensed Dog: If said conditions are not met within the
seven (7) days, the unlicensed dog shall be disposed of by the kennel personnel
or as otherwise ordered by the mayor. (Ord. 86-75, 3-27-1986; amd. 2015 Code)
5-3-6: DAMAGING PROPERTY; DISTURBING PERSONS:
   A.   Damage Or Interference: It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal
to allow or to let such animal to pass on the premises of another thereby
causing damage to or interference with the premises.
   B.   Annoyance Or Disturbance: It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog
to allow or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any
person or persons by frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking or
otherwise; or by running after or chasing persons, bicycles, automobiles or
other vehicles. (Ord. 51, 9-11-1978)
5-3-7: VICIOUS DOGS AND CATS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious dog or cat
within the city. A dog or cat is deemed to be vicious when it shall have
attacked or bitten any person or has maimed or killed any domestic pet without
provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons shall exist and is
known or ought reasonably to be known by the owner. (Ord. 2003-102, 7-8-2003;
amd. 2015 Code)
5-3-8: INFECTED ANIMALS:
Any dog or other animal that appears to be infected, after being impounded or
during an attempt to impound, may be disposed of or handled in any manner which
seems reasonable and prudent to the animal shelter personnel at the time. (Ord.
51, 9-11-1978)
5-3-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve the owner of any animal from
responsibility for any damage committed by such animal as provided by the laws
of the state. (Ord. 51, 9-11-1978)
5-3-10: SUMMONS ISSUED:
The owner of any licensed dog or the owner, if known, of any unlicensed dog or
other animal shall be issued a summons to appear in court to answer charges
permitting such dog or animal to be at large in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 51, 9-11-1978)
5-3-11: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 51, 9-11-1978; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 4
EXOTIC, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Purpose
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Keeping Dangerous Animal
5-4-4: Dangerous Animal Exceptions
5-4-5: Impoundment And Disposition Of Dangerous Animals
5-4-6: Keeping Vicious Animal
5-4-7: Vicious Animal Exceptions
5-4-8: Impoundment And Disposition Of Vicious Animals
5-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate dangerous and vicious animals within
the city, for the protection of the health and well being of persons found
within the city. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings set forth in this section:
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: A. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and
which is of a wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing,
inflicting serious injury upon, or causing disease among, human beings or
domestic animals and having known tendencies as a species to do so;
   B.   Any animal declared to be dangerous by the city council;
   C.   The following animals shall be deemed to be dangerous animals per se:
      1.   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, and bobcats;
      2.   Wolves, coyotes, and foxes, or any mixed breed thereof;
      3.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks, and minks;
      4.   Raccoons;
      5.   Bears;
      6.   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
      7.   Bats;
      8.   Alligators and crocodiles;
      9.   Scorpions;
      10.   Snakes and reptiles that are venomous;
      11.   Snakes which are constrictors;
      12.   Gila monsters;
      13.   Pit bull dogs;
      14.   Venomous spiders and insects;
      15.   Doberman type dogs;
      16.   Opossums;
      17.   All apes, baboons, and macaques;
      18.   Piranhas.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se, as listed
above, that has bitten or clawed a person or persons or has maimed or killed
any domestic animal while running at large, when the attack was unprovoked, or
any animal that has exhibited vicious propensities in present or past conduct,
including such that said animal:
   A.   Has bitten or clawed a person or persons on two (2) separate occasions
within a twelve (12) month period; or
   B.   Did bite or claw once causing injuries above the shoulders of a person;
or
   C.   Could not be controlled or restrained by the owner at the time of the
attack to prevent the occurrence; or
   D.   Had attacked any domestic animal or fowl on three (3) separate
occasions within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995; amd.
2015 Code)
5-4-3: KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, nor act
as a temporary custodian for such animal, nor keep, shelter, or harbor any such
animal for any other purpose or in any other capacity within the city, except
as provided in section
5-4-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
5-4-4: DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibitions contained in section
5-4-3 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in
the following circumstances:
   A.   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a bona
fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit, or show;
   B.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment; (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
   C.   The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with
appropriate permit from the Iowa natural resources commission;
   D.   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession
of the Iowa natural resources commission, pursuant to Iowa Code chapters 481A
or 481B. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995; amd. 2015 Code)
5-4-5: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Authority To Destroy: In the event that a dangerous animal is found at
large and unattended on public property, park property, public right of way, or
the property of someone other than the owner, thereby creating a hazard to
person or property, such animal shall, in the discretion of the Johnson County
sheriff's office, the mayor, or designee, be destroyed if it cannot be confined
or captured. The city shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or
capture of a dangerous animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to
notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
   B.   Complaint; Investigation; Seizure:
      1.   Upon the complaint of an individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring a dangerous animal per se upon premises in the city,
the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee, shall
cause the matter to be investigated, and if after investigation, the facts
indicate that a person named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering, or
harboring a dangerous animal per se, the Johnson County sheriff's office, the
mayor, or his/her designee, shall immediately seize any such animal. An animal
so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of
the impoundment period the individual or entity keeping, sheltering, or
harboring such dangerous animal per se has not petitioned the Johnson County
district court seeking return of such dangerous animal per se, the Johnson
County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee, shall cause the animal
to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an organization
or group allowed under this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy
such animal in a humane manner.
      2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring a dangerous animal other than a dangerous animal per
se on premises in the city, the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or
his/her designee, shall cause the matter to be investigated, and if after
investigation, the facts indicate the person named in the complaint is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring such a dangerous animal in the city, the animal
control officer for the city shall order the person named in the complaint to
safely remove such animal from the city, permanently place the animal with an
organization or group allowed to possess dangerous animals under this chapter,
or destroy the animal within three (3) days of the receipt of such order. Such
order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous animal, which
notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or
harboring the dangerous animal and shall be served personally or by certified
mail. Such order and notice to remove a dangerous animal shall not be required
where the dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death
to any person, in which case the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or
his/her designee, shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded
or destroyed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of
serious physical harm or death to any person.
   C.   Appeal Of Order To Remove: The order to remove a dangerous animal,
other than a dangerous animal per se, issued by the Johnson County sheriff's
office, the mayor, or his/her designee, may be appealed to the city council. In
order to appeal such an order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the
city clerk within three (3) days after receipt of the order contained in the
notice to remove a dangerous animal. Failure to file such a written notice of
appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the Johnson
County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee.
   D.   Notice Of Appeal Contents; Hearing; Decision: The notice of appeal
shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by
certified mail to the city clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled
within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be
continued for good cause. After such hearing, the city council may affirm or
reverse the order of the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her
designee. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
   E.   Written Order To Remove; Action Upon Failure To Comply: If the city
council affirms the action of the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor,
or his/her designee, the city council shall order in its written decision that
the individual or entity owning, sheltering, or harboring or keeping such
dangerous animal, remove such animal from the city, permanently place such
animal with an organization or group allowed under this chapter to possess
dangerous animals or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be
served upon the person or entity against whom it is rendered in the same manner
as the notice of removal. If the original notice of the animal control officer
is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) days or the order of
the city council after appeal is not complied with within three (3) days of its
issuance, the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee,
is hereby authorized to seize and impound such dangerous animal. An animal so
seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the
impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the decision or order
of the Johnson County sheriff's office, or the mayor, or his/her designee, was
issued has not petitioned the Johnson County district court for review of said
order, the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee,
shall cause the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanent placement of the
animal with an organization or group allowed under this chapter to possess
dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a humane manner. Failure to comply
with an order of the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her
designee, issued pursuant hereto and not appealed, or the city council after
appeal, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995; amd.
2015 Code)
5-4-6: KEEPING VICIOUS ANIMAL:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the city a
"vicious animal" as defined herein, except as provided in section
5-4-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
5-4-7: VICIOUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section
5-4-6 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of vicious animals in the
following circumstances:
   A.   Law Enforcement: Animals under the control of a law enforcement or
military agency.
   B.   Guard Dogs: The keeping of guard dogs. However, guard dogs must be kept
within a structure, a fixed enclosure, at all times, and any guard dog found at
large may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to this chapter. Any
premises guarded by a guard dog shall be permanently posted with a sign
containing the words "Guard Dog", "Vicious Dog", or words of similar effect,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the Johnson County sheriff's
office, the mayor, or his/her designee, that a guard dog is on duty on the
premises. (Ord. 1995-97, 11-14-1995)
5-4-8: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   Proceedings To Declare Animal As Vicious; Hearing: The Johnson County
sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee, in his/her discretion or upon
the receipt of a complaint alleging that a particular animal is a "vicious
animal" as defined herein, may initiate proceedings to declare such animal as a
vicious animal. A hearing on the matter shall be conducted by the mayor or his/
her designee. The person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring the animal
in question shall not be given less than seventy two (72) hours' written notice
of the time and place of said hearing. Said notice shall set forth the
description of the animal in question and the basis for the allegation of
viciousness. The notice shall also set forth that if the animal is determined
to be vicious, the owner will be required to remove it from the city or allow
it to be destroyed. The notice shall be served upon any adult residing at the
premises where the animal is located, or may be posted on those premises if no
adult is present to accept service.
   B.   Issuance Of Removal Order; Failure To Comply: If, after hearing, the
mayor, or his/her designee, determines that an animal is vicious, the mayor, or
his/her designee, shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring, or
keeping the animal to remove it from the city and cause it to be destroyed in a
humane manner. The order shall immediately be served upon the individual or
entity against whom issued, in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the
order is not complied with within three (3) days of its issuance, the mayor, or
his/her designee, is authorized to seize and impound the animal. The animal so
seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days. If at the end of the
impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the order of the
mayor, or his/her designee, was issued has not appealed such order to the city
council, the mayor, or his/her designee, shall cause the animal to be
destroyed.
   C.   Appeal Of Removal Order: The order to remove or destroy a vicious
animal issued by the mayor, or his/her designee, may be appealed to the city
council. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city clerk within three (3) days after the receipt of the order to
remove or destroy the vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of
appeal shall constitute a waiver of right to appeal the order of the mayor, or
his/her designee.
   D.   Notice Of Appeal Contents; Hearing; Decision: The notice of appeal
shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by
certified mail to the city clerk. The hearing of such appeal shall be scheduled
within seven (7) days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing may
be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the city council may affirm or
reverse the order of the mayor, or his/her designee. Such determination shall
be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with the city clerk
within three (3) days after the hearing, or any continued session thereof.
   E.   Written Order To Remove; Failure To Comply: If the city council affirms
the actions of the mayor, or his/her designee, the city council shall order in
its written decision that the individual or entity owning, sheltering,
harboring, or keeping such vicious animal, shall remove such animal from the
city or cause it to be destroyed in a humane manner. The decision and order
shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom rendered in
the same manner as the order to remove or destroy. If the original order of the
mayor, or his/her designee, is not appealed and is not complied with within
three (3) days or the order of the city council after appeal is not complied
with within three (3) days of its issuance, the Johnson County sheriff's
office, the mayor, or his/her designee, is authorized to seize and impound such
vicious animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven
(7) days. If at the end of that impoundment period, the individual or entity
against whom the decision and order of the mayor, or his/her designee, or the
city council order issued, has not petitioned to the Johnson County district
court for a review of said order, the mayor, or his/her designee, shall cause
the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner.
   F.   Violation A Misdemeanor Offense: Failure to comply with an order of the
mayor, or his/her designee, issued pursuant hereto and not appealed, or of the
city council after appeal, shall constitute a misdemeanor offense.
   G.   Authority To Destroy: Any animal found at large which displays vicious
tendencies may be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the foregoing,
unless the animal is so vicious that it cannot be safely apprehended, in which
case the Johnson County sheriff's office, the mayor, or his/her designee, may
immediately destroy it.
   H.   Animal Under Impoundment Or Quarantine: Any animal which is alleged to
be vicious and which is under impoundment or quarantine at the animal shelter
shall not be released to the owner, but shall continue to be held at the
expense of the owner pending the outcome of the hearing. All costs of such
impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner if the animal is
determined to be vicious. If the animal is not determined to be vicious, all
costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 1995-
97, 11-14-1995)
CHAPTER 5
URBAN FOWL
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Permit Required
5-5-3: Number And Type Of Chickens Allowed
5-5-4: Zoning Districts Allowed
5-5-5: Non-Commercial Use Only
5-5-6: Enclosures
5-5-7: Odor And Noise Impacts
5-5-8: Predators, Rodents, Insects And Parasites
5-5-9: Feed And Water
5-5-10: Waste Storage And Removal
5-5-11:    Urban Fowl At Large
5-5-12:    Unlawful Acts
5-5-13:    Nuisances
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
CHICKEN: A member of the subspecies Gallus Gallus Domesticus, a domesticated
fowl.
CHICKEN TRACTOR: A portable chicken coop lacking a floor that may be moved
around the yard.
PERMITTEE: An applicant who has been granted a permit to raise, harbor or keep
urban fowl pursuant to this Chapter.
PERMITTING OFFICER: The City Clerk or designee.
PERMITTED TRACT OF LAND: The tract of land as identified by the application
upon which a permit is granted for keeping urban fowl pursuant to this Chapter.
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING: Any building that contains only one dwelling unit used,
intended, rented, leased, let or hired to be occupied for living purposes.
THE CITY: The City of Oxford.
TRACT OF LAND: A property or a zoned lot that has one single family dwelling
located on that property or zoned lot.
URBAN FOWL: A chicken kept on a permitted tract of land pursuant to a permit
issued under this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required. No person shall raise, harbor or keep urban fowl
within the City of Oxford without a valid permit obtained from the Permitting
Officer under the provisions of this Chapter. The permit fee will be
established by resolution of the City Council.
   B.   Application. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must file a
completed application with the City Clerk and pay all fees required by this
Chapter.
   C.   Requirements. The requirements to the receipt of a permit include:
      1.   All requirements of this Chapter are met;
      2.   All fees, as may be provided for from time to time by City Council
resolution, for the permit are paid in full;
      3.   All judgments in the City's favor and against the applicant have
been paid in full;
      4.   The tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one Single
Family Dwelling occupied and used as such by the permittee.
      5.   The applicant has obtained permission by way of a signature from the
residents of all immediately adjacent dwellings of the applicant's property.
      6.   The applicant has successfully completed an approved class in
raising urban fowl in an urban setting. The City shall maintain a current list
of such approved classes.
      7.   The Permitting Officer has inspected the tract of land and found it
to be suitable for urban fowl.
   D.   Issuance of Permit. If the Permitting Officer concludes as a result of
the information contained in the application that the requirements for a permit
have been met, then the Permitting Officer shall issue the permit.
   E.   Denial, suspension, revocation, non renewal. The Permitting Officer may
deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for any of the
following grounds:
      1.   False statements on any application or other information or report
required by this section to be given by the applicant;
      2.   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re inspection or
reinstatement fee required by this section or city council resolution;
      3.   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the
time specified in the notice;
      4.   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation/
remediation plan by the Permitting Officer, or designee.
      5.   Failure to comply with any provision of this Chapter.
   F.   Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a permit
shall be in writing, delivered by certified mail or in person to the address
indicated on the application. The notification shall specify reasons for the
action.
   G.   Effect of revocation/denial. When an application for a permit is
denied, or when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not reapply for a new
permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of the denial or revocation.
   H.   Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed
without notice and an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder
of the permit. In any instance where the Permitting Officer has denied,
revoked, suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder of urban
fowl may appeal the decision to the City Council, within seven (7) days of
receipt by the applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision.
Written notice of appeal must be filed with the City Clerk in the time
required. The applicant or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity
for a hearing in front of the City Council. The decision of the City Council,
or any decision by the Permitting Officer which is not appealed in accordance
to this Chapter shall be deemed final action. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-3: NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED:
   A.   The maximum number of chickens allowed is four (4) per tract of land
regardless of how many dwelling units are on the tract.
   B.   Only females (hens) are allowed.
   C.   Chickens must have wings appropriately clipped to prevent them from
flying. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-4: ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED:
Permits will be granted only for tracts of land located in residential
districts as identified on the current Official Zoning Map on file with the
City of Oxford, and which do not have restrictive covenants that prohibit urban
fowl. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-5: NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY:
A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes. Eggs may not be offered for
sale. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-6: ENCLOSURES:
   A.   Urban fowl must be kept in an enclosure or fenced area at all times.
Urban fowl shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during non-
daylight hours.
   B.   Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat and sanitary
condition at all times.
   C.   Henhouses, chicken tractors and pens must provide adequate ventilation
and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds and
predators, including dogs and cats.
   D.   Henhouses and chicken tractors.
      1.   Henhouses and chicken tractors shall be designed to provide safe and
healthy living conditions for the urban fowl with a minimum of four (4) square
feet per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the
neighborhood.
         a.   A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and
shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof
wire of less than one (1) inch openings.
         b.   The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall
be uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of
the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and
chicken tractors shall be well maintained.
      2.   Henhouses, chicken tractors and pens shall only be located in the
rear yard, unless the setback requirements cannot be met in which case they may
be kept in a side yard but within the required setbacks. At no time urban fowl
may be kept in a front yard or corner side yard on the street side.
      3.   Henhouses, chicken tractors and pens must be located at least
fifteen (15) feet from the property line of any adjacent residential dwelling,
church, school or place of business.   
   E.   Any enclosed pen shall consist of sturdy wire fencing. The pen must be
covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-7: ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS:
   A.   Odors from urban fowl, including but not limited to, chicken manure or
other related substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the
permitted tract of land.
   B.   Noise from urban fowl shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of
the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of
reasonable sensitivity. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-8: PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS AND PARASITES:
The Permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators
and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. Urban fowl
found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy
conditions to human habitation may be removed by an Animal Control Officer or
City employee at the cost of the owner. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-9: FEED AND WATER:
Urban fowl shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
The feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents, wild birds and predators.
(Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-10: WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL:
All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or
lid over the entire structure. No more than three (3) cubic feet of manure
shall be stored on the permitted tract of land. All other manure not used for
composting or fertilizing shall be removed. The henhouse, chicken tractor, pen
and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings.
Uneaten feed shall be removed and properly disposed of in a timely manner.
(Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-11: URBAN FOWL AT LARGE:
The Permittee shall not allow the Permittee's urban fowl to roam off the
permitted tract of land. A dog or cat or other domesticated animal which kills
a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that reason alone, not be
considered a dangerous or aggressive animal. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-12: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep urban fowl in violation of
any provision of this Chapter or any other provision of the Oxford Municipal
Code.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of property
to allow urban fowl to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions
of this Chapter.
   C.   No person shall keep urban fowl inside a single family dwelling unit,
multi family dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.
   D.   No person shall slaughter any urban fowl within the City of Oxford.
   E.   No person shall keep a rooster.
   F.   No person shall keep urban fowl on a vacant or uninhabited tract of
land. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
5-5-13: NUISANCES:
Any violation of the terms of this Chapter that constitutes a health hazard or
that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a nuisance
and may be abated under the general nuisance abatement provisions, pursuant to
a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2022-1, 2-8-2022)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
STATE TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Compliance With State Traffic Code
6-1-2: Definitions; State Law Applicable
6-1-3: Signal For Traffic Movement
6-1-4: Speed Limits; Restrictions
6-1-5: Noisy Operation
6-1-6: Avoiding Arrest Or Identification
6-1-7: Snow Removal; Procedure And Restrictions
6-1-8: Golf Cart Operation
6-1-9: Penalty
6-1-1: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE TRAFFIC CODE:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to violate any
provisions of Iowa Code chapter 321, or amendments thereto, where the violation
of such statute is declared, directly or indirectly, to be a misdemeanor by the
provisions of said chapter 321, or amendments thereto, except such provisions
as are by their nature inapplicable. (2015 Code)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS; STATE LAW APPLICABLE:
Where words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by the laws of the
state, such definition shall apply to this chapter. (Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
6-1-3: SIGNAL FOR TRAFFIC MOVEMENT:
The operator of a motor vehicle, before stopping, turning, or changing the
course of such vehicle in the city, shall first see that there is sufficient
space to make such movement in safety and shall give a visible or audible
signal to the crossing officer, if there be such, or to the drivers of other
vehicles and to pedestrians of his intentions to make such movement by raising
and extending the arm and indicating with it the direction in which he wishes
to turn, or shall use his turn signal if said vehicle is equipped therewith.
(Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
6-1-4: SPEED LIMITS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Operation In Prudent Manner; Limits Designated: Every person operating
a motor vehicle on the streets, alleys, or highways of the city shall drive the
same in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed that will not
endanger the property of another, or any person, and in no event drive the same
at a greater rate of speed than as follows:
      1.   Business District: Twenty (20) miles per hour within a business
district.
      2.   Residential Or School District: Twenty five (25) miles per hour in a
residential or school district. (Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
      3.   Augusta Avenue: The following shall be the maximum speeds for the
operation of motor vehicles on Augusta Avenue within the corporate limits of
the city: (Ord. 1995-98, 12-12-1995; amd. 2015 Code)
Twenty five (25) miles per hour from the point of intersection with Center
Street to approximately one hundred feet (100') north of State Street.
Thirty five (35) miles per hour from approximately one hundred feet (100')
north of State Street to approximately seven hundred fifty feet (750') north of
North Street.
Forty five (45) miles per hour from approximately seven hundred fifty feet
(750') north of North Street to the intersection of U.S. Highway 6. (Ord. 1995-
98, 12-12-1995)
   B.   Slow Speed; Blocking Normal Movement: No person shall drive a motor
vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal reasonable
movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation
or in compliance with law.
   C.   Posting Signs: The city shall have placed conspicuously on every main
highway where the rate of speed changes, signs of sufficient size, setting out
the rate of speed. (Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
6-1-5: NOISY OPERATION:
   A.   Squealing Tires: No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the
streets, alleys, or highways of the city, and no owner of the motor vehicle
shall permit or allow the operation of a motor vehicle in such a manner, or by
such a method, as to cause the tires on said motor vehicle to make any loud,
raucous squealing, screeching noise, or other sounds caused by excessive
acceleration from a stopped position, or while a vehicle is in motion, or by
deceleration while a vehicle is in motion.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   This section shall not apply to any noises or sounds caused by the
tires of motor vehicles when the vehicle is engaged in an emergency situation
where it is necessary to accelerate or stop the vehicle immediately or suddenly
in order to avoid contact with another motor vehicle, or with a pedestrian, as
long as the emergency situation is not that of the owner's making.
      2.   This section shall not apply to authorized peace officers, fire and
emergency vehicles authorized by the state as such special mobile equipment.
(Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
6-1-6: AVOIDING ARREST OR IDENTIFICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle within the city
to turn off all or any of his vehicle's lights for the purpose of avoiding
arrest or identification. (Ord. 22, 9-1-1970)
6-1-7: SNOW REMOVAL; PROCEDURE AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure for the
efficient removal of snow from the city streets; to establish snow routes; to
allow or prohibit parking on designated city streets; and to establish the
procedure for removal of vehicles in violation of parking prohibitions.
   B.   Removal Of Snow Procedure:
      1.   The city will begin snowplowing or ice removal after it has stopped
snowing or sleeting. However, at the discretion of city officials, plowing of
emergency routes may begin after sufficient notice has been provided as
outlined in this section. This section establishes the following priority for
clearing city streets:
         a.   The emergency route;
         b.   The streets and intersections;
         c.   The alleys; and
         d.   The parks.
      2.   The snowplowing may create a snow pile in driveways that cannot be
prevented. The city is not responsible for the removal of this snow. Property
owners should act responsibly as to the removal of snow piled in their
driveways by the city plows and should not push the snow back into the city
streets where it will create a hazard as a compacted and frozen snow or ice
patch.
      3.   Sanding of icy streets will begin at the city's discretion and
sanding also may follow the plowing of snow from the streets.
   C.   Declaration Of Winter Weather Emergency:
      1.   A declaration of a winter weather emergency will be made by city
officials on the basis of falling snow, sleet, freezing rain or a forecast by
the weather bureau of other weather conditions that make it necessary for motor
vehicle traffic, including emergency vehicles, to be expedited. Parking on
certain streets will be prohibited or restricted for snowplowing or sanding
purposes.
      2.   An emergency declaration will take effect not earlier than four (4)
hours after it is declared, except if it is declared after eight o'clock (8:00)
P.M., it will take effect at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. City officials
will give a written declaration to the city clerk that states the beginning and
ending time for the emergency declaration. The declaration may be canceled or
changed by the same procedure. The city clerk must inform area radio and
television stations and local newspapers as delineated by resolution of the
city council and will ask for a public service announcement. The city officials
must post signs on all "emergency routes" so designated by resolution of the
city council. "Emergency routes" will be posted at approximately two (2) block
intervals as is possible along the emergency route. Public announcement method
and "emergency routes" may be designated and changed by resolution of the city
council from time to time as deemed necessary.
   D.   Parking Restricted During Winter Weather Emergency; Violation:
      1.   In order to provide an emergency route during winter storms, certain
streets will be designated "emergency routes" by resolution of the city
council. Designated "emergency routes" will be the first streets to be cleared.
      2.   Vehicles may park only on the odd numbered side of the street on odd
days of the month after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. On even numbered days,
all other parking regulations and prohibitions remain in effect.
      3.   Any vehicle found to be parked where not permitted during a
declaration of emergency as described in this subsection or subsection C of
this section, may be towed. Towing costs will be assessed to the owner of the
vehicle towed.
      4.   During a winter weather emergency, there will be no parking allowed
on either side of any winter weather emergency route. This restriction will
continue until the city lifts the winter weather emergency.
   E.   Penalty: The city may elect, at its sole discretion, to prosecute any
violation either as simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction. (Ord. 2010-
02, 11-9-2010)
6-1-8: GOLF CART OPERATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to enable the city with the
legal remedies provided by Iowa Code section 321.247, "golf cart operation on
city streets", and to establish other provisions for means of law enforcement.
   B.   Operation Restrictions And Requirements: The following provisions are
hereby adopted, including certain provisions of Iowa Code section 321.247, and
are hereby made applicable to all city ordinances, now or hereafter adopted:
      1.   The operation of an adequate, safety equipped golf cart on the city
streets is permitted by persons who are sixteen (16) years old and who possess
a valid motor vehicle driver's license.
      2.   The golf cart shall not be operated upon any city street that is a
primary road extension through the city but shall be allowed to cross a city
street that is a primary road extension through the city. Augusta Avenue and
Hawkeye Drive are designated primary roads in the city.
      3.   The golf cart shall be equipped with a slow moving vehicle sign
visible from the rear of the cart and with a bicycle safety flag, the top of
which shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from ground level.
      4.   The golf cart may only operate on the permitted city streets from
the time period of one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise to one-half (1/2) hour
prior to sunset.
   C.   Penalty:
      1.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty
of a municipal infraction for each provision violated. This shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of simple misdemeanor violations, but it shall be
construed as an additional remedy, alongside the imposition of the simple
misdemeanor.
      2.   The city may, at its sole discretion, elect which remedy to pursue,
but the city may not pursue both remedies for a single violation. (Ord. 2012-
01, 6-12-2012)
      3.   Unless otherwise altered by amendment to Iowa Code section 364.22,
all municipal infractions for each provision violated shall constitute a civil
offense punishable by a civil penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Authorized Enforcement Officers: The following officers are hereby
authorized by the city to file municipal infractions when on good faith belief
they have determined that a violation has occurred: mayor, mayor pro tem, city
clerk, director of public works, and city attorney. (Ord. 2012-01, 6-12-2012;
amd. 2015 Code)
6-1-9: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, anyone violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 22, 9-1-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: No Parking Places
6-2-4: Parking Time Limitation
6-2-5: Parallel Parking
6-2-6: Parking Restrictions In Specific Areas
6-2-7: Parking Of Semitractors And Trailers
6-2-8: Fines For Violations
6-2-9: Impounding Of Vehicles
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to enact regulations concerning parking within
the city and prescribing penalties therefor and the manner of payment. (Ord.
82-68, 12-6-1982)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions as contained in Iowa Code chapter 321 shall apply to the
enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 83-73, 8-11-1983)
6-2-3: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to stop, stand, or park
such vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid
conflicts with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer, member of the fire department or traffic control signal or device.
   A.   Within an intersection.
   B.   On a crosswalk.
   C.   In front of a public or private driveway.
   D.   Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
   E.   On a sidewalk.
   F.   Within ten feet (10') from the approach of any flashing beacon, stop
sign, stoplight or traffic control signal located at the side or above the
roadway or center of roadway.
   G.   Within ten feet (10') from the intersection of curb lines or, if none,
within five feet (5') of the intersection of property lines at the
intersection, except alleys.
   H.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to the fire station.
   I.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction when
standing, stopping or parking will obstruct the traffic.
   J.   On a bridge.
   K.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a
curb or a street.
   L.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking. (Ord.
82-68, 12-6-1982)
6-2-4: PARKING TIME LIMITATION:
No person shall leave any vehicle at the same location upon any street, alley
or public ground at any time for a period longer than forty eight (48) hours.
(Ord. 82-68, 12-6-1982)
6-2-5: PARALLEL PARKING:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the front wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb
or edge of the roadway, except in those locations where there are signs posted
permitting angle parking. (Ord. 82-68, 12-6-1982)
6-2-6: PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN SPECIFIC AREAS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is:
      1.   To establish parking restrictions of any vehicles along certain
streets or portions of streets; and
      2.   To establish a penalty for violation for unlawful parking along the
streets or portions of streets listed in subsection B of this section. (Ord.
2005-2, 6-14-2005)
   B.   Restricted Parking Areas: In order to provide safe travel on certain
streets or portions of streets, parking shall be restricted as follows:
James Boulevard: Vehicles shall only be allowed to park on the east side, which
is also the even numbered side, of James Boulevard.
Kay Drive: Vehicles shall only be allowed to park on the north side, which is
also the even numbered side, of Kay Drive.
Summit Street: Vehicles shall be parked on only the north side of Summit Street
between Augusta and Prairie Avenues. Parking on the south side of Summit Street
between Prairie and Augusta Avenues is prohibited. (Ord. 2005-2, 6-14-2005;
amd. Ord. 2005-003, 7-12-2005; Ord. 2010-01, 11-9-2010; 2015 Code)
   C.   Towing Of Illegally Parked Vehicle: Any vehicle found to be parked
where not permitted may be towed to a place where parking is permitted or to a
designated place for storage as determined by city officials. Such towing costs
shall be assessed to the owner of the vehicle towed.
   D.   Other Parking Regulations In Effect: All other parking regulations and
prohibitions shall remain in full effect. (Ord. 2005-2, 6-14-2005)
6-2-7: PARKING OF SEMITRACTORS AND TRAILERS:
No semitractor and trailer or stand alone semitrailer may be parked overnight
on any city street. Tractors and semitrailers may not be parked on city
streets, except when under active control of the driver for the purposes of
loading or unloading cargo. Any time such a vehicle stops on city streets, it
must be attended by a lawful driver. Exceptions may be made with city approval.
(Ord. 2008-01, 8-12-2008)
6-2-8: FINES FOR VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Fines Imposed: All violators of this chapter shall receive a ten dollar
($10.00) fine, except for violations for parking in designated snow routes. The
fine for violation of the snow route provisions is twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for each violation.
   B.   Fines Assessed To Vehicle Owner; Notice: All fines are assessed to the
owner of the vehicle. Notice of violations made by law enforcement officers
must be left with the vehicle in a manner clearly visible to the driver.
   C.   Time Limit For Payment; Increase Of Amount: A parking violation, other
than a snow route violation, will increase to twenty dollars ($20.00) if not
paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the violation. (Ord. 2009-01, 3-10-
2009)
6-2-9: IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicle Obstructing Traffic:
      1.   Impoundment: Any officer, agent or employee of the city designated
to enforce the parking ordinances of the city, on finding the vehicle
unattended at a place where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or obstructing the roadway in any way, in the event that
said officer, agent or employee feels that an emergency exists and the vehicle
needs to be removed, may remove or cause the removal of such vehicle to a place
designated by said officer, agent or employee for the storage of impounded
vehicles. (Ord. 82-68, 12-6-1982; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Notify Owner: Upon impoundment of such vehicle, the city shall
notify the last known registered owner of such impoundment by certified mail if
the name and address of the owner can be ascertained with reasonable diligence.
      3.   Reclamation Of Vehicle; Payment Of Charges: The registered owner or
operator may reclaim such vehicle by payment of any charges incurred for towing
and storage. (Ord. 82-68, 12-6-1982)
   B.   Accumulation Of Parking Tickets Against Vehicle; Notice And Hearing: If
any vehicle has accumulated five (5) or more unpaid parking tickets, said
vehicle may be impounded subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 82-68, 12-
6-1982; amd. 2015 Code)
      1.   Impoundment shall occur only after notice and opportunity for an
administrative hearing is offered to the last known registered owner of said
motor vehicle.
      2.   Notice shall constitute the following: written notification by
certified mail or personal service stating the license number or describing the
vehicle at issue; the owner's name; the date and description of violations; the
date, time, and place of the administrative hearing; that the hearing shall be
on the merits of whether to impound said vehicle; that failure to appear at
said hearing constitutes a waiver to an opportunity for hearing; and that the
owner shall be responsible for all charges and costs incurred in impounding
said vehicle.
      3.   The hearing shall be conducted before the mayor or his/her designee
and shall be limited as to whether said vehicle shall be impounded for
accumulation of unpaid tickets. The owner may at that time pay for any
outstanding tickets.
      4.   No vehicle shall be impounded by towing unless said vehicle is on a
public street or in a public lot and appears to be in violation of an existing
parking ordinance. (Ord. 82-68, 12-6-1982)
CHAPTER 3
SNOWMOBILES
SECTION:
6-3-1: Short Title
6-3-2: Purpose
6-3-3: Definitions
6-3-4: Operation Restricted In City Limits
6-3-5: Curfew
6-3-6: Violation; Penalty
6-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the CITY OF
OXFORD, IOWA, SNOWMOBILE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
6-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate the use of snowmobiles upon
the streets within the corporate limits of the city and to provide penalties
for violations thereof. (Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
6-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words are defined:
OPERATE: To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the
operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is
moving.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
OWNER: A person, other than a lienholder, having the property right in or title
to a snowmobile. The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession
of a snowmobile subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created
by agreement and securing payment or performance of an obligation, but the term
excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, and the
state, its agencies and political subdivisions.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
SNOWMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000)
pounds which utilizes wheels with low pressure tires and is designed to operate
on land or ice or is equipped with sled type runners or skis, endless belt type
tread, or any combination thereof, and is designed for travel upon snow, land
or ice, except in public areas in which the boundary shall be thirty three feet
(33') each side of the centerline of the roadway. (Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
6-3-4: OPERATION RESTRICTED IN CITY LIMITS:
   A.   Compliance With Statute: It is unlawful for any person to operate a
snowmobile within the corporate limits of the city, except upon the terms,
conditions and limitations enumerated in Iowa Code chapter 321G and the
ordinances of the city.
   B.   Areas Designated: Snowmobiles may be operated on the roadway and on the
five foot (5') adjacent shoulder on either side of the roadway on the following
streets in the city: Wilson Street and Nemora Avenue, for the purposes of
allowing the operator to pass through the city and to his destination only. The
snowmobile operators shall comply with all other requirements of Iowa Code
chapter 321G. (Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
6-3-5: CURFEW:
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, no person shall operate
a snowmobile within the corporate limits of the city after ten thirty o'clock
(10:30) P.M. unless said person has received written permission from the mayor.
(Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
6-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished accordingly. (Ord. 63, 3-11-1981)
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose
6-4-2: Definition
6-4-3: Removal; Impounding Of Vehicles
6-4-4: Notice To Owner And Lienholders
6-4-5: Impoundment Fees
6-4-6: Auction Of Operable Vehicle
6-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the city by providing for removal of abandoned motor vehicles.
(Ord. 83-71, 2-10-1983)
6-4-2: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "abandoned vehicle" shall mean any of
the following:
   A.   A motor vehicle that has been left unattended on public property
(streets and public grounds) for more than forty eight (48) hours and lacks
current registration plates or two (2) or more wheels or other structural parts
which render the vehicle totally inoperable; or
   B.   A motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than fifteen (15) days; or
   C.   A motor vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or
has been placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person
in control of the property for more than twenty four (24) hours; or
   D.   A motor vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of the mayor
or any other peace officer duly designated by the city council in the
provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinance providing for
impoundment of vehicles and has not been reclaimed for a period of fifteen (15)
days. (Ord. 83-71, 2-10-1983)
6-4-3: REMOVAL; IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES:
If any abandoned motor vehicle is found upon the streets and highways, parking
lots, or other public places, which has current registration plates, it may be
removed under the direction of the mayor or other peace officer designated by
the city council. (Ord. 83-71, 2-10-1983)
6-4-4: NOTICE TO OWNER AND LIENHOLDERS:
   A.   Issuing Notice; Contents: An abandoned motor vehicle may be sold as
provided for in this chapter, only after written notice is given to the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, and to all lienholders of record. Notice
shall be by personal service, unless personal service is not possible, in which
case it shall be by certified mail. Mailed notice shall be deemed given when
mailed. The notice shall describe the year, model, and serial number of the
motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where it is being held,
and inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor
vehicle within fourteen (14) days after the effective date of the notice upon
payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing
the motor vehicle in custody. The notice shall also state that the failure of
the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to reclaim the motor vehicle
within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all
lienholders of all right, title, claim and interest in the motor vehicle and
that such failure to reclaim is deemed consent to the sale of the motor vehicle
at a public auction or disposal of the motor vehicle to a demolisher. If the
owner and lienholders do not exercise their right, they shall have no further
right, title, claim, or interest in or to such motor vehicle, as provided by
law.
   B.   Unknown Owner; Publication Of Notice: If the identity of the last
registered owner of an abandoned vehicle cannot be determined, or if the
registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible to
determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in
the city shall be made by the mayor or other peace officer designated by the
city council, and multiple listings may be included in said notice if they are
subject to the same time limits, and the same information as prescribed for
mailed notice shall be included.
   C.   Extension Of Time Limit: The owner or any lienholder may, by written
request delivered to the mayor or other peace officer designated by the city
council, prior to the expiration of the fourteen (14) day reclaiming period,
obtain an additional fourteen (14) days within which the motor vehicle may be
reclaimed. (Ord. 83-71, 2-10-1983)
6-4-5: IMPOUNDMENT FEES:
The owner or lienholder shall pay forty five dollars ($45.00) if the vehicle is
claimed within three (3) days of impounding, plus seven dollars ($7.00) for
each additional day within the reclaiming period, plus towing and storage fees,
if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The
amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned
garages shall be established, by resolution of the council, before the
provisions of this chapter are carried out by the mayor or other peace officer
designated by the city council. (Ord. 83-71, 2-10-1983)
6-4-6: AUCTION OF OPERABLE VEHICLE:
   A.   Sale To Highest Bidder: If an abandoned motor vehicle which has not
been reclaimed as provided by section
6-4-4 of this chapter, it shall be sold at public auction to the highest
bidder.
   B.   Publication Of Notice: Notice of auction shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days and no
more than fourteen (14) days prior to the auction.
   C.   Sale For Use On Highways; Inspection: Before the auction, the mayor or
other peace officer designated by the city council shall make a determination
as to whether or not the vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways. If
it is to be sold for such use, it shall first be inspected as required by law,
have a valid certificate of inspection affixed, and shall then be sold, and
title given in accordance with law.
   D.   Vehicles Not Sold For Use On Highways: Vehicles not sold for use upon
the highways shall be sold only in accordance with the restrictions in the
state law. The purchaser shall take title as provided for by law, or if sold to
a demolisher, no further titling of the motor vehicle shall be permitted.
   E.   Disposition Of Proceeds: Proceeds of any sale shall apply to the costs
of towing, preserving, storing and notification required, in accordance with
state law, and any balance shall be disposed of as required by law. (Ord. 83-
71, 2-10-1983)
CHAPTER 6
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Purpose
6-5-2: Definitions
6-5-3: Operation Of ATV/UTV Permitted
6-5-4: Reserved
6-5-5: Speed
6-5-6: Equipment
6-5-7: Reserved
6-5-8: Travel Prohibited
6-5-9: Occupant Load
6-5-10: Proof Of Financial Liability Coverage
6-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter of the Code of Ordinances is to permit the
operation of ATV’s/UTV’s on certain streets in the City, as authorized by
Section 3211.1 (17) of the Code of Iowa, as amended. This chapter shall apply
whenever a ATV/UTV is operated on any city street or alley within the City of
Oxford. (Ord. 2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases are defined as
follows.
                                      A motorized vehicle not less than three and not more than six non-highway
                                      tires that is limited in engine displacement to less than 1000 cubic
ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES (ATV):           centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1200 pounds and that has a
                                      seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for
                                      steering control.
                                      A motorized vehicle with not less than four and not more than eight nonhighway
                                      tires or rubberized tracks that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design,
OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE (UTV):       not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control
                                      levers for control. “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following
                                      vehicles:
   OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE - TYPE An off-road vehicle with a total dry weight of one thousand two hundred pounds
                                      or less and a width of fifty inches or less.
                                      An off-road utility vehicle, other than a type 1 off-road vehicle, with a
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE - TYPE 2:      total dry weight of two thousand pounds or less and a width of sixty-five
                                      inches or less.
                                      An off-road utility vehicle, other than a type I off-road vehicle, with a
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE - TYPE 3:      total dry weight of more than two thousand pounds or a width of sixty-five
                                      inches or both,
OPERATE:                              To use or control the movement of the ATV/UTV in any manner or degree.
OPERATOR:                             The person who uses or controls the movement of the ATV/UTV.
PASSENGER:                            A person who does not use or control the movement of the ATV/UTV but who
                                      merely rides on the ATV/UTV.
STREET:                               That portion of the street or alley intended for vehicular travel. (Ord. 2022-
                                      02, 9-13-2022)
 
6-5-3: OPERATION OF ATV/UTV PERMITTED:
ATV’s/UTV’s may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons possessing
a valid Iowa operator’s license, and at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord.
2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-4: RESERVED:
6-5-5: SPEED:
No ATV’s/UTV’s shall be operated on any City Street at a speed in excess of the
posted speed limit with maximum speed of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. (Ord.
2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-6: EQUIPMENT:
ATV’s/UTVs may operate upon City streets as required by state law with the
equipment required by state law.(Ord. 2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-7: RESERVED:
6-5-8: TRAVEL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to operate ATV’s/UTV’s in any public cemetery, park,
playground, or on any sidewalk or trail or any other publicly owned property
without express written permission from the City, public parking areas
excluded. (Ord. 2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-9: OCCUPANT LOAD:
It shall be unlawful to operate ATV’s/UTV’s in excess of the designed occupant
load thereof or ride on any portion not designed to carry passengers. (Ord.
2022-02, 9-13-2022)
6-5-10: PROOF OF FINANCIAL LIABILITY COVERAGE:
No person shall operate an ATV/UTV on any public street, or alley without proof
of financial liability coverage for the vehicle and carried proof of such
financial liability coverage in accordance with Section 321.20B of the Code of
Iowa. (Ord. 2022-02, 9-13-2022)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Construction And Repair Authorized
7-1-2: Assessment Against Property For Expense
7-1-3: Construction Specifications
7-1-4: Failure To Construct Or Repair
7-1-5: Snow Removal Responsibility
7-1-1: CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Permanent Sidewalks: The city shall have the power to provide for the
construction, reconstruction and repair of permanent sidewalks upon any street,
highway, avenue, public ground or other place within the limits of the city and
assess the costs thereof on the lots or parcels of land in front of which the
same shall be constructed, and said construction of a permanent sidewalk shall
not be made until the bed of the same shall have been graded so that when
completed such sidewalks will be at the established grade. The establishment of
permanent sidewalks within the city will be done in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended, and pertaining to
permanent sidewalks.
   B.   Temporary Sidewalks: The city shall have the power to provide for the
laying, re-laying and repairing of temporary sidewalks upon any street, avenue,
alley, public ground or other place within the limits of the city at a cost not
to exceed that which is allowed by the appropriate sections of the code of Iowa
and to prescribe a uniform width thereof and to regulate the grade and provide
for the assessment of the cost thereof on the property in front of which the
same shall be laid. The establishment of temporary sidewalks will be done in
accordance with appropriate provisions of the code of Iowa, as amended,
pertaining to temporary sidewalks. (Ord. 32, 11-10-1970)
7-1-2: ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY FOR EXPENSE:
The city shall have the power to repair sidewalks without notice to the
property owner and assess the expense thereof on the property in front of which
said repairs are made, and the same shall be certified and collected as other
taxes. All of this shall be done in accordance with the appropriate provisions
of the code of Iowa, as amended, pertaining to the repair of sidewalks. (Ord.
32, 11-10-1970)
7-1-3: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks throughout the business district and the residential district
shall be constructed as the city council may direct and as passed by
appropriate resolution of the city council. All plans and specifications for
the construction of sidewalks shall be prepared by the council and kept on file
in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 32, 11-10-1970)
7-1-4: FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR:
If the owner of any lot or parcel of ground in front of which a sidewalk is
ordered constructed or reconstructed, or repaired, shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to construct or reconstruct or repair the sidewalk within the time
prescribed by resolution ordering such improvement or repair, the city council
shall cause said improvement or repair to be made and the costs and expenses
thereof be assessed against the lot or parcels of land adjoining or abutting
where such improvements or repairs are made. All of this shall be done in
accordance with the appropriate sections of the code of Iowa, as amended. (Ord.
32, 11-10-1970)
7-1-5: SNOW REMOVAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Owner Responsible; Failure To Remove: It shall be the responsibility of
the abutting property owner to promptly remove snow, ice and accumulations from
the sidewalks, but in the event that such snow, ice and accumulations are
permitted to remain on said sidewalks for more than a reasonable length of
time, the city shall have the power to remove them and assess the actual costs
thereof against the said property, all in accordance with the appropriate
provisions of the code of Iowa and amendments thereto relating to the removal
of snow, ice and accumulations.
   B.   Time Limit: The city shall determine by resolution what a reasonable
length of time shall be. (Ord. 32, 11-10-1970)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Purpose
7-2-2: Supervision; Director Of Public Works
7-2-3: Permit Required; Insurance
7-2-4: Planting Requirements
7-2-5: Dead Or Diseased Trees; Nuisance Declared
7-2-6: Interference With Enforcement
7-2-7: Penalty
7-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to assume charge, custody and control of all
trees and shrubbery upon the public streets and upon public property of the
city and to provide rules and regulations for the planting, pruning, caring,
removal and maintenance of such trees and shrubbery and for the granting of
permits relative thereto; and to define tree nuisances and provide for their
abatement in order to provide for the safety, preservation of health, and to
promote the prosperity and improve the order, comfort and convenience of the
city. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970)
7-2-2: SUPERVISION; DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Trimming Trees: All trimming, pruning, or cutting of any trees or
shrubs in any street, avenue, highway or public place shall be done under the
personal supervision of the director of public works, except that the owner,
agent or occupant of any lot or parcel of land shall keep the trees on and
adjoining his property in the street, avenue or highway trimmed so that the
overhanging branches shall be at least ten feet (10') above the surface of the
sidewalk or surface of the street, and in all cases, all trees shall be trimmed
as high as the size and shape of the tree will permit.
   B.   Planting Approval Required: No person shall plant or set out any tree
or shrub in any street or public place of the city without first getting
approval from the city council and should anyone plant a tree or shrub without
first getting approval, the city may require its removal by the person who
planted said tree or the city may remove said tree or shrub. (Ord. 39, 11-10-
1970)
7-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSURANCE:
   A.   Application For Permit: No person except the city or a person hired by
the city shall treat, trim, remove or otherwise disturb any tree or shrub on
any street or other public property without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the city clerk. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970)
   B.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Certificate Of Insurance: Prior to the issuance of a permit, and
before any tree work of any sort can be done, the applicant must deposit with
the city clerk a certificate of liability insurance in the amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injuries and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) aggregate for property damage and injuries
liability. The insurance policy shall also name the city as an additional
insured in all liability insurance. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Waiver Of Insurance Requirement: In event the applicant is able to
furnish proof of financial responsibility approved by the city and enters into
an agreement for indemnification of the city in the event of any damage caused
by applicants obtaining a permit to do tree work, the insurance requirement may
be waived.
   C.   Permit Issuance; Council Approval: All permits will be issued by the
city clerk, with approval of the city council. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970)
7-2-4: PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Placement: All trees hereinafter planted in any street, avenue or
highway shall be planted midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the
curb where the curb line is established, and where the curb line is not
established, on a line ten feet (10') from the property line.
   B.   Removal Authority: All trees now or hereafter planted in any street,
alley, avenue or highway that interfere with the making of any improvements
thereon, or with travel, or become dangerous, shall be removed by order of the
city council; and any tree planted in any street, avenue or highway shall be
planted upon such condition and subject to such removal. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970)
7-2-5: DEAD OR DISEASED TREES; NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance; Abatement: Any dead, diseased or damaged trees
or shrubs which may harbor serious insect or diseased pests or disease
injurious to other trees is hereby declared a nuisance and when any dead,
diseased, damaged or healthy tree or shrub which is in a state of
deterioration, and in such a condition that said tree may fall and damage
property or cause injury to persons, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, said
nuisances may be abated in the same manner as any other nuisance as set forth
in the provisions of the ordinances of the city or the code of Iowa.
   B.   Dutch Elm Diseased Trees:
      1.   Removal Required: Any tree infected with Dutch elm disease is hereby
specifically declared to be a nuisance and the city shall remove or cause to be
removed any tree known to be contaminated.
      2.   Notify Owner To Remove; Right To Inspect: Any tree infected with
Dutch elm disease, and which is located on private property, shall be removed
by the owner thereof after the owner has received a written notice requiring
the removal of said tree and said tree shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after receipt of said notice. The notice may be served upon the property owner
or on the occupant or person in charge of the property, and the city is hereby
authorized to enter and inspect the trees growing on private property in an
effort to enforce the application of this chapter.
      3.   Removal By City; Assessment Of Cost: If the tree is not removed on
or before the date specified in the notice, the city may remove or cause said
tree to be removed and the exact cost of such work shall be certified and
assessed against the property owner as specified in the code of Iowa. (Ord. 39,
11-10-1970)
7-2-6: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT:
No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the city or any of
their assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of
this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an
attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
any property within the city. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970)
7-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 39, 11-10-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Registration
7-3-3: Right-Of-Way Permits
7-3-4: Completion Of Installations
7-3-5: As Built Drawings
7-3-6: Interference With The City
7-3-7: Relocation Or Removal
7-3-8: Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities
7-3-9: Compliance With Permit
7-3-10: Emergency Removal Or Relocation
7-3-11: Coordination Of Installations
7-3-12: Insurance And Bond Requirements
7-3-13: Pole Attachments
7-3-14: Appeal To City Council
7-3-15: No Easement, Permission Only, Not Assignable
7-3-16: Penalty For Violation
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
   A.   City right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a city roadway,
street, bridge, trail, or city sidewalk, in which the city has an interest,
including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility
easements.
   B.   Right-of-Way Users: Those entities, except the City of Oxford, that own
or operate facilities that are or are proposed to be installed within City
right-of-way for purposes of conducting, 'transmitting or distributing water,
drainage, sanitary sewage, electricity, steam, gas,pr electronic
communications. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-2: REGISTRATION:
   A.   All right-of-way users that have or propose to have facilities within
the city right-of-way shall register annually with the city on or before
january 1 of each year to provide the following information:
      1.   The identity and form of legal entity of the registrant and if
wholly owned by another legal entity the identity of the owning entity.
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement, and for
local operations, of the right-of-way user.
      3.   A description of the registrant's existing and proposed facilities
within the City right-of-way.
      4.   A description of the service that the registrant intends to offer or
is currently offering within the city.
      5.   Information sufficient to enable the city to determine that the
registrant has applied for or received any document or certificate required by
State or Federal law to provide services or facilities within the city.
      6.   Proof of registration with the Iowa "one-call" system.
   B.   Each right-of-way user registration shall be accompanied by such
registration fee as shall be set from time to time by the City Council.
   C.   The purpose of the registration required by this section is to assist
the city in enforcement of its regulations; and, to assist the city in the
abatement of dangerous conditions or conditions that threaten to interfere with
the property of others by reason of the registrant's facilities. (Ord. 2019-01,
5-14-2019)
7-3-3: RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS:
   A.   A right-of-way user shall obtain, by application to the City Clerk, a
permit for installation in the city right-of-way whenever the right-of-way user
desires to place, construct, bury, locate, relocate, or reconstruct anything in
the city right-of-way. Such application shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Written and-graphic material that states and-shows the particular
part of or point on the city right-of-way where placement, construction, or
excavation is proposed to occur.
      2.   A statement of the beginning and ending dates for the time during
which, the work is to be done and completed.
      3.   A sign-off sheet showing that all other registered right-of-way
users and the City of Oxford, with facilities in the vicinity of the proposed
installation or repair work have reviewed the plan for the proposed work and
have no objection. So as not to have undue delay, the right-of-way user making
application for the permit need only wait ten business days from the time of
submitting its plans to the other right-of-way users. Failure by a right-of-way
user to respond to such requested plan review within ten (10) business days
shah constitute an expression of no objection. If there is a dispute between
right-of-way users as to location of the respective facilities of each in a
segment of city right-of-way, the city shall determine the placement of such
facilities.
      4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed work in such detail as the
city shall reasonably require to show that the work as proposed conforms to
city ordinances, regulations, and policies.
   B.   In making excavations in the city right-of-way the right-of-way user
shall do the work in a manner devised to cause the least possible inconvenience
to the public.
   C.   The right-of-way user shall properly protect, according to safety
standards generally accepted at the time that the installation in the city
right-of-way occurs, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement of
barricades, warning, lights and such other or additional devices, in accordance
with The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as circumstances may
warrant. If in the opinion of the city such excavation or obstruction is not
properly and safely protected, the city shall notify the right-of-way user and
the right-of-way user shall comply immediately with the instructions of the
city. Failure or refusal by the right-of-way user to follow such instructions
shall constitute a violation of this section.
   D.   Any trenches or excavations opened by a right-of-way user in the city
right-of-way shall be filled by the right-of-way user, all backfilling in the
city right-of-way shall be done in accordance with city specifications,
including specification for the replacement of grass and other landscaping
features.
   E.   Temporary street surfacing shall be placed, in excavations in a city
street as soon as the same has been backfilled. Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened, disturbed or
damaged, shall be promptly restored and replaced with like materials at the
expense of the right-of-way user and left in as good a condition as before the
opening, disturbance or damage occurred. In the event that like materials for
replacement are not available, the city may approve the use of an alternative
material that is reasonably close in effect to the original material. The city
will consider and evaluate for approved use, on a case by case basis, such
alternative methods that meet standards of good engineering practice.
   F.   Where a cut or disturbance is made by a right-of-way user to a section
of a street or a sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, the
right-of-way user shall replace the full width of the existing sidewalk or
street paving and the mil length of the section or sections cut, a section
being that area marked by expansion joints or scoring, or as directed by the
city.
   G.   Right-of-way users shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition
for a period of two (2) years following such disturbance all portions of the
city street surface disturbed by a right-of-way user. Landscaping that is so
disturbed shall be repaired and maintained for a period of one (1) year. Grass
that is so disturbed shall be repaired and maintained for a period of sixty
(60) days.
   H.   No right-of-way user or any person acting on the right-of-way user's
behalf shall commence any non-emergency work in the city right-of-way without
five (5) working days advance notice to the city. In the event of an emergency
involving public safety, the city may issue the permit orally, but the written
documentation of the application for and issuance of the permit shall be
completed as soon as practicable after the work has started.
   I.   Whenever any existing electric utility facilities, cable television
facilities, or other telecommunications facilities are installed underground in
a certain segment of the city right-of-way, any other right-of-way user shall
also locate its facilities underground in that segment of the city right-of-
way.
   J.   Street crossings and sidewalk crossings by right-of-way user facilities
shall be bored at those locations where reasonably required by the city. Some
examples of where such boring may be required are: major streets, new streets,
and locations of major events that conflict with construction.
   K.   No permit shall be issued for the installation of right-of-way user
facilities in the city right-of-way unless the right-of-way user has filed with
the city a registration statement in accordance with this section.
   L.   No permit for installation of right-of-way Facilities in the city
right-of-way shall be issued by the city unless the right-of-way user has paid
such installation permit fee as shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the city council.
   M.   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of installations by a right-of-way user in the city right-of-way shall
be replaced or restored as soon as is reasonably possible, in accordance with
inspection by and direction of the city public works department, with respect
to effects of construction in the city right-of-way. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-4: COMPLETION OF INSTALLATIONS:
A right-of-way user shall promptly complete all installations in the city
right-of-way so as to minimize disruption of the city ways and other public and
private property. All installation work authorized by permit within the city
right-of-way, including restoration work, shall be completed as soon as
possible but not later than one hundred and eighty (180) days of the date the
city issued a permit for the installation. An extension may be granted for good
cause due to circumstances beyond the control of the right-of-way user. (Ord.
2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-5: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
A right-of-way user shall, within sixty (60) days of making an installation pf
facilities in the city right-of-way, furnish the city with one (1) complete set
of as built drawings, in an electronic format compatible with the city's
mapping system, if required, drawn to scale and certified by the contact person
for the right-of-way user as accurately depicting the location of the
facilities installed pursuant to the permit. When the city has issued a single
installation permit document relative to multiple installations linked in a
single project, the as built drawing pertaining to those installations are not
required as aforesaid until sixty (60) days after completion of all
installations to be done for the project. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-6: INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY:
A right-of-way user shall so construct, maintain, operate and locate its
facilities in the city right-of-way so as not to interfere with the
construction, location, maintenance and operation of city sewer, water,
drainage, electrical, communications, signal and fiber optic facilities, or any
other operations or facilities of the city. The city shall have the rignt and
power by resolution of its City Council, to specifically direct the location of
right-of-way user facilities with reference to city facilities, existing or
proposed, in such a manner as shall serve the public use and convenience.
Failure or refusal by a right-of-way user to promptly follow such directions
shall be a violation of this section. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-7: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL:
Within sixty (60) days following written notice from the city, a right-of-way
user shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently relocate, change or
alter the position of any facilities within the city right-of-way whenever the
city shall have determined that such relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city public improvement, or for the operations of the city in or upon
the city right-of-way. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-8: REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES:
Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, a right-of-way
user that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized facility within the city
right-of-way shall remove such facilities from the city right-of-way at the
right-of-way users sole expense. A facility is unauthorized if:
   A.   Any license, permit or authorization required by Federal, state or city
regulations with respect to the facilities has not been obtained, or has been
revoked, or allowed to expire.
   B.   The facilities are not installed in accordance with the permit for
installation or other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-9: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All installation work and activities for right-of-way user facilities in the
city right-of-way shall be in accordance with the installation permit issued by
the city. Any work done that is not in accordance with an applicable
installation permit shall be a violation of this section by the right-of-way
user; and, failure to do work required by an installation permit shalt be a
violation by the right-of-way user, regardless of involvement of agents, or
contractors, of the right-of-way user. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-10: EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION:
The city shall have the right and power to cut or move any right-of-way
facilities in the city right-of-way as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. The
city shall endeavor to give notice of such emergency disruption, but nothing in
this chapter shall be deemed to create a duty to give such notice. Restoration
of right-of-way facilities that have been cut or moved as aforesaid shall be
done by the right-of-way user at its own expense. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-11: COORDINATION OF INSTALLATIONS:
All right-of-way users with facilities in the city right-of-way or who expect
to install facilities in the city right-of-way shall coordinate such activities
with the city and with each other right-of-way user. Between January 1 and
February 1 of each year, all registered right-of-way users shall provide to the
city a schedule of their anticipated installations in the city right-of way for
that calendar year. Each registered right-of-way user shall meet with the city,
and with the other registered right-of-way users as scheduled by the city, to
schedule and coordinate installation of right-of-way user facilities in the
city right-of-way, so as to minimize public inconvenience and costs. (Ord.
2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-12: INSURANCE AND BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A right-of-way user that has or expects to install facilities within
the city right-of-way shall maintain in effect such insurance as the city
engineer shall reasonably deem appropriate to the nature of the facilities
installed or to be installed, and the location of such installations.
   B.   The city may require performance security in an amount commensurate
with the scope of the work, to secure satisfactory installation in accordance
with the installation permit, by means of an irrevocable letter of credit in a
form approved by the City Attorney, or by cash deposit. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-
2019)
7-3-13: POLE ATTACHMENTS:
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a right-of-way user
to attach its facilities to the utility poles of any right-of-way user.
Installation of right-of-way user facilities underground in the same places
where other right-of-way user facilities are attached to an existing set of
utility poles shall be permitted.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to confer upon any right-of-way
user any right or entitlement to make any attachment to the utility poles of
any right-of-way user.
   C.   At those locations on the city right-of-way where there are already
existing utility poles of a right-of-way user, a second set of poles is
strictly prohibited, except when done by or at the request of the city. If
there is not sufficient space on the existing utility poles for attachment of
the proposed additional right-of-way user facilities, or if the right-of-way
user proposing to install right-of-way user facilities at the site of the
existing poles cannot reach an agreement with the owner of the poles to allow
attachment of those facilities, then those facilities shall be installed
underground. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-14: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
A right-of-way user that is denied registration, denied a right-of-way
installation permit, that has its right-of-way installation permit revoked, or
that believes that the fees imposed are in violation of applicable State law,
may request in writing that such denial, revocation or fee imposition be
reviewed by the City Council. Such request shall be made within ten (10)
business days from the date of the city's denial or revocation. The City
Council shall act within sixty (60) days of a-timely written request. A
decision by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition must be in writingand supported by a written finding establishing
the reasonableness of the decision. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-15: NO EASEMENT, PERMISSION ONLY, NOT ASSIGNABLE:
The provisions of this chapter, and the permits and authorizations granted
pursuant to this chapter, shall not be deemed to create or grant, to anyone any
easement, estate, or interest in the property of the city. A permit to install
right-of-way user facilities in the city right-of-way is a mere license, that
is, an authorization to the stated entity to go onto the land of the city to do
only that which is explicitly stated by the permit, that may be revoked by the
city as provided in this chapter, and that cannot be assigned to another. A
right-of-way user that occupies city right-of-way or makes an installation of
facilities in the city right-of-way on the basis of a purported assignment of
an installation permit granted to another entity, shall be in violation of this
section. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
7-3-16: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Reference Oxford City Code Title 1 Chapter 4. (Ord. 2019-01, 5-14-2019)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER REGULATIONS AND RATES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Control And Supervision Over System
8-1-2: Waterworks Fund
8-1-3: Rules Contract With User
8-1-4: Rules And Regulations Established
8-1-5: Meter Installation; Water Billings
8-1-6: Water Service Rates
8-1-7: Delinquency In Paying Bills; Procedure
8-1-8: Service Deposit Required
8-1-9: Request For Meter Test; Billing Adjustment
8-1-10: Excavations; Council Permission Required
8-1-11: Fire Hydrants
8-1-12: City Not Liable For Service Disruption
8-1-13: Injury To Property
8-1-14: Violation; Penalty
8-1-1: CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OVER SYSTEM:
The waterworks system shall be under the control of the city council. A council
member shall be designated at the first council meeting after January 1 of each
year to have supervision over the waterworks system, subject to the control of
the entire city council. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-2: WATERWORKS FUND:
There shall be an account kept by the city treasurer, known as the waterworks
fund. All monies received from the sale of waterworks bonds, from the
collection of water rents, from taxation for waterworks purposes, from the sale
of any property or material connected with the waterworks, from any
appropriation made by the city council for the purpose of construction or
extension of waterworks or from any source whatever connected with the
management and operation of the waterworks system, shall be paid out of this
fund. (Ord. 41)
8-1-3: RULES CONTRACT WITH USER:
   A.   Assent To Comply: The rules, regulations and water rates hereafter set
out in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract with every
person who is supplied with water through the waterworks system, and every
person, by taking water, shall be considered to express his assent to be bound
thereby.
   B.   Failure To Comply; Turn Off Water: When any of the same are violated,
or such others as the city council may adopt, the water shall be cut off from
the building or place of such violation and shall not be turned on except by
order of the director of public works, or his duly authorized agent, and only
then after the payment of the expense of shutting off the water and turning it
on again, and such other items as the city council or waterworks committee
thereof determine, and in case of such violation, the council or waterworks
committee thereof shall have the right to declare forfeited any payment made
for water by the person committing such violation. (Ord. 41)
8-1-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED:
The following rules and regulations for the government of water users,
licensing of plumbers and others, are hereby adopted and established:
   A.   Application For Connection Permit:
      1.   Every person desiring a supply of water must make application
therefor to the city clerk upon such form as may be prescribed by the city
council and provided for that purpose. The application must state fully and
truly all the uses to which the water is to be applied, and no different or
additional use will be allowed, except by written permission issued by the
waterworks committee upon application being made therefor. The permit for the
connection to the water mains shall be issued by the city clerk or waterworks
committee of the city council to some licensed plumber employed by the
applicant to make the connection to the water mains.
      2.   Not more than one house or premises shall be supplied from one tap,
except by written permission of the majority members of the waterworks
committee and not then in any case unless provision is made so that each house
or premises can be shut off independently of every house or premises.
   B.   Supervision Of Connections: The director of public works shall make or
supervise the making of all connections with the water mains and shall lay or
supervise the laying of all service pipes from the mains to the stop box of the
consumer.
   C.   Cost Of Connection; Applicant Liable: Each applicant for a water
connection to the mains shall pay the estimated cost of such connection to the
middle of the street. (Ord. 41)
   D.   Payment Of Service Bills: All bills must be paid promptly when due.
City officials are positively prohibited from allowing credit to anyone.
   E.   Authority To Turn On Water: Water will not be turned on in any house or
private service except by order of the city clerk or the director of public
works. This rule shall not be construed to prohibit plumbers from turning water
into any pipes to test same for that purpose only. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
   F.   Consumer Supplying Water To Others: No consumer shall supply water to
other families nor suffer them to take water off their premises, or after water
is introduced into any building, or upon their premises, shall any person make
or employ any plumber or other person to make any taps or connections with the
pipes upon the premises from alterations, extensions or attachments without
filing a regular application therefor and issuing a permit by the city clerk or
waterworks committee of the city council.
   G.   Fixtures Closed; Improper Use Prohibited: All persons using water shall
keep the hydrants, tap, hose, water closets, urinals, bath or other fixtures
allotted to their use, closed except when obtaining water for use, and shall be
responsible for any damage or injury that may result to others from the
improper use of water.
   H.   Meters:
      1.   Placement; Easy Access: All meters shall be so placed as to be easy
of access and convenient to read and inspect. They shall also be protected from
frost in such a manner as to prevent freezing.
      2.   Testing And Repair Of Meters: All meters shall be tested when deemed
necessary by the director or when ordered by the waterworks committee of the
city council, and all defective meters shall be repaired by the director of
public works under his supervision. (Ord. 41)
      3.   Faulty Meter; Estimate Of Use: Should a meter get out of order or
repair, or fail to register properly, the consumer will be charged with the
average monthly consumption as shown by the meter, when in order, for the two
(2) monthly periods previous thereto or any fraction thereof if the same has
not been used that long.
      4.   Approval Required To Remove Meter: In no case shall licensed
plumbers or others remove a meter from its setting or interfere with its
reading for any cause, without first obtaining approval from the director of
public works. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
   I.   House Boilers; Vacuum Valve: All house boilers shall be constructed
with a vacuum valve at the top of the inlet pipe, and be sufficiently strong to
bear the pressure of the atmosphere when under a vacuum. The stopcocks and
other appurtenances must be sufficiently strong to bear the pressure and ram of
the water in the mains.
   J.   Maintain Pipes And Apparatus; City Right To Shut Off Water For Repairs:
All persons taking water shall keep their own service pipe, stopcocks, and
apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own risk and
expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water, and it is expressly
stipulated that no claim shall be made against it by reason of the breaking of
any service pipe or service cock, or if for any cause the supply of water
should fail or from damage arising from shutting off the water to repair mains,
making connections or extensions, or for any other purpose that may be deemed
necessary, the right is hereby reserved to cut off the supply of water at any
time, any permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. (Ord.
41)
   K.   City Officials; Right Of Entry: Every person taking water supplied
through the waterworks system shall permit the director of public works and
employees of the department, at all reasonable hours of the day to enter their
premises or buildings to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which
the water is used or to read meters, and they must frankly and without
concealment answer questions put to them relative to the use of water on such
premises. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
   L.   Limit Water Use During Fire: The use of hose for sprinkling yards,
gardens and streets, or for washing windows and sidewalks is prohibited in case
of fire or when there is an alarm of fire. (Ord. 41)
   M.   Service Pipe Regulations And Requirements:
      1.   All water service pipes from the street line to the mains shall be
of extra strong pipe material connected by brass couplings, and one-eighth inch
(1/8") larger than the taps that supply them. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
      2.   Every service pipe must be sufficiently waving and laid in such a
manner as to prevent rupture by settlement.
      3.   Mains must be tapped on the top and not in any case within six
inches (6") of the hub.
      4.   All service pipes must be laid as much underground as the main pipe
in the street, and in all cases shall be deep enough to prevent rupture by
freezing.
      5.   Stopcocks shall be placed in every service pipe at the inside of the
sidewalk line and protected by stopcock box of a pattern approved by the City
Council, reaching from the stopcock to the surface of the ground, of a suitable
size to admit of a stop key for turning on and off the stopcock and with heavy
metal cover, have the letter "W" marked thereon, visible and even with the
pavement or ground. Where one service pipe is intended to supply two (2) or
more consumers, there shall be separate service cocks for each.
      6.   There shall be a stop and waste cock of a pattern and weight
approved by the City Council, attached to every service pipe, at a point where
it enters the building, inside the same easily accessible point and so situated
that the water can be conveniently shut off and drained from the pipes.
      7.   Service pipes must be thoroughly flushed before a meter is attached.
No meter shall be placed on a straight run but shall be placed at least six
inches (6") above the service pipe on a loop.
      8.   In making excavations in streets or highways for the laying of
service pipes or making repairs, the planks or paving stones or earth shall be
deposited in such a manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public
and provide for the passage of water along the gutter.
      9.   After the service pipes are laid, in refilling the excavation, the
earth must be laid in layers and each layer thoroughly tamped and packed to
prevent settlement, and this work, together with the replacement of the
sidewalk, ballast and paving, must be done so as to make the street at least as
good as it was before the excavation was made and to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works.
   N.   Placement Of Hydrants And Drinking Fountains: No hydrant or fountain,
except public drinking fountains, shall be placed within the limits of any
street unless the hydrant or drinking fountain are securely closed and
protected against general use; and no drinking fountain shall be erected for
public use which has openings by which it can be used as a source of domestic
supply. (Ord. 41)
   O.   Discontinuance Of Service; Reconnection Charge: Water service may be
severed upon notice to the Director of Public Works whenever the premises are
to be unoccupied and reconnected upon a payment of ten dollars ($10.00) for
cutting off and turning on the water, and if the premises are unoccupied for
more than one month, a proportionate reduction on the minimum charge for water
service will be allowed. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-5: METER INSTALLATION; WATER BILLINGS:
   A.   Furnished By Owner, Installation By City: Meters shall be furnished by
the property owner and be of a type and manufacture approved by the City
Council and be installed by the Director of Public Works or licensed plumber.
Such installation shall be placed in a frostproof meter box of not less than
twenty four inches (24") in diameter, or properly bricked up of not less than
twenty four inches by thirty inches (24" x 30"), all duly protected from frost
and to be kept in such condition that the meter therein can at any time be
readily inspected.
   B.   Water Measured By Meter: All water shall be measured by meter. No
reduction shall be allowed for leakage of water measured by meter. (Ord. 41)
   C.   Reading Meters; Billing Provisions: Meters shall be read monthly by the
Director of Public Works, and water fees shall be due on a monthly basis. Where
meters are connected for temporary purposes, water rates shall be due and
payable when that use is completed. (Per motion dated 3-9-1954; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-6: WATER SERVICE RATES:
   A.   Rates for water service within the city limits of Oxford, Iowa, shall
be as follows: A minimum of Nine Dollars and Fifty Cents ($9.50) monthly on the
first one thousand (1,000) gallons used and Nine Dollars and Fifty Cents
($9.50) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof beyond the
initial one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   B.   Rates for water service outside the city limits of Oxford, Iowa, shall
be as follows: A minimum of Eleven Dollars and Twenty-Five Cents ($11.25)
monthly on the first one thousand (1,000) gallons used and Eleven Dollars and
Twenty-Five Cents ($11.25) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction
thereof beyond the initial one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   C.   Bulk Water. Bulk water is potable water obtained from the City of
Oxford, at one specific time and place, exceeding one thousand (1,000) gallons.
Bulk water will be sold, at the discretion of the City, at a rate of Twenty
Dollars ($20.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons for the first one thousand
(1,000) gallons. Any amount exceeding the first one thousand (1,000) gallons up
to the next one thousand (1,000) gallons will be charged at a rate of Twenty
Dollars ($20.00) per one thousand (1,000) gallons. Bulk water rates will not be
prorated. (Ord. 2018-01, 5-8-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-04, 1-10-2023)
8-1-7: DELINQUENCY IN PAYING BILLS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Penalty; Unpaid Charges A Lien: Bills for water rates shall become
delinquent if not paid by the twenty fifth day of the month when due. A one-
time late payment penalty often dollars ($10.00) shall be added to each
delinquent bill. Unpaid service charges, rates or rentals shall constitute a
lien upon the premises with water service. The City Clerk shall certify by
March 10 of each year to the county auditor said past due bills for collection
with and in the same manner as property taxes.
   B.   Water Shut Off For Nonpayment; Notice; Reconnection Fee: Upon receipt
of a regular monthly water bill with a previous balance due, the previous
balance due plus the late payment penalty must be paid by the fifteenth of the
current month or water service will be shut off. A shutoff notice will be
included with the current bill showing the delinquency. Such notice shall be
sent by ordinary mail with the current bill to the customer in whose name the
delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature of
the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to
the shut off.
   If a hearing is requested by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the day
preceding the shut off, the Mayor shall conduct an informal hearing and shall
make a determination as to the whether the disconnection is justified. The
customer has a right to appeal the decision to the City Council, and if the
City Council finds that disconnection is justified, then the disconnection
shall be made, unless payment has been received.
   If service is shut off, the delinquent amount of the current bill must be
paid in full before service is restored, and the user will have to pay a ten
dollar ($10.00) reconnection fee in advance of restoration of the service. If
the payment of the delinquency is made prior to the fifteenth day of the month,
the current balance will remain due by the twenty fifth of the month.
   C.   Rental Property Exempt From Lien; Written Notice To City: Residential
or commercial rental property where a charge for water service is separately
metered and paid by the tenant is exempt from a lien for delinquency or charges
associated with such water service, if the landlord gives written notice to the
City that the property is residential or commercial rental property and that
the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The City requires a deposit of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for all renters. Upon receipt, the City shall
acknowledge and notice any deposits. A written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, address of the rental property that the
tenant is to occupy and the date occupancy begins. (2015 Code; amd. Ord. 2016-
01, 2-9-2016; Ord. 2020-01, 2-20-2020)
8-1-8: SERVICE DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
All rental tenants will be required to make a deposit of seventy five dollars
($75.00) prior to receiving permission to use water from the City. This deposit
will be refunded at the time the user no longer becomes a tenant and provided
he has paid his water bills and they are current. In the event that there are
charges for water used, the deposit may be used to pay said charges. (Ord. 60,
8-13-1980; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-9: REQUEST FOR METER TEST; BILLING ADJUSTMENT:
Any property owner may require his meter to be tested by paying to the City
Clerk the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). The Director of Public Works shall test
the meter and should the meter register two percent (2%) or more over, the
property owner shall be entitled to an adjustment of his water rent by the
Waterworks Committee and have his ten dollar ($10.00) deposit for testing the
meter refunded. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-10: EXCAVATIONS; COUNCIL PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to make any excavations in any street or highway within
six feet (6') of any laid water pipe, while the ground is frozen, or dig up or
uncover so as to expose to frost any of the water pipes or sewers of the City
except by special permission of the City Council. (Ord. 41)
8-1-11: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Use By Authorized Persons: All hydrants erected for the purpose of
extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and no person,
except the Director of Public Works and members of the Fire Department, or
persons especially authorized by the City Council, and then only in the
exercise of authority designated by the City Council, shall open any of said
hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same, or at any time attempt to
uncover or remove any protection from or in any manner interfere with any of
the hydrants. (Ord. 41)
   B.   Delegating Authority To Others: It shall be unlawful for any person
authorized to open hydrants to delegate his authority to another, or let or
suffer another person to take wrenches or tools furnished him, or suffer the
same to be taken from any hose house except for the purposes strictly connected
with the Fire Department or as they accompany the firetruck on occasions of
fire. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
8-1-12: CITY NOT LIABLE FOR SERVICE DISRUPTION:
The City does not guarantee a constant supply of water to any consumer and
shall not be liable for damages for any failure to supply the same, nor shall
it be liable for any claim or damage by reason of breaking of any service pipe,
stopcock or other equipment, or if for any reason the supply of water shall be
shut off to make repairs, connections or extensions or for any other purpose
that may be found necessary. The right is reserved to cut off the supply of
water at any time. (Ord. 41)
8-1-13: INJURY TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to break, injure, mar or deface, interfere with or disturb
any building, machinery, apparatus, fixtures, attachments, or appurtenances of
the waterworks, or any hydrant, stopcock box, meter, water supply or service
pipe or any part thereof, or deposit anything in any stopcock box, or commit
any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above
mentioned property, without permission of the City Council, or excepting cases
herein or otherwise provided by ordinances. (Ord. 41)
8-1-14: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 41; amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 2
WATER CONSERVATION PROGRAM
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Shortages
8-2-2: Conditions Described
8-2-3: Water Watch
8-2-4: Water Warning, Tier I
8-2-5: Water Warning, Tier II
8-2-6: Water Emergency; Allocation Of Water
8-2-7: Premium Rates
8-2-8: Water Appeal Board
8-2-9: Reduction In Flow Of Water For Unlawful Use
8-2-10: Violations; Penalties
8-2-11: Municipal Infraction
8-2-1: WATER SHORTAGES:
From time to time during and following drought conditions, or due to equipment
failure, the city water supply may become significantly and seriously depleted
so that there will not then be a sufficient supply of water to meet all
customary and usual demands. Under these conditions, the city council may find,
and declare by resolution, a public water watch, water warning, or water
emergency, during which time the following measures and provisions of this
chapter shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of
water consumption until, by resolution, the city council finds and declares the
water shortage condition to be ended. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-2: CONDITIONS DESCRIBED:
   A.   Water Watch: A water watch may be declared when a water shortage or
equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system
to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future.
Indicators of the need to impose a water watch include: system operating at
seventy five percent (75%) of pumping capacity; moderate decrease in the
pumping water level of wells or moderate decrease in recovery rate of water
level in wells; moderate decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of
feet below spillway or number of feet above intake.
   B.   Water Warning: A tier I or tier II water warning may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of
the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the
foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a tier I water warning
include: system operating at eighty five percent (85%) of pumping capacity;
significant decrease in the pumping water level of wells, or significant
decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells, or significant decrease in
reservoir levels measured in number of feet below spillway or number of feet
above intake. Indicators of the need to impose a tier II water warning include
severe system emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in
feeder mains or treatment plant.
   C.   Water Emergency: A water emergency may be declared when a water
shortage or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the
ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of
the need to impose a water emergency include: system operating at ninety five
percent (95%) of pumping capacity; serious decrease in recovery rate of water
level in wells; serious decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet
below spillway or number of feet above intake. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-3: WATER WATCH:
Under a water watch, all customers of the municipal water service are
encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to
conserve precious water resources during the time of shortage. Customers may be
encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards:
   A.   No watering of lawns, shrubs or gardens between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
   B.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children's
wading pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.
   C.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks or building exteriors.
   D.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces.
   E.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-4: WATER WARNING, TIER I:
   A.   Prohibited And Restricted Water Use: Under a tier I water warning, no
person shall use potable processed water of the municipal water service in any
manner contrary to the following:
      1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.
      2.   Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. daily.
      3.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees and
shrubs less than four (4) years old, and new seedling or sod is permitted once
per week with an application not to exceed one inch (1").
      4.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that
provide that service.
      5.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children's
wading pools, reflecting pools or any other outdoor pool or pond.
      6.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks or building exteriors.
      7.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery and interior spaces.
      8.   Water shall be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
      9.   Use of water consuming comfort air conditioning equipment which
consumes in excess of five percent (5%) of the water circulating in such
equipment is prohibited.
      10.   Tank load water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
   B.   Reclaimed Or Recycled Water: Water reclaimed or recycled after some
other primary use, such as water that has been used for washing or cooling, may
be used without restriction. Additionally, water derived from sources other
than the city water utility, such as water condensed from the atmosphere by air
conditioners or collected from rain or snow, may be used without restriction.
(Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-5: WATER WARNING, TIER II:
Under a tier II water warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
   A.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is
prohibited.
   B.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing
products or services is prohibited.
   C.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
   D.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and golf course
watering and other incidental or recreational use, is prohibited.
   E.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-6: WATER EMERGENCY; ALLOCATION OF WATER:
   A.   Use Restrictions: Under a water emergency, tier I water warning use
restrictions will be in effect and, in addition, each customer will be afforded
a monthly allocation of water.
   B.   Base Allocation:
      1.   The base allocation of water for residential use shall be three
thousand (3,000) gallons per household per billing period.
      2.   For commercial, industrial or institutional use, the base allocation
shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the average water used
during the previous winter (November through April).
   C.   Appeal And Adjustment Of Base Allocation: Any person may file an appeal
with the water appeal board to adjust the base allocation amount. The water
appeal board may grant an adjustment to the appellant based upon the following
criteria:
      1.   For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be
increased by one thousand (1,000) gallons per person per billing period for all
individuals residing at the appellant's residence for a period of more than
thirty (30) days.
      2.   For commercial, industrial, institutional or other residential uses,
the base allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the
individual customer such as usage, production, service and occupancy data
provided by the customer. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-7: PREMIUM RATES:
   A.   Premium Rate For Imprudent Consumption: In addition to the water rates
duly enacted by the city council, all persons shall pay a premium rate of one
dollar ($1.00) per one hundred (100) gallons of water consumed in excess of the
base allocation.
   B.   Adjustment Of Premium Rate Charges: Any person may file for adjustment
of the premium rate charges for imprudent water consumption with the water
appeal board. The water appeal board may grant an adjustment of the premium
rate charges in accordance with the following criteria:
      1.   Adjustments may be granted for overconsumption due to mechanical
failures such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures but not for overconsumption
due to human carelessness.
      2.   The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was
repaired promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber's invoice
or statement or a materials receipt.
      3.   The adjustment shall be granted only for the billing period prior to
the correction of the failure.
      4.   For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate
charges, the minimum adjusted rate shall be forty percent (40%) of the actual
bill which shall include the premium rate charges and sales tax. (Ord. 2000-
102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-8: WATER APPEAL BOARD:
A water appeal board shall be appointed during any water warning or water
emergency. The water appeal board shall consist of the mayor, the public works
director, and three (3) representatives of the community who shall be appointed
by the mayor with the approval of the city council. The water appeal board
shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a water warning or water
emergency; except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal infraction
relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be conducted pursuant to Iowa
Code section 364.22. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-9: REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER FOR UNLAWFUL USE:
The director is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for hearing
before the water appeal board, to reduce the flow of water to any person
determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this chapter
during a water warning or water emergency. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalties: The following penalties shall apply for violations of water
warning use restrictions imposed under this chapter:
      1.   First Violation: For a first violation, the utility shall issue a
written notice of violation to the water user violating the water use
restrictions imposed during a water warning or water emergency.
      2.   Second Violation: For a second violation within a twelve (12) month
period, a one month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to fifty
percent (50%) of the previous month's water bill.
      3.   Subsequent Violations: For any subsequent violation within a twelve
(12) month period, a one month surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to
fifty percent (50%) of the previous month's water bill and, in addition, the
utility shall interrupt water service to that customer at the premises at which
the violation occurred. Service shall not be restored until the customer has
paid the reconnection fee and has provided reasonable assurance that future
violations of water warning or water emergency use restrictions will not occur.
   B.   Aggrieved Customer; Hearing: Any customer charged with a violation of
the water warning or water emergency use restrictions may request a hearing
before the water appeal board. The water appeal board may conclude that a
violation did not occur or that the circumstances under which the violation
occurred warrant a complete or partial mitigation of the penalty. (Ord. 2000-
102, 8-8-2000)
8-2-11: MUNICIPAL INFRACTION:
A second or subsequent violation of the water warning or water emergency use
restrictions by any person within a twelve (12) month period constitutes a
municipal infraction. Any person who, in making application to the water appeal
board for adjustment of the base allocation or premium charges, intentionally
provides false or incorrect statements or information commits a municipal
infraction. (Ord. 2000-102, 8-8-2000)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Definitions
8-3-2: Control And Supervision Over System
8-3-3: Powers And Authority For Inspection
8-3-4: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-3-5: Sewer Connection Requirements
8-3-6: Prohibited Discharges
8-3-7: Treatment Agreement Required For Certain Discharges
8-3-8: Injuring Or Tampering With Sewage Works
8-3-9: Violation; Penalty; Remedies
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions of terms shall be applicable to the terms used in
this chapter:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in parts per million
by weight.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
CITY: That area or territory located within the corporate limits of the city of
Oxford, Iowa.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
COUNCIL: The duly elected city council representing and administrating the
city.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and
from handling, storage, and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface
waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing
of sewage and other wastes.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer which carries stormwaters and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord. 37, 6-10-1958)
8-3-2: CONTROL AND SUPERVISION OVER SYSTEM:
The sewer system shall be under the control of the city council, with a
committee from the council appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of
the council to supervise and report on matters pertaining to sewers. The
director shall be the council's representative. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
8-3-3: POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Access To Private Property: The city or its duly authorized employees
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling,
and testing with regard to wastewater in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The city or its representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the public sewers, natural outlets or water
pollution control facilities.
   B.   Duty Of Care: While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in subsection A of this section, the city or its duly authorized
employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company.
   C.   Easement Access: The city or its duly authorized employees bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
8-3-4: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Garbage Deposits Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any insanitary manner upon public
or private property within the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the city any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Privies And Septic Tanks: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Public Sewer Required: The owner of all houses, buildings
or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purpose, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of
way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with
the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that
said public sanitary sewer is within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
property line. (Ord. 37, 6-10-1958)
8-3-5: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connection with, or opening into; use; or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   B.   Subject To Rules, Regulations And Rates Of City: Any connection to a
public sewer within the jurisdiction of the city shall be subject to the rules
and regulations of the city and to the charges, rates, rents, fees and
assessments which are or may be established by the city as being applicable,
and shall be made under permits issued by the city.
   C.   Construction Standards: The construction of sewers which are to be
connected to and become a part of the public sewer system shall be done in
conformance with Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) standards. Plans
shall be submitted to and approved by the director, and a letter requesting
permission to build shall be filed with and approved by the city council prior
to commencement of work.
   D.   Tapping Public Sewer; Authority: No person shall tap any public sewer
at any other place than at the regular junction "tee" or "wye" built into the
sewer, without specific authority from the director, nor shall any connection
be made with the public sewer except in the presence of the director or an
approved plumbing contractor.
   E.   Connection Outside City Limits: No connection shall be made to a public
sewer for any facility located outside of the corporate limits of the city
unless permission is specifically granted by resolution of the city council.
   F.   Combined Sewers Prohibited: The construction of and use of combined
sewers is hereby prohibited.
   G.   Building Razed Or Moved; Service Discontinued: When any building or
structure is razed or moved, and the sewer service is discontinued, all sewer
connections shall be properly stopped or cut off at the curb line.
   H.   Grease, Oil Or Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil or sand interceptors
shall be provided upstream from the connection to a public sewer when, in the
opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease, any inflammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
8-3-6: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described substances, materials, waters and/or wastes into the designated
sewers:
   A.   Public Sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other inflammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to deteriorate any public sewer, injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including, but not limited to, the following list indicating maximum
concentrations allowable in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer:
Substance Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Substance      Maximum Concentration (mg/l)
Arsenic        0.3
Cadmium        1.0
Copper         2.0
Cyanide        0.2
Iron           5.0
Lead           1.0
Mercury        0.002
Nickel         3.0
Total chromium 5.0
Zinc           2.0
 
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the public sewer or
structures, equipment, and personnel of the water pollution control facilities,
or operation thereof.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the water pollution control plant such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   B.   Storm Sewers: No wastewaters except unpolluted waters shall be
discharged to storm sewers. Stormwaters and all other unpolluted water shall be
discharged into such sewers as are specifically designed and designated as
storm sewers.
   C.   Sanitary Sewers: No stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage (footing tiles), cooling water, or unpolluted water
shall be discharged to any sanitary sewer. Where a storm sewer or natural
outlet is not available, such unpolluted water may be discharged to a sanitary
sewer only after written approval of the director. No person constructing a
sanitary sewer, building, or house connection shall leave same open, unsealed
or incomplete in such a fashion to permit stormwater, surface water, or
subsurface water to enter the sanitary sewer.
   D.   Illegal Connections:
      1.   Any connections made before or after the effective date hereof,
which discharge prohibited materials, shall be considered illegal and shall be
subject to immediate removal by the owner of the premises so connected and at
such owner's expense.
      2.   Should the owner of such an illegally connected premises fail to
remove the connection within sixty (60) days, the city shall cause the
connection to be removed and the cost thereof shall be billed to the owner of
the premises.
   E.   Accidental Discharges:
      1.   The accidental discharge of any prohibited liquid, gases or solid
material into any public sewer or natural outlet, either directly or
indirectly, shall be reported to the director immediately by the person
responsible for the discharge.
      2.   Although no penalty, as such, will be levied as a result of such
accidental discharge, it shall be understood that the person shall not be
relieved of his responsibilities and shall be liable for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such accidental discharge. (Ord. 94-
94, 5-31-1994)
8-3-7: TREATMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes without a treatment agreement with the
city and without filing IDNR form 31 with the city and IDNR:
   A.   Any water or wastes excluding sanitary wastes having:
         Five (5) day BOD greater than 8.5 pounds per day, or
         Suspended solids concentration greater than ten (10) pounds per day,
or
         Average daily flow greater than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons per
day, or
         Ammonia greater than two (2) pounds per day.
   B.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred twenty
degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) (48°C).
   C.   Any water or wastes which contain grease, fats, wax, or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), or
other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° - 65°C). (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
   D.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the mayor. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
   E.   Any water or wastes containing nonedible type oil or grease such as
petroleum or mineral oil or grease.
   F.   Any water or wastes that contain more than ten (10) parts per million
by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide, or
nitrous oxide.
   G.   Any water or wastes that contain phenols or other taste and odor
producing substances, in excess of five-tenths (0.5) parts per million by
weight.
   H.   Any water or wastes, acid or alkaline in reaction, and having corrosive
properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the city.
   I.   Any water or wastes containing any of the constituents listed in
section
8-3-6, "Prohibited Discharges", of this chapter, or any other objectionable or
toxic substances.
   J.   Any water or wastes containing the discharge of strong acid iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
   K.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substances, which either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or
hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
   L.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
   M.   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      2.   Excessive discolorations such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
   N.   Any water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the water pollution control processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the water pollution
control plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving water.
   O.   Any water or wastes which by interaction with the other water or wastes
in the public sewer system, releases obnoxious gases or develops color of
undesirable intensity; or forms suspended solids in objectionable
concentration; or creates any other conditions deleterious to structures and
treatment processes, shall be subject to control or shall be banned from the
system as determined by the director.
   P.   Any wastes which, in the opinion of the director, may harm either the
public sewers, water pollution control plant, treatment process, equipment, or
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the director shall give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction in the sewers, nature of
the treatment processes, capacity of the water pollution control facilities,
degree of treatability of wastes in question, and other pertinent factors.
Factors influencing this ruling and known conditions at the time of this ruling
shall be recorded by the director in the plant file at the time the ruling is
made. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
8-3-8: INJURING OR TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the city sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 37, 6-10-1958)
8-3-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY; REMEDIES:
   A.   Notice To Correct: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. Such notice may be given by certified mail or by personal
service. If given by certified mail, the notice shall be deemed given when
mailed. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations specified therein. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994)
   B.   Violation A Misdemeanor: Any person who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may
be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each day in which such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 94-94, 5-31-1994; amd. 2015
Code)
   C.   Other Remedies For Violations: Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the city for any damage, loss,
cost or expense occasioned by reason of such violation.
   D.   Nuisance Declared; Notice; Hearing: A violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the city
council, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing, may:
      1.   Order necessary measures to correct and abate such violation and the
director is authorized to enter on private property so to do.
      2.   Order the service to the premises involved discontinued and
authorize the director to disconnect any tapping or connections made to the
wastewater system of the city. In the event a violation of the provision of
this chapter creates an immediate hazard to the wastewater facilities or to the
operation thereof, or to the health and safety of any person or to the
preservation and protection of any property, or may prevent meeting the
conditions of the NPDES permit, the director is authorized and directed to
perform all necessary acts, without prior notice or hearing, to correct and
abate such violations, and may enter on private property so to do. (Ord. 94-94,
5-31-1994)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER SERVICE RATES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purpose
8-4-2: Sewer System Defined
8-4-3: Payment Of Charges Required
8-4-4: Rates Established; Manner Of Payment
8-4-5: Property Lien And Suspending Service For Nonpayment
8-4-6: Power To Make Adjustments
8-4-7: Biannual Review
8-4-8: Annual Notification Of User
8-4-9: Toxic Pollutants
8-4-10: Penalty
8-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to collect from all users of the City sewer
system the cost in whole or in part of constructing and maintaining the main
sewers and sewage treatment plant in proportion to the service provided each
user. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-2: SEWER SYSTEM DEFINED:
For use within this chapter, "sewer system" includes main sewers, sewage
pumping stations, treatment and disposal plants, lateral sewers, drainage
conduits or channels, and sewer connections on public streets for private
property. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-3: PAYMENT OF CHARGES REQUIRED:
   A.   Persons Subject To Rates: Every person whose premises now or hereafter
are directly or indirectly served by a connection to the City sewer system
shall pay rent to the City at the rate and in the manner provided in section
8-4-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Industrial Contributors: Major industrial contributors shall pay the
rates set forth in the treatment agreement with the City. The definition of a
major industrial contributor is defined herein. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-4: RATES ESTABLISHED; MANNER OF PAYMENT:
   A.   Rates Established: The City shall charge the following rates based on
usage:
First 2,000 gallons of water used at $55.00 (minimum monthly charge).
All water used over 2,000 gallons at $13.00 per 1,000 gallons.
   B.   Payment With Water Bill: The rent shall be paid with the water bill at
the time payment of the water bill is due and under the same conditions. (Ord.
94-93, 5-31-1994; amd. 2015 Code; Ord. 2018-02, 5-8-2018; Ord. 2022-03, 12-13-
2022)
8-4-5: PROPERTY LIEN AND SUSPENDING SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT:
   A.   Lien; Collection: The amount of rent charged shall constitute a lien
upon that property served by the sewer system and that amount shall be
collected in the same manner as other taxes, if payment is not made when due.
   B.   Suspension Of Service: Water, or sewer service, or both, to the
property for which rent has not been paid may be suspended until that payment
is made. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-6: POWER TO MAKE ADJUSTMENTS:
The City may change and readjust the aforementioned charges, rates or rentals
from time to time, where in the judgment of the City Council special conditions
as to the use of water and discharge of sewage into the sanitary sewage
facilities exist to the extent that the application of the basic rentals
provided for herein would be inequitable and may from time to time fix and
readjust such charges, rates, or rentals for a particular classification and
for unusual conditions and variations in the character and quantity of sewage
and industrial wastes as, in the discretion of the Council, shall be deemed
fair and equitable; and, in any event, such charges, rates, or rentals shall be
established, adjusted, and maintained so as to be sufficient each year for the
payment of the proper and reasonable expense of operation, repair,
replacements, and maintenance of said sanitary sewer facilities, for the
payment of the requirements of a sinking fund to meet principal and interest
and other charges for outstanding revenue bonds issued to pay the cost of
construction of said sanitary sewage facilities, and to build up and maintain a
requisite depreciation fund. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-7: BIANNUAL REVIEW:
The city council shall conduct a biannual review of uses and use classes, and
the total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, and the
approved user charge system, to determine if any changes are necessary or
desirable, and thereafter cause any such changes to be made, and prepare a new
appendix explaining the cost or rate structure to be maintained in the office
of the city clerk. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-8: ANNUAL NOTIFICATION OF USER:
Each user must be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to the wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-9: TOXIC POLLUTANTS:
Each user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay
for such increased costs, as may be determined by the city council from time to
time. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994)
8-4-10: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where some other
penalty is not specifically provided herein, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 94-93, 5-31-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Adoption Of Nationally Recognized Codes
9-1-3: Permits And Inspections
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to, pursuant to Iowa Code section 380.10, adopt
by reference the Johnson County building code, which includes amendments to and
portions of the 2009 international building code and the 2009 international
residential code, as published by the International Code Council and as adopted
as Johnson County ordinance 04-29-10-Z1; the 2009 international mechanical
code, as published by the International Code Council and as adopted as Johnson
County ordinance 04-29-10-Z2; the 2009 uniform plumbing code, as published by
the International Association Of Plumbing And Mechanical Officials and as
adopted as Johnson County ordinance 04-29-10-Z3; the 2009 international fuel
gas code, as published by the International Code Council and as adopted as
Johnson County ordinance 04-29-10-Z4; and the 2014 national electrical code, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association and as adopted as Johnson
County ordinance 12-18-04-01, all as initially adopted and subsequently
amended; and to provide for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of
the citizens of Johnson County, Iowa; and to provide for the enforcement of
these codes. It is further the purpose of this chapter that said standard
codes, once adopted, shall be collectively referred to as the Oxford building
code. (Ord. 2014-06, 2-10-2015)
9-1-2: ADOPTION OF NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED CODES:
Subsequent to a public hearing as required by Iowa Code section 380.10, and
subject to the amendments described in Johnson County ordinances 04-29-10-Z1,
06-26-14-01, 04-29-10-Z2, 04-29-10-Z3, 04-29-10-Z4, and 12-18-04-01, the 2009
international building code and the 2009 international residential code,
including appendix F Radon Control Methods and appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas
And Hot Tubs, as published by the International Code Council; the 2009
international mechanical code, as published by the International Code Council;
the 2009 uniform plumbing code, as published by the International Association
Of Plumbing And Mechanical Officials; the 2009 international fuel gas code, as
published by the International Code Council; and the 2014 national electrical
code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association are hereby
adopted by reference and along with said amendments shall be known as the
Oxford building code. (Ord. 2014-06, 2-10-2015)
9-1-3: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
Permits and inspections shall be provided by Johnson County building inspection
personnel pursuant to an agreement entered into between the city of Oxford and
Johnson County, Iowa. In addition to the inspection fees charged in conjunction
with the above referenced standard codes, as amended, the city of Oxford may
charge an administrative fee of all building permit applicants. Said
administrative fee, if any, shall be as set forth by the Oxford city council in
a resolution. (Ord. 2014-06, 2-10-2015)
CHAPTER 2
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Purpose
9-2-2: License, Permit And Bond
9-2-3: Application For License; Fee
9-2-4: Permit And Insurance For Moving Buildings
9-2-5: Notify Utilities; Move Wires And Poles
9-2-6: Frontage And Setback Requirements
9-2-7: Violation; Penalty
9-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the moving of houses within the
corporate limits of the city by requiring a license to engage in any such
activity and to provide for the enforcement thereof, and penalties for the
violation thereof. (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970)
9-2-2: LICENSE, PERMIT AND BOND:
   A.   Obtain License And Permit: Before any person shall move, or cause to be
moved upon the streets, alleys, or other public places in the city, any house
or other fabricated structure, such person shall first qualify as a house mover
by obtaining a license and permit.
   B.   Bond Requirement: Such person shall file a bond in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with the city clerk with good and sufficient
sureties to be approved by the mayor and city clerk, conditioned that the said
licensee shall pay for any and all damages caused to the city or public
property by the removal of any house or other building from one lot, or parcel
of ground, to another within the city, or from a parcel or lot of ground within
the city to a place outside the city limits, or from a place outside the city
limits to a lot or parcel within the city limits during any removal, as above
set out, whether the damage or injury shall be caused by said party or his
agents or employees, and the licensee shall save and indemnify and hold the
city harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs or expenses which may
in anywise accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of such
license or permit.
   C.   Permit Required: Any person engaged in house moving, or moving of any
structures or building on or over the streets, avenues, or alleys of the city
shall first receive a permit from the city clerk or as the city council shall
require. (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970)
9-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Application Accompanied By Fee: All applications hereunder shall be in
writing to the city clerk on a form provided and the license application shall
be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970;
amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   License Issuance: Upon payment of the license fee and approval of the
bond filed, the mayor shall issue the license as is covered by the fee. (Ord.
15, 7-21-1970)
9-2-4: PERMIT AND INSURANCE FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
Before actually moving any house or other structure on any public alley,
avenue, street or public place, the mover will first obtain a permit from the
mayor and the permit holder must have on file with the city clerk, or the
mayor, a certificate of insurance protecting the permit holder and the city,
and its officials, providing for minimum coverage of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for any property damage and five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for any injury to one person, which policy may be a blanket
public liability policy covering all house moving by the permit holder, or the
particular move for which the permit has been sought. A permit shall not be
issued until the mayor has approved the moving of the building, as well as
prescribing the routing to be used. (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970; amd. 2015 Code)
9-2-5: NOTIFY UTILITIES; MOVE WIRES AND POLES:
When it becomes necessary to move any building across any street or alley, a
house or other building of such size or height as it will interfere with poles
or wires, the owner or agent of the company in charge of the telephone or
electric wires shall, upon receiving at least twenty four (24) hours' notice,
furnish at the expense of the mover, a competent person to superintend the
necessary change and replacement of said poles and wires, and the house mover
shall, at his own expense, furnish all other help required, together with tools
and appliances, and shall move and replace the said property as directed. If
the owner of the franchise fails to be present by himself or agent at the time
stated, the house mover may remove and replace the property as aforesaid. (Ord.
15, 7-21-1970)
9-2-6: FRONTAGE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No building proposed to be used for a dwelling shall be moved to a location
within the city unless such proposed location shall have a frontage on a public
street of at least forty feet (40'), with no intervening buildings between the
street and the proposed site, and the same must be approved by the city
council. (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970)
9-2-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any house mover who fails to obtain a license as required by this chapter, or
who has obtained a license hereunder and fails to display it, as required, or
who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; provided, however, that each offense, or violation of this
chapter shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 15, 7-21-1970;
amd. 2015 Code)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; INTENT AND PURPOSE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-3: Compatibility With Comprehensive Plan
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited, and referred to as the OXFORD ZONING
ORDINANCE OF 1994. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The Oxford zoning ordinance, as set forth in the text and map which constitute
this title, is adopted with the purpose of improving and protecting the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the people and in
accordance with Iowa Code section 414.3. The fulfillment of this purpose is to
be accomplished by seeking:
   A.   To preserve the availability of agricultural land.
   B.   To consider the protection of soil from wind and water erosion.
   C.   To lessen congestion on the public streets.
   D.   To avoid undue concentration of population.
   E.   To prevent the overcrowding of land, thereby ensuring proper living and
working conditions and preventing the development of blight and slums.
   F.   To establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air, and
open spaces.
   G.   To facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of other
public requirements and services such as water, sewerage, schools, and parks.
   H.   To zone all properties with a view to conserving the value of buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
   I.   To protect residential, business, commercial, and industrial areas
alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land
allocated to a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses.
   J.   To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for
adequate drainage, curbing of erosion, and reduction of flood damage.
   K.   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall
conform.
   L.   To promote the conservation of energy resources.
   M.   To promote reasonable access to solar energy.
   N.   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures as would not comply with the restrictions or
limitations imposed herein.
   O.   To foster a more rational pattern of relationship between residential,
business, commercial, and manufacturing uses for the mutual benefit of all.
   P.   To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing
uses.
   Q.   To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions of this
title or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-1-3: COMPATIBILITY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The standards and requirements contained in this title and the district mapping
reflected on the zoning district map have all been made in accordance with the
officially adopted comprehensive community plan of Oxford, Iowa. (Ord. 1994-92,
6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Scope
10-2-2: Rules
10-2-3: Definitions
10-2-1: SCOPE:
In the interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions in this chapter
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-2-2: RULES:
   A.   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The words "city code" or "this code" mean the city code of the city of
Oxford.
   E.   The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
associations, and any other similar entities.
   F.   The word "county" means the county of Johnson, Iowa.
   G.   The word "city" means the city of Oxford.
   H.   The words "city council" mean the city council of the city of Oxford,
Iowa.
   I.   The word "state" means the state of Iowa.
   J.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this title and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. (Ord. 1994-
92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE: A use or structure subordinate to the
principal use of a building or land on the same lot or parcel of ground and
serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building
or use of land.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for the purpose of raising and harvesting crops;
or for the raising, breeding, or management of livestock, poultry, fish, or
honeybees; or for dairying, truck gardening, forestry, nurseries, or orchards;
for the noncommercial on farm storage or processing of agricultural products;
or for any similar agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, or aquacultural
use. No farms shall be operated for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish,
offal or rendering plants or for the slaughtering of animals, except such
animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the
premises for the use and consumption of persons residing on the premises.
ALLEY: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms used as the dwelling of a family, including
bath and culinary accommodations, located in a building in which there are a
multiple of these units.
BALCONY: An unroofed platform, unenclosed except by a railing, which projects
from the outer wall of any building above ground level with or without support
other than the building.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly below grade but having
more than one-half (1/2) its height above the average grade of the adjoining
ground. For the purpose of this title, a basement shall not be considered a
story unless designed or used for habitable space or business purposes.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Any single-family or multi-family dwelling unit used for the
purpose of overnight or temporary lodging that consists of one to five (5)
units wherein meals may also be provided.
BOARD: Board of adjustment as described in Iowa Code section 414.7.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation
and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals, are
provided for three (3) or more persons.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter
or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area of lot which remains after the minimum yard
setbacks, height requirements, and open space requirements of this title have
been complied with.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
average height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes
of this title, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is situated.
CELLAR: That portion of a building partially or wholly underground, having one-
half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) its clear height below the grade plane.
A cellar shall be nonhabitable and shall not be counted as a story.
COMMUNICATION TOWER HEIGHT: The distance between the base of a tower and the
top of the highest appurtenance mounted on the tower. The height is not
necessarily the distance between the top of the tower and the ground. Towers in
excess of forty feet (40') shall not exceed the overall height recommended by
the FAA or FCC.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A metal structure that is used primarily as a
communication antenna or as a communication antenna support structure which is
used primarily for the commercial transmittal of radio, television, radar, or
microwaves. However, noncommercial towers fifty feet (50') or less in height
shall not be considered communication towers.
CONDITIONAL USE: The use allowed in a zoning district after approval has been
granted by the zoning board of adjustment according to the provisions set forth
in subsection 10-4-6D of this title. A special exception is the same as a
conditional use for the purposes of this title.
DAYCARE FACILITY: A facility in which six (6) or more children are received for
part or all of a day for care and/or instruction. The facility shall be
approved and licensed by the state of Iowa. The term "daycare facility"
includes, but is not limited to, the following: nursery schools, childcare
centers, day nurseries, kindergartens, preschools and play groups, but does not
include bona fide kindergartens or nursery schools operated by public or
private elementary or secondary school systems.
DECK: A covered or uncovered platform area projecting from the wall of a
building, accessible at or from above grade, and attached to the ground.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof which is designed for and used
exclusively for residential purposes. Said building shall have an outside
dimension of no less than twenty feet (20') wide by thirty feet (30') long,
excluding any attached garage, if any.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building designed with accommodations in order to be
occupied exclusively by more than two (2) families living independently of each
other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed with accommodations for exclusive
occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed with accommodations for occupancy
exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons related by direct lineal descent,
marriage, adoption or placement by a governmental or social service agency,
occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping organization. A family may
also be two (2), but not more than two (2), persons not related by blood,
marriage or adoption.
FAMILY GROUP CARE HOME: A community based residential home which is licensed as
a residential care facility under Iowa Code chapter 135C or as a child foster
care facility under Iowa Code chapter 237 to provide room and board, personal
care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment
exclusively for not more than eight (8) developmentally disabled persons and
any necessary support personnel. Family home does not mean an individual foster
care home licensed under Iowa Code chapter 237.
FARM: An area of not less than ten (10) acres which is used for the growing of
the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits and grain, and their storage
on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and
farm animals.
FEEDLOT, COMMERCIAL: A confined area where five hundred (500) or more cattle,
swine, sheep, or thirty thousand (30,000) or more fowl are housed, penned, and
fed.
FENCE: A freestanding structure intended to provide privacy, prevent escape or
intrusion or to redirect a person's direction of travel. A fence may be
constructed of posts, wire, boards, stone or any standard building materials.
FLOODPLAIN: Lands which are subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
FLOOR AREA: The total area of all floors of a building as measured to the
outside surfaces of exterior walls and not including halls, stairways, elevator
shafts, attached garages, porches, and balconies when such area is used for
storage or other such incidental use.
FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if
the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between
an intersecting street and the street.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building that is subordinate or used for the storage of not
more than four (4) motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the
buildings to which it is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof other than a private or storage
garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling,
or storing motor driven vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
term storage by prearrangement of motor driven vehicles, as distinguished from
daily storage furnished transients and personal belongings, and at which motor
fuels and oils are not sold, and motor driven vehicles are not equipped,
repaired, hired or sold.
GARDEN HOUSE: An accessory structure of not more than one hundred forty (140)
square feet in area and having a height of eight feet (8') or less constructed
primarily for storage.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building except when any wall approximately parallels and
is not more than five feet (5') from a street line, then the elevation of the
street shall be grade. The purpose is to regulate the number of stories and
height of a structure.
HEDGE: A boundary formed of a row of closely planted shrubs or bushes.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity carried on within a dwelling unit
or accessory building by a member of the family residing on the premises, which
occupation or activity is incidental and secondary to the residential occupancy
and does not change the residential character thereof.
HOTEL: A residential building licensed by the state and occupied and used
principally as a place of lodging for guests. Hotels may or may not provide
meals and there are usually no cooking facilities in guestrooms.
INSTITUTION: An establishment occupied or operated by a private or public
nonprofit corporation, association, organization, or group for use or benefit
of the general public.
JUNKYARD/SALVAGE YARD: Any enclosed or fenced in lot or portion thereof where
waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or
packed, disassembled, or handled, including the dismantling or "wrecking" of
automobiles or other machinery, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building.
KENNEL: An establishment where small animals are bred, raised, trained, groomed
and boarded for compensation, sale or other commercial purposes.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space within the main building or on the same lot
providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of commercial vehicles,
having a minimum dimension of twelve feet by thirty five feet (12' x 35') and a
vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
LONG TERM CARE FACILITY: A long term care unit of a hospital, a licensed
hospice program, a foster group home, a group living arrangement, or a facility
licensed under Iowa Code section 135C.1 et seq., whether the facility is public
or private.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building
together with its accessory buildings officially approved and having its
principal frontage upon a dedicated street. The boundaries of the lot shall be
determined by its lot lines. Adjacent lots sharing a significant lot line(s)
may also be considered as a single lot entity so long as they are owned by
exactly the same owner(s) and they file an affidavit of explanatory of title
with the Johnson County recorder's office.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their
intersections.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot
from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, "front
lot line" shall mean that line separating said lot from that street which is
designated as the front street in the plat and in the application for a zoning
compliance permit.
Rear Lot Line: That lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
In the case of a lot pointed at the rear or triangular shaped, the rear lot
line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line not less than
ten feet (10') long farthest from the lot line and wholly within the lot.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot
line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another
lot.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot measured at the building line and at right angles
to its depth where the minimum building line or setback intersects the side lot
lines.
MAIN BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot
upon which it is situated.
MAIN USE: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal
purpose for which the premises exists.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory built dwelling, which is manufactured or
constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403, "federal manufactured
home construction and safety standards", which is not constructed with a
permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the
purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently
attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home constructed to
the "federal manufactured home construction and safety standards" is not a
manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as
a site built dwelling as is provided in Iowa Code section 427A.1. For the
purpose of any of these regulations, manufactured homes shall be considered the
same as a single- family detached dwelling.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle without motive power used, or so originally constructed
as to permit being used, as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways
and duly licensed as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit
occupancy thereof for human habitation, capable of being used as dwellings, or
sleeping quarters and which is being moved, towed, or transported by another
vehicle. This definition shall also include and apply to such vehicles or
structures that are located on a permanent or temporary foundation.
MOBILE HOME CONVERTED TO REAL ESTATE: A mobile home which meets the provisions
of Iowa Code section 435.26.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two (2) or
more occupied mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue
purposes and intended for such use shall include any building, structure, tent,
vehicle, or enclosure intended for use as part of the equipment of such mobile
home park.
MOTEL: A building or group of buildings in which lodging is provided and
offered primarily to transient occupancy and in which each unit has convenient
access to a parking space for the use of the unit's occupants.
MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT: A building arranged, designed, and intended for use as
a residence by two (2) or more families living independently of each other.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof that does not conform to
the provisions of this title relative to height, bulk, area or yard size
requirements for the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupies a building or land but does
not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
NURSING HOME: An institution which is advertised, announced, or maintained for
the express or implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for
persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home is a home for chronic or
convalescent patients who, on admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill and who
do not usually require special facilities, such as an operating room, X-ray
facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home
provides care for persons who have remedial ailments, for which continuing
medical and skilled nursing care is indicated; who, however, are not sick
enough to require general hospital care. Nursing care is their primary need,
but they will require continuing medical supervision. A major factor which
distinguishes a nursing home is that the residents will require the
individualization of medical care. For the purpose of this title, a "nursing
home" shall also be considered a "convalescent home".
OPEN SPACE: The land area of a site not covered by buildings, rights of way,
parking structures, or accessory buildings, except recreational structures, and
which is available to all occupants of units for whose use the space is
intended. "Open space" does not include school sites and commercial areas.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in an
accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than one hundred
eighty (180) square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the
temporary storage of one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a
surfaced driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for vehicles.
PLAN: A comprehensive or general development plan of the city of Oxford.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures as distinguished from
secondary or accessory use. For example, a house is a principal use in a
residential area; a garage or pool is an accessory use.
PRIVATE: In reference to a building, structure, utility, facility, or use,
"private" means owned by someone other than a unit of government, or an agency
of government, unless the context clearly indicates that "private" is being
used in a broader sense of something not open or available to the general
populace.
PUBLIC: In reference to a building, structure, utility, facility, or use,
"public" means owned and/or operated by a unit of government or an agency
thereof, unless the context clearly indicates that "public" is being used in
the broader sense of something available to the general populace.
SETBACK: The distance required to obtain the front, side or rear yard open
space provisions of this title. All measurements are taken from the structure's
foundation or from the exterior wall at grade level.
SIGN: Any structure or part thereof or device attached thereto or painted, or
represented thereon, which shall display or include any letter, word, model,
banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is
in the nature of, an announcement, direction, or advertisement. The word "sign"
includes the word "billboard".
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement, not having over fifty
percent (50%) of its height below grade, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
three feet (3') above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes, other than for janitor or caretaker or his/her
family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be
deemed a full story.
STREET: An approved public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of vehicular access to abutting property and/or for vehicular passage.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for
tennis courts, gazebos, ground based satellite dishes, and solar collectors.
TRAILER CAMP OR TOURIST CAMP GROUND: An area providing spaces for two (2) or
more travel trailers, camping trailers, or tent sites for temporary occupancy,
with necessary incidental services, sanitation, and recreation facilities to
serve the traveling public.
TRAVEL TRAILER OR MOTOR HOME: A vehicle with or without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed to permit the vehicle to be
used as a place of human habitation by one or more persons. Said vehicle may be
up to eight feet (8') in width and any length, provided its length does not
exceed forty feet (40'). If such vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily
used as a place of human habitation for more than ninety (90) days in any
eighteen (18) month period, it shall be classed as a mobile home, regardless of
the size and weight limitation provided herein.
VARIANCE: A modification of the literal provisions of this title which would
cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property
on which the variance is granted. The crucial points of variance are: a) undue
hardship, b) unique circumstances, and c) applying to property. The authority
to grant variances is vested in the board of adjustment pursuant to Iowa Code
chapter 414.
YARD: An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of a structure. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or
the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
lines and the main building line shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or
any projections thereof other than the projections of the usual uncovered
steps. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the
street upon which the lot has its least dimension, except where owner shall
elect to front his building on a street parallel to the lot line having the
greater dimension.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main
building line or any projections thereof other than the projections of
uncovered steps. On all lots, the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front
yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building line and the side line of the lot,
and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being
the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the
main building line or any projections of uncovered steps. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-
1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995; 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Administrative Officer
10-3-2: Permits And Fees
10-3-3: Application Of District Regulations
10-3-4: Interpretation Of Provisions
10-3-5: Changes And Amendments
10-3-6: Severability
10-3-7: Repealing Clause
10-3-8: Violations; Penalties
10-3-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
   A.   Officer Designated; Assistance: An administrative officer designated by
the city council shall administer and enforce this title. He or she may be
provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may
direct.
   B.   Enforcement Duties: If the administrative officer shall find that any
of the provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations,
or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done;
or shall take any other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance
with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
   C.   Appeal Decisions Of Administrative Officer: Appeals from any decision
of the administrative officer may be taken to the board of adjustment as
provided in subsection 10-4-6B of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-3-2: PERMITS AND FEES:
   A.   Construction Permit: No buildings shall hereafter be erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered nor shall any work be started upon same
until a construction permit for same has been issued by the administrative
officer, which permit shall state that the proposed building complies with all
provisions of this title. This permit is valid for one year following issuance
for single-family, multi-family, commercial and industrial structures. At the
end of the one year period, the applicant may purchase a onetime, three (3)
month extension on the permit for a fee that will be established from time to
time by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Fees: The administrative officer is directed to issue permits, under
this title, for the construction or alteration of residential, commercial or
industrial buildings, and to charge fees therefor in such amounts as may be
established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such fees as
are required shall be credited to the general fund of the city. Building
permits shall be issued without charge, however, to:
      1.   The United States government or any political subdivision thereof;
and
      2.   The state of Iowa or any political subdivision thereof; and
      3.   To any religious group for the construction of a church or parochial
school. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-3-3: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Regulations Uniformly Applied: The regulations set by this title shall
apply uniformly within each district to each class or kind of structure or
land, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   All Uses And Structures To Conform: No building, structure, or land
shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.
   C.   Height, Density Or Yards To Apply: No building or other structure shall
hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height, to accommodate or house a
greater number of families, or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front
yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this title.
   D.   Separate Yards, Open Space And Off Street Parking Required: No part of
a yard, or other open space, or off street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any building for the purposes of complying with
this title, shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, or off street
parking, or loading space similarly required for any other building.
   E.   Minimum Yards And Lot Areas Not To Be Reduced: No yard or lot existing
at the time of the effective date hereof shall be reduced in dimension or area
below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after
the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established by this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-3-4: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this
title are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most
restrictive or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-3-5: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Procedure:
      1.   Public Hearing; Report; Notice: The regulations imposed and the
districts created by this title may be amended from time to time by the city
council, but no such amendments shall be made without public hearing before the
city council and after a report upon the amendment from the planning and zoning
commission. If the planning and zoning commission makes no report within thirty
(30) days from the date of passage of the council's motion referring the matter
to the planning and zoning commission, the city council may proceed with a
public hearing without such report or recommendation. At least seven (7) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given according to the
requirements for public hearings in the Iowa Code for cities the size of
Oxford.
      2.   Conditions For Adoption Of Amendment: In the event that one or more
of the following events should occur, such amendment shall not be passed except
by the favorable vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of all members of the city
council:
         a.   The planning and zoning commission recommends disapproval of the
change; or
         b.   A protest against such change is filed with the city council and
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots
included in the proposed change; or
         c.   A protest against such change is filed with the city council and
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the lots immediately
adjacent in the rear of the lots to be rezoned extending the depth of one lot
or not to exceed two hundred feet (200') therefrom; or
         d.   A protest of such change is filed with the city council and
signed by owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the lots directly opposite
the lots to be rezoned, extending the depth on one lot or not to exceed two
hundred feet (200') from the street frontage of such opposite lots.
   B.   Form Of Rezoning Application: An application for rezoning shall contain
the following items:
      1.   The legal description and local address of the property.
      2.   The present zoning classification and the zoning classification
requested for the property.
      3.   The existing use and proposed use of the property.
      4.   The names and addresses of the owners of all property within two
hundred feet (200') of the property for which the change is requested.
      5.   A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present
zoning classification is no longer valid.
      6.   A plat or site plan showing the locations, dimensions, and use of
the applicant's property and all property within two hundred feet (200')
thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads, and other physical features. The
following will also be required on the aforementioned site plan:
         a.   North arrow and scale.
         b.   Size and location of existing and proposed structures and drives
on the subject property, and existing structures and drives on surrounding
properties.
         c.   Name and address of landowner.
         d.   Date of preparation of the plan.
   C.   Application Fee: Before any action is taken upon an application as
provided in this title, the applicant shall pay to the administrative officer a
fee in such amount as may be established by resolution of the city council. The
administrative officer shall forthwith pay over such fees to the credit of the
general fund of the city. The failure to approve an application for rezoning
shall not be construed as any reason for refunding the fee to the applicant.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-3-6: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   This title and the various parts, sections, subsections and clauses
thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
subsection, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is
hereby provided that the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby.
   B.   If any part, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid as applied to a particular property,
building or other structure, it is hereby provided that the application of such
portion of this title to other property, buildings or structures shall not be
affected thereby.
   C.   Whenever any condition or limitation is included in an order
authorizing any conditional use permit, variance, grading permit, zoning
compliance permit, certificate of occupancy, site plan approval or designation
of nonconformance, it shall be conclusively presumed that the authorizing
officer or body considered such condition or limitation necessary to carry out
the spirit and purpose of this title or the requirement of some provision
hereof, and to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and that the
officer or board would not have granted the authorization to which the
condition or limitation pertains except in the belief that the condition or
limitation was lawful. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-3-7: REPEALING CLAUSE:
The existing zoning regulations of the city, as amended, are hereby repealed.
The adoption of this title, however, shall not affect nor prevent any pending
or future prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing violation of said
existing zoning regulations of the city, as amended, if the violation is also a
violation of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
10-3-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with
the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and may be required to pay all costs and expenses involved
in the prosecution of the violation. Alternatively, any person who shall
violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this title shall be guilty of
a municipal infraction pursuant to Iowa Code section 364.22. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-
1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Owners And Tenants Liable: The owner, or tenant of any building,
structure, land or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a
violation or fails to comply with any provision of this title may each be
charged with a misdemeanor or municipal infraction and, upon conviction, suffer
the penalties provided herein in the event a misdemeanor is charged and the
penalties contained in Iowa Code section 364.22, if a municipal infraction is
charged. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   C.   Additional Remedies; Abatement: If any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
title, the city may, in addition to other remedies, institute an injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct or
abate such violation. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
10-4-1: Creation And Membership
10-4-2: Proceedings Of Board
10-4-3: Finality Of Decisions And Necessary Vote
10-4-4: Appeals From Board Decisions
10-4-5: Fees
10-4-6: Powers And Duties
10-4-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   Terms Of Office; Vacancies: A board of adjustment is hereby
established. The board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed for a
term of five (5) years excepting that when the board shall first be created,
one member shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, one for a term of
four (4) years, one for a term of three (3) years, one for a term of two (2)
years, and one for a term of one year. Members of the board of adjustment may
be removed from office by the city council for cause upon written charges and
after public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the
unexpired term of the member affected.
   B.   Membership Restrictions: No member of the city council, planning and
zoning commission, nor any city employee may be a member of the board of
adjustment. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-4-2: PROCEEDINGS OF BOARD:
   A.   Adoption Of Rules; Meetings: The board of adjustment shall adopt rules
necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of
this title. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such
other times as the board may determine. The chairperson, or in his or her
absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel attendance of
witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
   B.   Minutes Of Proceedings: The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the administrative officer and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-4-3: FINALITY OF DECISIONS AND NECESSARY VOTE:
All decisions and findings of the board on any appeal or upon any application
for a variance or conditional use, after a public hearing, shall, in all
instances, be the final administrative decision and shall be subject to
judicial review as by law may be provided.
   A.   Quorum: A quorum for a meeting of the board of adjustment shall consist
of at least three (3) of the five (5) members being present. A quorum shall be
necessary for a meeting to be considered an official meeting which allows the
board to take action on any issue before it.
   B.   Voting Requirements: The concurring vote of three (3) members of the
board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the zoning administrator, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this title, or
to effect any variation in the application of this title.
   C.   Issue Defeated: Any issue that receives less than three (3) concurring
votes of the members present at an official meeting shall be considered
defeated. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-4-4: APPEALS FROM BOARD DECISIONS:
Any person, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city
aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may seek review by a court
of record within thirty (30) days of such decision, in the manner provided by
the laws of the state and particularly by Iowa Code chapter 414. (Ord. 1994-92,
6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-4-5: FEES:
Fees shall be in such amounts as may be established from time to time by
resolution of the city council, and shall be paid to the administrative officer
at the time an appeal, variance, conditional use, or revised site plan is
filed. The zoning administrator shall forthwith pay over such fees to the
credit of the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
10-4-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there was error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the administrative officer in the enforcement of this title.
   B.   Appeals To Board Of Adjustment: Appeals concerning interpretation or
administration of this title may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board or bureau of the governing body of the city affected
by any decision of the administrative officer.
      1.   Notice Of Appeal: Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable
time, not to exceed sixty (60) days by filing with the administrative officer
and with the secretary of the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall forthwith transmit to the
board all paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
      2.   Time Limit For Hearing: The board of adjustment shall fix a
reasonable time not exceeding thirty (30) days from the date of appeal for the
hearing, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time, not exceeding fifteen
(15) days from the date of the hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the administrative officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal
is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on
notice to the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
   D.   Special Exceptions; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures: The
board shall be authorized to hear and decide only such special exceptions as
the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of
this title; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether
special exceptions should be granted; and to grant special exceptions with such
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this title, or to deny
special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
title. A special exception shall not be granted by the board of adjustment
unless and until:
      1.   Application For Special Exception: A written application for a
special exception is submitted indicating the section of this title under which
the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is
requested.
      2.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days
in advance of the public hearing in the manner required for a public hearing by
the Iowa Code for cities the size of Oxford. Notice shall also be mailed to all
property owners within a distance of two hundred feet (200') of the affected
property.
      3.   Conduct Of Hearing: The public hearing shall be held. Any party may
appear in person, or by agent or attorney.
      4.   Findings By Board:
         a.   Effect On Public Interest: The board of adjustment shall make a
finding that it is empowered under the section of this title described in the
application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the
special exception will not adversely affect the public interest.
         b.   Prescribe Conditions And Safeguards; Violations; Time Limit: In
granting any special exception, the board of adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violation
of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title and
punishable under section
10-3-8 of this title. The board of adjustment shall prescribe a time limit
within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be
begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action
within the time limit set shall void the special exception.
   E.   Variances; Conditions Governing Application:
      1.   Conditions For Granting: The board shall have the authority to
authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
title as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this title shall
not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
         b.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this title;
         c.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of
neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no
permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance; and
         d.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant.
      2.   Public Hearing; Findings Of Board:
         a.   Notice of public hearing shall be given as in subsection D2 of
this section, and in accordance with the state of Iowa open meetings law 1 .
         b.   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person,
or by agent or by attorney.
         c.   The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and
that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
         d.   The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements
of subsection E1 of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance.
         e.   The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the
granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this title, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
         f.   The decision of the board shall be recorded in the official
minutes of the board of adjustment meeting.
      3.   Prescribe Conditions And Safeguards; Violations: In granting any
variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this title and punishable under section
10-3-8 of this title.
      4.   Board Restrictions: Under no circumstances shall the board of
adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of
this title in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication
prohibited by the terms of this title in said district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-
1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
 
Notes
1 1. IC ch. 21.
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
10-5-1: Official Zoning Map
10-5-2: Changes In Official Zoning Map
10-5-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
10-5-4: Applicability Of Regulations
10-5-5: Annexed Territory
10-5-6: Vacated Streets
10-5-1: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   A.   Districts Established: Oxford is hereby divided into districts which
shall be designated as follows:
A-1  Agricultural
R-1  Low density single-family residential
R-2  Medium density single-family residential
R-3  Multi-family residential
R-4  Mobile home park residential
C-1  Central business district commercial
C-1B Peripheral business district commercial
C-2  Highway commercial
M-1  Light industrial
M-2  Heavy industrial
P-1  Public use
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
   B.   Official Zoning Map Adopted: The locations and boundaries of these
districts are shown on the official zoning map which, together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this title.
   C.   Signature; Seal: The official zoning map shall be identified by the
signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the
city under the following statement:
This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Ordinance 1994-92 of the City of Oxford, Iowa, passed June 14, 1994.
   D.   Map On File With Clerk: The official zoning map, or a true copy of the
same, shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be final
authority as to the correct zoning status of the land, water areas, buildings,
and other structures in the city. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-5-2: CHANGES IN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
   A.   Manner Of Making Changes: If in accordance with the provisions of
section
10-3-5 of this title and Iowa Code section 414.4, changes are made in district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes
shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has
been approved by the city council, with an entry on the official zoning map as
follows: "By official action of the City Council, the following changes were
made on the Official Zoning Map", (indicating the changes by ordinance numbers
and date of publication). No amendment of this title which involves matter
portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until after such
change and entry has been made on said map.
   B.   Replacement Of Map:
      1.   Corrections: In the event that the official zoning map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions, the city council may by ordinance adopt a new
official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The
new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in
the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof.
The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor,
attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the
following words:
This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the
Official Zoning Map adopted as part of Ordinance 1994-92 of the City of Oxford,
Iowa.
      2.   Prior Map Preserved: Unless the prior official zoning map has been
lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts
thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
   C.   Unauthorized Changes Prohibited: Any unauthorized change, of any kind
whatsoever, in the official zoning map by any person or persons, shall
constitute a violation of this title and be punishable as provided in section
10-3-8 of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-5-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as following corporate limits shall be construed
as following corporate limits.
   D.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main right of way.
   E.   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be
constructed to move with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   F.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsections A through E of this section shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by
dimensions shown on the map, or in the absence of dimensions, by the scale of
the map.
   G.   In the case of further uncertainty, and/or where physical or cultural
features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A
through F of this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district
boundaries. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-5-4: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Territorial Application: This title shall apply to all structures,
land, and uses within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Conversion Of Use Or Building: The conversion of any use or building
either to another use or to increase the size or area of the existing use,
including the conversion of any building or the conversion of any dwelling to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units, families, or residents,
shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for similar
occupancy would be permitted in this title and only when the resulting
occupancy will comply with the requirements in such districts, with respect to
minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, dimension of yards, height, off
street parking and any other applicable requirements.
   C.   General Prohibition: No building or structure; no use of any building,
structure or land; and no lot of record or zoning lot, hereafter existing,
shall be established, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any manner
except in accord with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
10-5-5: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
All territory which may be annexed to the city after adoption of this title
shall be classified according to the planning and zoning commission's
recommendations prior to annexation and the territory, upon annexation, may be
immediately so classified. Procedures for classification are established in
section
10-3-5 of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-5-6: VACATED STREETS:
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action
of the city council, the district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or
public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation, and
all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all
appropriate regulation of the extended districts. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 6
SCHEDULES OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Regulations Adopted
10-6-1: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The following schedules of district regulations, as set out in chapters 7
through 11 of this title, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter:
A-1  Agricultural
R-1  Low density single-family residential
R-2  Medium density single-family residential
R-3  Multi-family residential
R-4  Mobile home park residential
C-1  Central business district commercial
C-1B Peripheral business district commercial
C-2  Highway commercial
M-1  Light industrial
M-2  Heavy industrial
P-1  Public use
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
CHAPTER 7
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Intent
10-7-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-7-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-7-4: Special Exceptions
10-7-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-7-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-7-7: Maximum Height
10-7-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-7-9: Special Regulations
10-7-1: INTENT:
The A-1 agricultural district is intended to maintain and enhance agricultural
operations and preserve agricultural lands utilized for crop production or the
raising of livestock and to serve as a holding zone for lands where future
urban expansion is possible, but not yet appropriate due to the lack of urban
facilities and services. The preservation of agricultural land is intended to
prevent urban sprawl, control the public costs of providing urban services and
reduce urban/rural conflicts which arise as a result of premature development
of rural areas. The district is further intended to preserve open space and
natural resource areas. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Agriculture, horticulture, dairy farming, poultry farming, livestock farming,
general farming, truck gardening, and other agricultural activities.
Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas.
Single-family dwellings.
Those structures essential to farming operations not otherwise restricted
within this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Accessory uses or structures accessory to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title.
Farm buildings incidental to agricultural uses.
Private garages.
Private greenhouses or plant nurseries not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the A-1 district subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate the approval of all special exceptions by
the zoning board of adjustment:
   Airports, meeting or exceeding the most current FAA standards and
regulations.
   Dog kennels and dog runs.
   Greenhouses and plant nurseries operated for commercial purposes.
   Public utilities.
   Recreational development seasonal or temporary use.
   Roadside stand for sale of produce raised on the premises. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
   A.   Single-family dwelling:
      1.   Lot area: One acre.
      2.   Lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   B.   Agricultural uses:
      1.   No minimum lot area.
      2.   All other uses permitted in this district:
         a.   Lot area: One acre.
         b.   Lot width: One hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-
1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single-family dwelling:
 
Front                   35 feet
Rear                    35 feet
Side                    25 feet each side, plus 2 feet for each story above 1
Street side, corner lot 35 feet
 
A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has less area or width
than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted in this district,
provided all other provisions of this title are met.
   B.   Other permissible uses under this section:
 
Front                   40 feet
Rear                    40 feet
Side                    25 feet
Street side, corner lot 35 feet
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
For residential dwellings, there shall be two (2) spaces for each dwelling
unit. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-7-9: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Waste Disposal: Provision must be made for disposal of manure, other
organic wastes, or chemicals in such a manner as to avoid pollution of
groundwater or any lake, river, or receiving stream. Livestock confinement
buildings for the purpose of raising hogs, poultry or cattle must conform to
the provisions of subsection B of this section.
   B.   Restrictions For Certain Uses; Livestock: Agricultural uses are
permitted with no restrictions as to the operation of such vehicles or
machinery as are customarily incidental to such uses, and with no restrictions
to the sale or marketing of products raised on the premises; provided, that any
building, structure or yard for the raising, feeding, housing or sale of
livestock or poultry shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') from
residentially zoned land; and provided further, that there shall be no disposal
of garbage, rubbish or offal, other than regular removal, within three hundred
feet (300') of residentially or commercially zoned land. Pasturing of livestock
shall be restricted to no closer than one hundred feet (100') of residentially
or commercially zoned land.
   C.   Signs: All signage must meet the sign regulations described in chapter
12 of this title.
   D.   Feedlots Prohibited: Commercial feedlots are specifically prohibited in
the A-1 district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8A-1: Intent
10-8A-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-8A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-8A-4: Special Exceptions
10-8A-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-8A-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-8A-7: Maximum Height
10-8A-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-8A-1: INTENT:
The R-1 low density single-family residential district is intended to establish
and preserve quiet single-family residential neighborhoods free from other uses
except those which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of
such a district. The R-1 district will be comprised of larger lots than
required within the R-2 district in order to maintain a low population density.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Churches and temples.
Family group care home.
Parochial or private schools having no rooms used regularly for housing or
sleeping purposes.
Public buildings, public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, community centers,
libraries, and museums.
Public schools, elementary, junior high and high schools.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Garden houses.
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that
such buildings are removed within thirty (30) days upon completion of the
construction work.
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-1 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate the approval of all special exceptions by
the zoning board of adjustment:
   are facilities.
   Cemetery or mausoleum.
   Daycare centers.
   Public utilities.
   Swimming pools, golf courses and country clubs, except miniature courses or
driving ranges operated for a profit. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
   A.   Single-family dwelling:
      1.   Area: Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80').
      3.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
However, the minimum width and depth dimensions may not be construed to imply a
minimum lot size of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. In regard to overall
minimum lot dimensions set by this title, the total area will supersede any
conflicting combinations of widths or depths that do not equal the minimum area
requirement.
      4.   Lot Of Record: A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that
has less area or width than herein required may be used for any purpose
permitted in this district, provided all other provisions of this title are
met.
   B.   Other permissible uses:
      1.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single-family dwellings:
 
Front                   30 feet
Rear                    30 feet
Side                    10 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
   B.   All other uses permitted under this section:
 
Front                   40 feet
Rear                    40 feet
Side                    20 feet
Street side, corner lot 20 feet
 
   (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8A-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
 
Church or temple                    1 space for each 6 seats of average seating
                                    in the main auditorium
                                    10 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each
Community center, library or museum 300 square feet of floor area in excess of
                                    2,000 square feet
Country club or golf club           6 spaces for each hole
Dwellings                           2 spaces for each dwelling unit
                                    1 space for each classroom or office room,
Schools and public buildings        plus 1 space for each 10 seats of average
                                    seating in the main auditorium, stadium, or
                                    place of public assembly
 
All parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with
disabilities act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
ARTICLE B. R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8B-1: Intent
10-8B-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-8B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-8B-4: Special Exceptions
10-8B-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-8B-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-8B-7: Maximum Height
10-8B-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-8B-1: INTENT:
The R-2 medium density single-family residential district is intended to
preserve and uphold existing single-family residential neighborhoods and
structures free from other uses except those which are compatible with current
land uses of such district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Churches and temples.
Family group care home.
Parochial or private schools having no rooms used regularly for housing or
sleeping purposes.
Public buildings, public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, community centers,
libraries, and museums.
Public schools, elementary, junior high and high schools.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Garden houses.
Private garages.
Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
Private swimming pools.
Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work; provided, that
such buildings are removed within thirty (30) days upon completion of the
construction work.
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-2 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate the approval of all special exceptions by
the zoning board of adjustment:
   Bed and breakfast houses.
   Care facilities.
   Cemetery or mausoleum.
   Daycare centers.
   Mortuary or funeral home.
   Public utilities.
   Swimming pools, golf courses and country clubs, except miniature courses or
driving ranges operated for a profit. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
   A.   Single-family dwelling:
      1.   Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Sixty feet (60').
      3.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
      4.   Lot Of Record: A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that
has less area or width than herein required may be used for any purpose
permitted in this district, provided all other provisions of this title are
met.
   B.   Other permissible uses:
      1.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single-family dwelling:
 
Front                   20 feet, 10 feet uncovered deck
Rear                    30 feet
Side                    5 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
   B.   All other uses permitted under this section:
 
Front                   30 feet
Rear                    30 feet
Side                    15 feet
Street side, corner lot 20 feet
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8B-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
 
Church or temple                    1 space for each 6 seats of average seating
                                    in the main auditorium
                                    10 spaces, plus 1 additional space for each
Community center, library or museum 300 square feet of floor area in excess of
                                    2,000 square feet
Country club or golf club           6 spaces for each hole
Dwellings                           2 spaces for each dwelling unit
                                    1 space for each classroom or office room,
Schools and public buildings        plus 1 space for each 10 seats of average
                                    seating in the main auditorium, stadium, or
                                    place of public assembly
 
All parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with
disabilities act where applicable. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
ARTICLE C. R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8C-1: Intent
10-8C-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-8C-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-8C-4: Special Exceptions
10-8C-5: Special Requirements
10-8C-6: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-8C-7: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-8C-8: Maximum Height
10-8C-9: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-8C-1: INTENT:
The R-3 multiple-family residential district is intended to establish and
preserve areas containing single-family, two- family, and multiple-family
dwellings. It is intended to provide a wide range of housing types while
maintaining a moderate density residential character designed to exclude those
uses which are not compatible with residential use but permitting certain
nonresidential uses which are of particular convenience to the residents of the
district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
All uses and structures permitted under the R-2 district.
Mortuary or funeral homes.
Multi-family dwellings.
Private kindergartens and day nurseries.
Religious, educational, nonprofit charitable institutions.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
All accessory uses and structures permitted under the R-2 district.
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to provisions of chapter 14 of this title.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-3 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions must be
approved by the zoning board of adjustment:
All other exceptions permitted under the R-2 district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-
1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Separate or divided ownership of each single-family unit of a two-family
dwelling unit is permitted, provided the following requirements are met:
   A.   Compliance With Requirements: The lot or parcel of real estate being
divided into two (2) parcels allowing separate ownership thereof must
originally meet all of the requirements for uses permitted in an R-3 district.
   B.   Separate Access And Utility Services: A two-family dwelling unit must
be in existence or will be constructed thereon, consisting of two (2) laterally
attached dwelling units with each unit having a separate access and separate
utilities services including gas, water, sewer and electricity.
   C.   Common Boundary Line: The division of the lot or parcel into two (2)
parcels shall be in such a manner as to result in one single-family dwelling
unit being located on either side of a common boundary line with the common
wall between the two (2) laterally joined single-family dwelling units being on
said common boundary line.
   D.   Protective Covenants: Prior to division of the lot or parcel into two
(2) parcels, there shall be submitted to the administrative officer of the city
two (2) copies of proposed restrictive and protective covenants providing that
the owners of each parcel, upon division, are jointly and severally liable and
responsible for the maintenance and repair of the common wall as well as of all
other common aspects including, but not limited to, utilities, water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, easements and driveways, all to the point of division. The
administrative officer shall, within fifteen (15) days, determine whether the
proposed covenants meet the requirements of this subsection and shall thereupon
return one copy of the covenants to the owners, at which time the owners shall
have said covenants recorded at the office of the Johnson County recorder. If
the administrative officer determines that the proposed covenants are not
satisfactory, the owner shall be notified and submit a further set of proposed
covenants which shall embody any corrections or clarifications deemed necessary
by the administrative officer.
   E.   Considered As Two-Family Apartment Dwelling: The two- family dwelling
unit shall, in all other respects, other than the divided ownership thereof, be
considered as any other two-family apartment dwelling and shall meet all
requirements pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-6: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
   A.   Single-Family Dwelling: The lot areas and widths required within the R-
1 district must be met accordingly. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
   B.   Two-Family And Multi-Family Dwellings:
      1.   Two-family dwelling:
         a.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         b.   Width: Fifty feet (50') per dwelling.
         c.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
      2.   Multi-family dwelling: The minimum lot areas and dimensions shall be
as follows:
         a.   Width: Not less than fifty feet (50').
         b.   Depth: Not less than one hundred feet (100').
         c.   Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet with one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet for each one additional family dwelling unit
thereafter. (Ord. 2000-104, 8-8-2000)
   C.   Other Permissible Uses:
      1.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-7: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single, two-family and multi-family dwellings:
 
Front                   25 feet
Rear                    30 feet
Side:
1 story                 10 feet
2 stories               10 feet
3 stories               12 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. Ord. 2000-104, 8-8-2000)
   B.   All other uses permitted in this section:
 
Front                   40 feet
Rear                    40 feet
Side                    20 feet
Street side, corner lot 25 feet
 
   (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-8: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be three (3) stories or forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 1994-
92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8C-9: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
 
                     1 space per bedroom, with a minimum of 2 spaces per unit,
Dwellings            plus 1 visitor space for every 4 units with unobstructed
                     ingress and egress
Other uses permitted Same as R-1 and R-2 districts
 
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
ARTICLE D. R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8D-1: Intent
10-8D-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-8D-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-8D-4: Special Exceptions
10-8D-5: Special Requirements
10-8D-6: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-8D-7: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-8D-8: Maximum Height
10-8D-9: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-8D-1: INTENT:
The R-4 mobile home park residential district is intended to accommodate mobile
home parks in those areas of the community where such a use will be compatible
with existing and projected development. This district will generally be
located in outlying areas of the city and should be well served by adequate
sewers, water service, streets, police and fire protection, and similar public
facilities and services. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Mobile homes designed for multi-family use.
Single-family mobile homes. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
All accessory uses and structures permitted under the R-2 district, provided
they meet the requirements outlined under the R-2 district for said use and
structure.
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to provisions of chapter 14 of this title.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the R-4 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions must be
approved by the zoning board of adjustment:
All exceptions permitted under the R-2 district, provided they meet the
requirements outlined under the R-2 district for said use and structure. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Mobile homes converted to real estate must be at least twenty two feet (22')
wide and must comply with the same yard and area requirements as single-family
dwellings in the R-2 district. In addition, the following requirements must be
met:
   A.   Location On Cement Slab: The mobile home shall be located on and
permanently attached to a cement slab which is a minimum length of the trailer
itself, and of a width of at least four feet (4') greater than the actual width
of the trailer such that the slab extends four feet (4') or more beyond the
side of the mobile home on the doorway side.
   B.   Connection To Water And Sewer: Each mobile home shall be permanently
connected to the city sanitary sewer and city water service in accordance with
the ordinances, rules, requirements, and regulations of the city.
   C.   Electric Service Connection: Each mobile home shall have separate and
permanent connection to the electric service facilities in accordance with the
ordinances, rules, requirements, and regulations of the city.
   D.   Compliance With State And City Health Requirements: Each mobile home
shall comply with all the sanitary and health laws, rules, regulations, and
requirements of the state and the city, and further comply with all additional
applicable laws, rules, regulations, and requirements of the city and the
state.
   E.   Temporary Permit: Prior to the mobile home being located in said
district, it shall first be necessary to make an application to obtain a
temporary permit for the location of said home. If the city council finds the
proposed location to be in compliance with all the terms of this title and all
the laws, rules, regulations, and requirements of the city and the state, the
council shall issue a temporary permit.
   F.   Occupancy Permit: Once a temporary permit has been acquired, a further
application shall be made to the city council in order to obtain an occupancy
permit. The council shall then obtain such information and make such
inspections as may be necessary to determine that all the terms of this title
and other laws, rules, regulations, and requirements of the state and the city
are being met.
   G.   Temporary Place Of Residence: No mobile home shall be located,
occupied, or used as a temporary place of residence except in accordance with
the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-6: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has less area or width
than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted in this district,
provided all other provisions of this title are met.
   A.   Single-family mobile home:
      1.   Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Sixty feet (60').
      3.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
   B.   Multi-family mobile home:
      1.   Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet, plus one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet per dwelling unit over one.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80').
      3.   Depth: Minimum depth of not less than one hundred feet (100').
Minimum area supersedes width and depth as in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Other permissible uses:
      1.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Width: Eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-7: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single, two-family and multi-family mobile homes:
 
Front                   20 feet
Rear                    20 feet
Side
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
   B.   All other uses permitted in this section:
 
Front                   40 feet
Rear                    40 feet
Side                    20 feet
Street side, corner lot 25 feet
 
   (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-8: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-8D-9: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
 
Dwellings            2 spaces for each dwelling unit, plus 1 space for every 2
                     roomers
Other uses permitted Same as the R-2 district
 
Where applicable, all parking and loading spaces shall comply with the
Americans with disabilities act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 9
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL
SECTION:
10-9A-1: Intent
10-9A-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-9A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-9A-4: Special Exceptions
10-9A-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-9A-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-9A-7: Structure Height
10-9A-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-9A-9: Building Materials And Design
10-9A-1: INTENT:
The C-1 central business district commercial is intended to establish and
preserve a central business district convenient and attractive for a wide range
of retail uses and business, government and professional offices and places of
amusement in a setting conducive to and safe for a high volume of pedestrian
traffic. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Apartments; provided, that they are located on or above the second floor of the
building in which they are located, (existing) funeral homes exempted.
Bakery and catering service.
Business and vocational schools.
Business offices, professional offices, studios.
Commercial amusements.
Financial institutions.
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
Medical and dental offices.
Personal service and repair shops.
Printing, publishing and engraving businesses.
Private clubs and lodges.
Public utilities.
Railroads and bus terminals.
Restaurants, taverns.
Retail business.
Temples, churches, and public buildings.
Wholesale display and salesrooms and offices. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994; amd. Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9A-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the C-1 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions be approved by
the zoning board of adjustment:
Automobile body repair, automobile service shops.
Bed and breakfasts.
Carnivals, circuses, fairs, or road shows. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
10-9A-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
No minimum. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9A-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front: Zero feet (0').
   B.   Corner lot, street side: Zero feet (0'). (Ord. 1999-100, 6-8-1999)
10-9A-7: STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
   A.   Minimum: Height of shortest adjoining building(s).
   B.   Maximum: Three (3) stories or forty five feet (45'). (Ord. 1999-100, 6-
8-1999)
10-9A-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
   A.   Off Street Loading: One space for each ten thousand (10,000) square
feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   B.   Compliance With Americans With Disabilities Act: Where applicable, all
parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with disabilities
act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9A-9: BUILDING MATERIALS AND DESIGN:
   A.   Review Requirements Of Building Facade: Construction of any
improvements or alteration of the principal structure's building facade shall
require a design for windows, entrances, doors, rooflines, and facade heights
and style to be similar to that brick structure constructed before 1930 which
is located closest to said principal structure.
   B.   Commission Review And Council Approval: Construction of any improvement
or alteration requires review by the planning and zoning commission and
approval by the city council before issuance of a building permit. The permit
applicant must submit drawings ten (10) days prior to the planning and zoning
commission's meeting, showing the front elevation (view) which identifies
building materials and dimensions. The planning and zoning commission must
issue a review recommendation within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
drawings.
   C.   Required Materials: Visible portions of the facade of all principal
building(s) shall be constructed using one or more of the following materials:
masonry finish or architectural metal, not including metal siding, on all
nonfenestrated areas of wall(s). For purposes of this provision, "masonry"
shall be defined as fired brick, stone, or similar such material, not including
concrete blocks and undressed poured concrete. Masonry may include stuccolike
material when used in combination with other masonry finish. Decorative
moldings may also be used.
   D.   Windows: The visible portion of the facade shall be fenestrated
(provided with windows) a minimum of the average fenestrated area(s) of
adjoining building(s). Windows shall provide pedestrians with visual access
into the first floor area. Exposed window material consisting of unpainted
steel or aluminum shall not be permitted.
   E.   No Fee For Design Review: There is no fee charged for design review.
(Ord. 1999-100, 6-8-1999)
ARTICLE B. C-1B PERIPHERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT COMMERCIAL
SECTION:
10-9B-1: Intent
10-9B-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-9B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-9B-4: Special Exceptions
10-9B-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-9B-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-9B-7: Structure Height
10-9B-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-9B-1: INTENT:
The C-1B peripheral business district commercial is intended to establish and
preserve a business district convenient and attractive for a wide range of
retail uses and business, government and professional offices and places of
amusement in the city with ample accommodations for off street parking and
setbacks reflecting requirements for neighboring residential areas. (Ord. 1995-
95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Apartments; provided, that they are located on or above the second floor of the
building in which they are located.
Bakery and catering service.
Business and vocational schools.
Business offices, professional offices, studios.
Commercial amusements.
Financial institutions.
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
Medical and dental offices.
Personal service and repair shops.
Printing, publishing and engraving businesses.
Private clubs and lodges.
Public utilities.
Railroads and bus terminals.
Restaurants, taverns.
Retail business.
Temples, churches, and public buildings.
Wholesale display and salesrooms and offices. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exception use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the C-1B district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions be approved by
the zoning board of adjustment: (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995; amd. 2015 Code)
Automobile body repair, automobile service shops.
Bed and breakfasts.
Carnivals, circuses, fairs, or road shows. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
Minimum lot area shall be five thousand two hundred (5,200) square feet. (Ord.
1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
Front  5 feet
Side   5 feet
Corner 5 feet
Rear   20 feet (designed for parking and loading)
 
(Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-9B-7: STRUCTURE HEIGHT:
   A.   Minimum: One and one-half (11/2) stories or 22.5 feet.
   B.   Maximum: Two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord. 1995-95,
5-9-1995)
10-9B-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
Banks, financial institutions            1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                         floor area
Barbershop                               1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                         floor area
Bowling alley                            5 spaces for each lane or alley
Church or temple                         1 space for each 6 seats of average
                                         seating in the main auditorium
Dance halls, theaters, places of         1 space for each 100 square feet of
amusement, and skating rinks             floor area
Furniture, appliance, hardware, building 1 space for each 250 square feet of
supplies                                 floor space
                                         1 space for each unit or suite, plus 1
Motels and hotels                        space for each 200 square feet of
                                         commercial floor area
Professional and business offices not    1 space for each 250 square feet of
listed elsewhere                         floor area
Restaurants, private clubs, nightclubs,  1 space for each 100 square feet of
cafes, and taverns                       floor area
Supermarkets, shopping centers, retail   1 space for each 150 square feet of
stores, and service establishments       floor area and outdoor sales space
Vehicle and farm implement sales,        1.5 parking spaces for each employee
service, and repair establishments
 
Where applicable, all parking and loading spaces shall comply with the
Americans with disabilities act. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
ARTICLE C. C-2 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9C-1: Intent
10-9C-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-9C-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-9C-4: Special Exceptions
10-9C-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-9C-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-9C-7: Maximum Height
10-9C-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-9C-1: INTENT:
The C-2 highway commercial district is intended to establish and preserve
general commercial areas consisting of shopping centers and commercial strips
where customers reach individual business establishments primarily by
automobile. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Banks and financial institutions.
Bowling alleys, skating rinks, dance halls, theaters, places of amusement, golf
driving ranges and miniature golf.
Building materials dealers.
Bus and railroad terminal.
Business offices.
Churches or temples.
Convenience stores.
Drive-in restaurants.
Farm implement displays and sales, service and repair.
Fruit, vegetable and produce stands.
Mobile and manufactured home sales.
Motels and hotels.
Motor vehicle sales, service and repair, service stations, and car washes.
Private clubs or lodges.
Restaurants, cafes, nightclubs and taverns.
Shopping centers or malls.
Supermarkets and retail businesses. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a special
exceptions use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the C-2 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions be approved by
the zoning board of adjustment:
   Amusement parks.
   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, road shows.
   Communication towers subject to section
10-14-10 of this title.
   Feed mills and grain elevators.
   Public utilities, veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and kennels. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
   A.   Minimum Lot Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum Width: None.
   C.   Lot Of Record: A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has
less area or width than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted
in this district, provided all other provisions of this title are met. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front: Twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Side: None except where abutting an agricultural or residential
district, a side yard of not less than ten feet (10') shall be provided.
   C.   Rear: None except where abutting an agricultural or residential
district, a rear yard of not less than thirty feet (30') shall be provided.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or 37.5 feet. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-9C-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
Banks and financial institutions         1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                         floor area
Barbershop                               1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                         floor area
Bowling alley                            5 spaces for each lane or alley
Church or temple                         1 space for each 6 seats of average
                                         seating in the main auditorium
Dance halls, theaters, places of         1 space for each 100 square feet of
amusement, and skating rinks             floor area
Furniture, appliance, hardware, building 1 space for each 250 square feet of
supplies                                 floor area
                                         1 space for each unit or suite, plus 1
Motels and hotels                        space for each 200 square feet of
                                         commercial floor area
Professional and business offices not    1 space for each 250 square feet of
listed elsewhere                         floor area
Restaurants, private clubs, nightclubs,  1 space for each 100 square feet of
cafes, and taverns                       floor area
Supermarkets, shopping centers, retail   1 space for each 150 square feet of
stores, and service establishments       floor area and outdoor sales space
Vehicle and farm implement sales,        1.5 parking spaces for each employee
service, and repair establishments
 
Where applicable, all parking and loading spaces shall comply with the
Americans with disabilities act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 10
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10A-1: Intent
10-10A-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-10A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-10A-4: Special Exceptions
10-10A-5: Minimum Lot Area
10-10A-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-10A-7: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-10A-8: Maximum Height
10-10A-1: INTENT:
The M-1 light industrial district is intended to establish and preserve areas
for industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create
serious problems of compatibility with other kinds of land uses, and to make
provision for certain kinds of commercial uses which are necessary to service
the immediate needs of people in these areas. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-10A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Animal pound or kennel.
Automobile body repair and paint shop.
Bottling works.
Building material sales and storage.
Contractor's shop and storage yard.
Dairy processing facility.
Farm implement sales, service, repair and assembly.
Freight terminal.
Frozen food lockers.
Grain elevator and feed mill.
High technology wholesaling and manufacturing to include electronics, medical
and biogenetics, computers and software research, and related activities.
Personnel storage lockers and warehouses.
Railroads, railroad yards and public utilities.
Sheet metal products manufacture.
Truck or bus garage and repair shop.
Welding and blacksmith shop.
Wholesaling and warehousing but not including the bulk storage of liquid
fertilizers or flammable liquids. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a conditional
permitted use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the M-1 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions must be
approved by the zoning board of adjustment:
   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, road shows.
   Communication towers subject to section
10-14-10 of this title.
   Concrete products and central mixing and proportioning plant.
   Stockyards and/or sales barns and yards. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994; amd. Ord. 2001-103, 9-11-2001)
10-10A-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Of Record: A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has
less area or width than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted
in this district, provided all other provisions of this title are met. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Yards:
 
Front         20 feet
Interior side 10 feet
Corner side   20 feet
Rear          15 feet
 
   B.   Transitional yards:
      1.   Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line
in an adjacent residential or commercial district, a yard shall be provided
along such side or rear lot line and such yard shall be at least equal in depth
to that yard required in the abutting district.
      2.   Where a lot within the M-1 district fronts on a street which forms
the boundary line between the M-1 district and a residential or commercial
district, then such lot shall provide a front yard at least equal in depth to
the front yard required in such abutting district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-7: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
   A.   Parking:
 
                                       1 space for each employee on duty at any
Warehousing, storage and manufacturing one time, plus 1 for each vehicle used
                                       by the industry
 
   B.   Off Street Loading: One space, fifty feet by twelve feet (50' x 12'),
for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
   C.   Compliance With Americans With Disabilities Act: Where applicable, all
parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with disabilities
act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-8: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be four (4) stories or sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
ARTICLE A. M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10A-1: Intent
10-10A-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-10A-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-10A-4: Special Exceptions
10-10A-5: Minimum Lot Area
10-10A-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-10A-7: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-10A-8: Maximum Height
10-10A-1: INTENT:
The M-1 light industrial district is intended to establish and preserve areas
for industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create
serious problems of compatibility with other kinds of land uses, and to make
provision for certain kinds of commercial uses which are necessary to service
the immediate needs of people in these areas. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-10A-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Animal pound or kennel.
Automobile body repair and paint shop.
Bottling works.
Building material sales and storage.
Contractor's shop and storage yard.
Dairy processing facility.
Farm implement sales, service, repair and assembly.
Freight terminal.
Frozen food lockers.
Grain elevator and feed mill.
High technology wholesaling and manufacturing to include electronics, medical
and biogenetics, computers and software research, and related activities.
Personnel storage lockers and warehouses.
Railroads, railroad yards and public utilities.
Sheet metal products manufacture.
Truck or bus garage and repair shop.
Welding and blacksmith shop.
Wholesaling and warehousing but not including the bulk storage of liquid
fertilizers or flammable liquids. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a conditional
permitted use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the M-1 district, subject to
provisions of subsection
10-4-6D of this title which mandate that all special exceptions must be
approved by the zoning board of adjustment:
   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, road shows.
   Communication towers subject to section
10-14-10 of this title.
   Concrete products and central mixing and proportioning plant.
   Stockyards and/or sales barns and yards. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994; amd. Ord. 2001-103, 9-11-2001)
10-10A-5: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
   A.   Area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Lot Of Record: A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has
less area or width than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted
in this district, provided all other provisions of this title are met. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Yards:
 
Front         20 feet
Interior side 10 feet
Corner side   20 feet
Rear          15 feet
 
   B.   Transitional yards:
      1.   Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line
in an adjacent residential or commercial district, a yard shall be provided
along such side or rear lot line and such yard shall be at least equal in depth
to that yard required in the abutting district.
      2.   Where a lot within the M-1 district fronts on a street which forms
the boundary line between the M-1 district and a residential or commercial
district, then such lot shall provide a front yard at least equal in depth to
the front yard required in such abutting district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-7: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
   A.   Parking:
 
                                       1 space for each employee on duty at any
Warehousing, storage and manufacturing one time, plus 1 for each vehicle used
                                       by the industry
 
   B.   Off Street Loading: One space, fifty feet by twelve feet (50' x 12'),
for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
   C.   Compliance With Americans With Disabilities Act: Where applicable, all
parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with disabilities
act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10A-8: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be four (4) stories or sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
ARTICLE B. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10B-1: Intent
10-10B-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-10B-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-10B-4: Special Exceptions
10-10B-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-10B-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-10B-7: Maximum Height
10-10B-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-10B-1: INTENT:
The M-2 heavy industrial district is intended to establish and preserve areas
for necessary industrial and related uses of such a nature that they require
isolation from many other kinds of land uses, and to make provision for
commercial uses which are necessary to service the immediate needs of people in
their areas. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Asbestos, brick and clay products manufacture.
Bulk storage of petroleum products and commercial fertilizers.
Concrete products and central mixing and proportioning plant.
Flour, feed and grain milling storage.
Machinery manufacturer.
Paint and varnish manufacturer.
Sheet metal products manufacturer.
Structural iron and steel fabrication.
All other uses permitted under the M-1 district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff.
6-14-1994)
10-10B-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses and structures accessory to a principal permitted use or a conditional
permitted use are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions are permitted in the M-2 district, subject to
provisions of subsection 10-4-6D of this title which mandate the approval of
all special exceptions by the zoning board of adjustment:
   Acid manufacturer.
   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, road shows.
   Communication towers subject to section
10-14-10 of this title.
   Explosive manufacturer or storage.
   Fertilizer manufacturer.
   Junkyards, including automobile wrecking and/or salvage.
   Materials recycling.
   Stockyards, slaughterhouses, poultry processing and packaging, and/or sale
barns and yards. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Yards:
 
Front         35 feet
Interior side 15 feet
Corner side   25 feet
Rear          25 feet
 
   B.   Transitional yards:
      1.   Where a side or rear lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line
in an adjacent residence or commercial district, or an existing residential
use, a yard shall be provided along such side or rear lot line not less than
forty five feet (45') in depth and shall contain landscaping and planting so
designed and/or planted to provide an effective visual screen, when viewed
horizontally, between two feet (2') and eight feet (8') above average ground
level.
      2.   Where a lot within an M-2 district fronts on a street which forms a
boundary line between the M-2 district and a residential or commercial
district, or an existing residential use, then such lot shall have a front yard
of not less than forty five feet (45') in depth. Parking shall not be permitted
therein and such yard shall be appropriately landscaped with grass and/or other
suitable plantings. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Maximum height shall be four (4) stories or sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-10B-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
   A.   Parking:
 
                                       1 space for each employee on duty at any
Warehousing, storage and manufacturing one time, plus 1 for each vehicle used
                                       by the industry
 
   B.   Off Street Loading: One space, fifty feet by twelve feet (50' x 12'),
for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
   C.   Compliance With Americans With Disabilities Act: Where applicable, all
parking and loading spaces shall comply with the Americans with disabilities
act. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 11
P-1 PUBLIC USE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Intent
10-11-2: Permitted Principal Uses And Structures
10-11-3: Permitted Accessory Uses And Structures
10-11-4: Special Exceptions
10-11-5: Minimum Lot Areas And Width
10-11-6: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-11-7: Maximum Height
10-11-8: Minimum Off Street Parking And Loading Space
10-11-1: INTENT:
It is intended that the P-1 public use district provide reference on the zoning
map to public uses of land. Thus land owned by the city of Oxford, United
States federal government, the state of Iowa, Johnson County, or the Clear
Creek - Amana community school district, will be designated public use. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES:
Agriculture.
Use of land, buildings or structures of the aforementioned governmental
entities or political subdivisions thereof. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-11-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
Uses subject to the provisions of chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-4: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-5: MINIMUM LOT AREAS AND WIDTH:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-6: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-7: MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-11-8: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE:
None. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 12
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Intent
10-12-2: Nameplates
10-12-3: Church Or Public Bulletin Boards
10-12-4: Temporary Signs Advertising Lease Or Sale
10-12-5: Billboards And Advertising Signs
10-12-6: Illumination Of Externally Visible Signs
10-12-7: Maintenance Of Signs
10-12-1: INTENT:
Regulation of the size, location, and certain features of signs is necessary to
enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities without disruption
to surrounding areas; to prevent wasteful use of natural resources; to prevent
hazards to life and property; and to assure the continued attractiveness of the
community. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-12-2: NAMEPLATES:
Signs bearing only property numbers, postal box numbers, names of occupants of
premises, private parking, or other identification of premises are permitted
within all residential districts; and
   A.   Shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
   B.   Must be attached to a structure. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
10-12-3: CHURCH OR PUBLIC BULLETIN BOARDS:
   A.   Permitted in all districts except R-1, R-2, M-1, and M-2 districts.
   B.   Signs shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-
14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-12-4: TEMPORARY SIGNS ADVERTISING LEASE OR SALE:
   A.   Not to be placed in street right of way in any district. (Ord. 1994-92,
6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
   B.   Not to exceed ten (10) square feet in total area in the following
districts: A-1, R-1, R-2, and C-1. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994;
amd. 2015 Code)
   C.   Not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in total area in the following
districts: C-2, M-1, M-2.
   D.   All temporary signs must be removed seven (7) days after closing date
of sale. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-12-5: BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING SIGNS:
   A.   Permit Required; No Fee: The city will require that all persons wishing
to erect a billboard or advertising sign, in any district, must first notify
the city official in charge of permits. If the billboard or advertising sign
meets the requirements as put forth in this chapter, the permit official will
issue a free permit for the sign.
   B.   Compliance With Zoning Regulations For District: All signs erected
according to this chapter must meet all other requirements for the district in
which they are located. No sign may be placed or extend into the area between
the lot line and any setback requirement in any district.
   C.   Compliance With State And Federal Laws: All signs erected according to
this chapter must meet all other applicable federal and state laws even though
said federal and state laws may not be exhibited in this title.
   D.   A-1 District: Unrestricted size permitted in A-1 district, provided:
      1.   They are not within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
district.
      2.   They are not within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection,
highway, structure, or residence, or another billboard.
      3.   They are not within one hundred feet (100') of a park, school,
cemetery, public, or semipublic building.
      4.   They are not within seventy five feet (75') of the centerline of a
city or country road, or one hundred feet (100') of a state or federal highway.
   E.   C-1 District: Permitted in C-1 district; provided, that they are not to
exceed twenty five (25) square feet in area and are attached to the building in
which the establishment is located and shall not be within twenty feet (20') of
any residential district or use. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
   F.   C-1B District: Permitted in C-1B district; provided, that they are not
to exceed twenty five (25) square feet in area and shall not be within twenty
feet (20') of any residential district or use. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
   G.   C-2 District: Permitted in C-2 district; provided, that they are not to
exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and shall not be within thirty
feet (30') of any residential district or use.
   H.   M-1 And M-2 Districts: Unrestricted size permitted in M-1 and M-
2 districts, provided:
      1.   They are not within fifty feet (50') of any residential district.
      2.   They are not within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection,
highway, structure, or residence, or another billboard.
      3.   They are not within one hundred feet (100') of a park, school,
cemetery, public, or semipublic building.
      4.   They are not within seventy five feet (75') of the centerline of a
city or country road, or one hundred feet (100') of a state or federal highway.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-12-6: ILLUMINATION OF EXTERNALLY VISIBLE SIGNS:
   A.   Shall not exceed two hundred (200) watts total and shall be lighted
only with nonintermittent lighting in the following districts: R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4 and dwellings in C-1.
   B.   Shall not exceed six hundred (600) watts per externally visible sign or
total watts of seven hundred (700) for all externally visible signs on the
premises and shall be lighted only with nonintermittent lighting in a C-
2 district.
   C.   All signs resembling traffic lights or other safety lights are strictly
prohibited in all districts.
   D.   No further restrictions apply to other districts or uses. (Ord. 1994-
92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-12-7: MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS:
All signs and billboards shall be maintained in a neat and presentable
condition and in the event their use shall cease, they shall be removed within
sixty (60) days of the date that their use ceases and the surrounding area
restored to a condition free from refuse and rubbish. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
CHAPTER 13
FENCE AND HEDGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Location In Yards, Lots
10-13-2: Swimming Pool Requirements
10-13-3: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
10-13-1: LOCATION IN YARDS, LOTS:
Fences and hedges, when located within a front, side or rear yard, or within
five feet (5') of a lot line, shall be subject to the following location and
height restrictions:
   A.   Height: No portion of a fence shall exceed seven feet (7') in height.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
   B.   Street Right Of Way: Fences and hedges shall be located so no part
thereof is within two feet (2') of an alley or two feet (2') of a street right
of way.
   C.   Front Yard: In any zoning district within the city, no fence exceeding
four feet (4') in height shall be located within any portion of the front yard.
   D.   Permit Requirements: All fences shall be subject to the following
permit requirements:
      1.   Application; Accompanying Documents: All applications for a fence
permit shall be submitted to the administrative officer and must be accompanied
by a sketch or design of the proposed fence, a plat showing the proposed
location of the fence and a description of the materials of which the fence
will be constructed.
      2.   Shared Lot Line: In the event the proposed fence will be constructed
on a shared lot line, it is advisable that persons constructing a fence should
inform adjoining neighbors of said plans.
   E.   Location; Maintenance: Fences and hedges shall be located entirely
within the confines of the property. The owner of the property upon which the
fence is constructed is required to maintain the fence or hedge. Posts and
supports for the fence shall be located on the inside of the fence on the
property on which the fence is constructed.
   F.   Snow Fences: A wooden snow fence or a plastic snow fence may be erected
on a temporary basis, not to exceed six (6) months, to alleviate the adverse
effects of drifting snow or warn and prevent access to an area by unauthorized
persons. When erected on a temporary basis to prevent access of unauthorized
persons to any area, wood snow fences or plastic snow/safety fences shall be
removed within twenty four (24) hours after the elimination of the reason for
which the fence was erected originally.
   G.   Construction In Workmanlike Manner: All fences shall be constructed in
a workmanlike manner and shall be maintained and repaired as needed. (Ord. 97-
99, 4-22-1997)
10-13-2: SWIMMING POOL REQUIREMENTS:
Fenced enclosures shall be provided for outdoor swimming pools with a depth of
eighteen inches (18") or more, and shall be subject to the following
requirements:
   A.   Height; Spaces: Fences must be at least four feet (4') in height from
ground level but not to exceed seven feet (7') from the top rim of the pool,
and have no spaces that would allow a four inch (4") diameter sphere to pass
through.
   B.   Self-Closing, Self-Latching Devices: Fences must have a self-closing
and self-latching device on the gate. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
   C.   Location: Fences must be located so no part thereof is within two feet
(2') of an alley or two feet (2') of a street right of way. (Ord. 97-99, 4-22-
1997)
10-13-3: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
Barbed wire and electric fences shall be subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Zone Restriction: Barbed wire and electric fences shall not be allowed
in residential or commercial zones.
   B.   Location: Barbed wire and electric fences shall be prohibited within
five feet (5') of a public sidewalk or within four feet (4') of a street right
of way where a public sidewalk does not exist.
   C.   Livestock Operations: Electric fences shall not be permitted in any
district except for the enclosure of livestock operations in an A-
1 agricultural district.
   D.   Electric Charge: No electric fence shall carry a charge greater than
twenty five (25) milliamperes nor a pulsating current longer than one-tenth (1/
10) per second in a one second cycle. All electric fence chargers shall carry
the seal of an approved testing laboratory. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
CHAPTER 14
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Visibility At Intersection
10-14-2: Accessory Buildings And Structures
10-14-3: Multiple Principal Structures On Lot
10-14-4: Height Regulation Exception
10-14-5: Use Of Public Right Of Way
10-14-6: Proposed Use Not Covered
10-14-7: Building Access Required
10-14-8: Handicapped Car Parking
10-14-9: Home Occupations
10-14-10: Communication Towers
10-14-11: Eaves Or Structural Overhangs
10-14-12: Fence Regulation
10-14-13: Minimum Single-Family Dwelling Dimensions
10-14-1: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION:
On a corner lot in any agricultural or residential district, no fence, wall,
hedge or other planting, sign or structure that will obstruct vision between a
height of two and one- half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of the intersecting street shall be erected, placed or
maintained within the triangular area formed, the right of way lines at such
corner and a straight line joining said right of way lines at points which are
twenty five feet (25') distant from the intersection of the right of way lines,
and measured along the right of way lines. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
10-14-2: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Time Limitation: No accessory building or structure shall be erected
more than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the time of completion of the
construction or establishment of the principal structure or use to which it is
accessory.
   B.   Height; Location: Accessory buildings and structures shall be limited
to fifteen feet (15') in height, and shall be in distance at least five feet
(5') from any main building or property line.
   C.   Yard Occupancy: No accessory building or structure shall be erected in
any yard other than rear year and it shall occupy less than thirty percent
(30%) of the required rear yard, except for a private garage, which may occupy
up to sixty percent (60%) of the required rear yard.
   D.   Private Garages: Private garages must meet minimum principal structure
front and side yard requirements.
   E.   Number Limitation In Residential Districts: Only one accessory
building, in addition to a private garage, is permitted per residence in
residential districts. (Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-14-3: MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES ON LOT:
In any district, more than one principal structure housing a permitted
principal use may be erected on a single lot; provided, that the area, yard,
and other requirements of this title shall be met for each structure as though
it were on an individual lot. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-4: HEIGHT REGULATION EXCEPTION:
The height limitations contained in the schedules of district regulations
(chapters 7 through 11 of this title) do not apply to spires, belfries,
cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing, or
other structures placed above the roof level and not intended for human use or
occupancy. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-5: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No portion of the public street or alley right of way shall be used or occupied
by an abutting use of land or structures for storage or display purposes, or to
provide any parking or loading space required by this title, or for any other
purpose that would obstruct the use or maintenance of the public right of way.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-6: PROPOSED USE NOT COVERED:
Any proposed use not covered in this title as a permitted use or special
exception shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for a
recommendation as to the proper district in which such use should be permitted
and this title amended by the council as provided in section
10-3-5 of this title before a permit is issued for such proposed use. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-7: BUILDING ACCESS REQUIRED:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot
having frontage on a public street. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-8: HANDICAPPED CAR PARKING:
Where handicapped parking spaces are required by state law, a minimum of two
percent (2%) of the vehicle capacity of the off street parking area shall be so
designated by the proper signs and insignia. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-14-9: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations are allowed in all residential zones; provided, that no home
occupation shall be permitted when it is associated with the following
characteristics:
   A.   Disturbances To Neighborhood: Any disturbance such as noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare beyond the confines of the dwelling unit or
accessory building.
   B.   Exterior Display Restrictions; Hours: Any exterior display, exterior
storage of materials, signs (except as otherwise permitted), house calls after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. or before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or other
indication from the exterior that the dwelling unit or accessory building is
being used in part for any use other than that of a dwelling or accessory
building for purely residential purposes.
   C.   Employees: Employees other than those residing on the premises.
   D.   Parking Spaces: Utilizes no more than two (2) on street parking spaces
at any one time. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-10: COMMUNICATION TOWERS:
All radio station, television, or other communication towers shall be subject
to the following minimum regulations:
   A.   Compliance With City Codes: All towers shall comply with all applicable
city codes.
   B.   Setback Requirements:
      1.   The setbacks for all towers shall comply with all applicable zoning
title district regulations for the district in which the tower is located.
      2.   The zoning board of adjustment may impose additional setback
requirements in conjunction with the approval of a special exception permit.
   C.   Location: Any tower in excess of one hundred twenty five feet (125') in
height shall not be located closer than two hundred feet (200') from an
existing, inhabited residential structure regardless of the district in which
the structure is located. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-14-11: EAVES OR STRUCTURAL OVERHANGS:
Eaves or structural overhangs may extend out to three feet (3') beyond the
setback requirement, provided they are two feet (2') or more from the lot line.
(Ord. 1995-95, 5-9-1995)
10-14-12: FENCE REGULATION:
When two (2) zoning districts adjoin, any fence constructed between the two (2)
adjoining districts must comply with the most restrictive fence requirements of
the two (2) districts. (Ord. 97-99, 4-22-1997)
10-14-13: MINIMUM SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DIMENSIONS:
   A.   Single-family dwellings must have minimum dimensions of not less than
twenty two feet (22') in width on the front and one side. The dimensions will
be measured along the foundation line of the dwelling.
   B.   There must be a continuous or complete permanent perimeter foundation
of the main body, or the dwelling must have a slab style foundation with a
minimum of forty two inch (42") frost footings.
   C.   The main structure must be permanently affixed to the foundation.
   D.   The dwelling unit must provide for a minimum of nine hundred (900)
square feet of floor space.
   E.   The house number must be visible from the street upon which the mailing
address is assigned. (Ord. 2008-02, 12-9-2008)
CHAPTER 15
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-15-1: Intent
10-15-2: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-15-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Land
10-15-4: Nonconforming Structures
10-15-5: Nonconforming Uses Of Structures
10-15-6: Repairs Or Maintenance
10-15-7: Uses Under Exception Provisions
10-15-1: INTENT:
   A.   If within the districts established by this title or amendments that
may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, and use of land and
structures which were lawful before this title was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title or
future amendments, it is the intent of this title to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival. Such uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved.
   B.   It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not
be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures, signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
   C.   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction
has been diligently carried on. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to
include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and
fastened in a permanent manner; except that the demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided, that
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
(Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-15-2: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
A lot of record as of the effective date hereof that has less area or width
than herein required may be used for any purpose permitted in the district in
which it is located, provided all other provisions of this title are met. (Ord.
1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994)
10-15-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND:
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title, lawful use
of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this title
as enacted and amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlarge Or Extend: No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or
increased nor extended to occupy a greater use of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this title.
   B.   Moving: No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title.
   C.   Cease Land Use: If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any
reason for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, any subsequent
use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for
the district in which such land is located. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-15-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this title that could not be built under the terms of this title by reason
of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics
of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be so continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlarge Or Alter: No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity.
   B.   Destruction: Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this title. The determination of the replacement cost must be
determined by a licensed property appraiser. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-
14-1994)
10-15-5: NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES:
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that would
not be allowed in the district under the terms of this title, the lawful use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   Enlarge Or Extend: No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted
by this title in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which
it is located.
   B.   Occupancy Of Land Outside Building: Any nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this title, but
no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
   C.   Superseded By Permitted Use: Any structure, or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such
structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   D.   Discontinue Or Abandon: When a nonconforming use of a structure, land,
or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6)
consecutive months, the structure thereafter shall not be used except in
conformance with regulations of the district in which it is located.
   E.   Removal Or Destruction: Where nonconforming use status applied to a
structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994,
eff. 6-14-1994)
10-15-6: REPAIRS OR MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Repairs: On any building devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of
the current replacement value of the building; provided, that the cubic content
of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this title
shall not be increased.
   B.   Restore To Safe Condition: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening of or restoring to a safe condition of any building
or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting
the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff.
6-14-1994)
10-15-7: USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS:
Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this title
shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be
deemed a conforming use in such district. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-
1994)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Purpose
11-1-3: Application Of Provisions
11-1-4: Recording Of Plat
11-1-5: Fees Established
11-1-6: Conditions For Building Permit Issuance
11-1-7: Variations And Exceptions
11-1-8: Changes And Amendments
11-1-9: Severability Clause
11-1-10: Abrogation And Greater Restriction
11-1-11: Violation; Penalties
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF OXFORD,
IOWA. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide minimum standards for the design,
development and improvement of all new subdivisions of land, so that existing
land uses will be protected, and so that adequate provisions are made for
public facilities and services, and so that growth occurs in an orderly manner,
consistent with the community development plan, and to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 94-90, 3-
8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who has subdivided or shall
hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into three (3) or more parts,
for the purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot, or lots,
acreage or suburban lots within the city or within two (2) miles from the
corporate limits of the city, shall cause plats of such area to be made in the
form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth before selling
any lots herein contained or placing the plat on record. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994,
eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-4: RECORDING OF PLAT:
   A.   Review And Approval Required: No subdivision plat, or street dedication
within the city, or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the city,
as provided in Iowa Code section 354.9, shall be filed for record with the
county recorder, or recorded by the county recorder, until a final plat of such
subdivision, or street dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance
with the provisions of this title.
   B.   File Plat With County: Upon the approval of the final plat by the
governing body, it shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such
plat with the county auditor and county recorder, as required by law. Such
approval shall be revokable after thirty (30) days, unless such plat has been
duly recorded and evidence thereof filed with the city clerk within such thirty
(30) days. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-5: FEES ESTABLISHED:
The governing body shall, from time to time, establish by resolution, fees for
the review of plats. No plat for any subdivision shall be considered filed with
the city clerk unless and until said plat is accompanied by the fee, as
established by resolution of the governing body, and as required by this title.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-6: CONDITIONS FOR BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
   A.   Final Plat Approval: No building permit shall be issued for
construction on any lot, parcel, or tract, where a subdivision is required by
this title, unless and until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved
and recorded in accordance with this title, and until the improvements required
by this title have been accepted by the city.
   B.   Sidewalks: A building permit may be issued without the establishment of
sidewalks in place. However, before any occupancy of the subdivided property
occurs, the subdivider must install all sidewalks as required by this title.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-7: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
The following shall apply to the granting of variances or exceptions:
   A.   Hardships: Where the governing body finds that extraordinary hardships
or particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may
result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may make variations or
exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured; provided, that such variation or exceptions to these
regulations meet the following criteria:
      1.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in
the neighborhood in which the property is located.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property.
      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
      4.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property.
   B.   Conditions: In granting variations and exceptions, the governing body
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
   C.   Procedure For Variance: A petition for any such variation or exception
shall be submitted in writing by the developer at the time when the preliminary
plat is filed. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application
and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff.
3-8-1994)
11-1-8: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Public Hearing; Notice: Any provisions of these regulations may be
changed and amended from time to time by the governing body; provided, that
such changes and amendments shall not become effective until after a public
hearing has been held, public notice of which shall have been given as required
by law.
   B.   Submission To Planning Commission: Such proposed amendments shall first
be submitted to the planning commission for study and recommendation before the
hearing date is scheduled. The planning commission shall forward its
recommendation to the city council within thirty (30) days after the governing
body requests the recommendation.
   C.   Hearing Before Governing Body: The governing body shall then give
notice of and hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. (Ord. 94-90, 3-
8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-9: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, provision or part of this title shall be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this title
as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-10: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION:
Nothing contained herein shall serve to abrogate, limit, repeal, or otherwise
modify any other ordinance or regulation except as expressly set forth herein.
If any provision of this title conflicts with the provisions of any other
ordinance, regulation, or statute, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 94-
90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-1-11: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty Imposed: Any person, as owner or agent, who shall dispose of or
offer for sale any lot or lots within the area of jurisdiction of this title,
before the plat thereof has been approved by the governing body, and recorded
as required by law, shall forfeit and pay five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each lot or part of lot sold, disposed of or offered for sale, to the governing
body and will be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1994-92, 6-14-1994, eff. 6-14-1994; amd. 2015 Code)
   B.   Additional Remedies: Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit
the city's right to any other remedies available to the city for the
enforcement of this title. These remedies include, but are not limited to, the
city's ability to institute an action for injunction, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent any pending disposal or offer of
sale, or to prevent any further disposal or offer of sale in violation of this
title. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Terms Defined
11-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
For the purposes of this title, certain words herein shall be defined as and
interpreted as follows. Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular; the masculine gender shall include the feminine; the term "shall" is
always mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive.
ACQUISITION PLAT: The graphical representation of the division of land or
rights in land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for right
of way purposes by an agency of the government or other persons having the
power of eminent domain.
ALIQUOT PART: A fractional part of a section within the United States public
land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-quarter, one-half
of one-quarter, or one- quarter of one-quarter shall be considered an aliquot
part of a section.
ALLEY: Public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular access
to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
AUDITOR'S PLAT: A subdivision plat required by either the auditor or the
assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of the auditor.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, railroad rights of way, rivers, tracts of public land, or the boundary
of the subdivision.
CITY ENGINEER: The professional engineer registered in the state of Iowa
designated as city engineer by the governing body or other hiring authority.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: The general plan for the development of the
community, that may be titled master plan, community development plan or some
other title, which plan has been adopted by the governing body. Such community
development plan shall include any part of such plan separately adopted, and
any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
CONVEYANCE: An instrument filed with a recorder as evidence of the transfer of
title to land, including any form of deed or contract.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having one end connecting to another street, and the other
end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DIVISION: Dividing a tract or parcel of land into two (2) parcels of land by
conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other than
public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the purpose of
this title.
EASEMENT: An authorization by a property owner for another to use a designated
part of his property for a specified purpose.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Any area subject to flooding by a one percent (1%)
probability flood, otherwise referred to as a 100-year flood; as designated by
the Iowa national resources council or the federal insurance administration.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE: An ordinance regulating the development of all
property located within a floodplain as shown on the FEMA floodplain map for
the city of Oxford. The Oxford floodplain management ordinance is set out in
title 12 of this code.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent lands
that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a 100-year flood
without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation more than one foot
(1').
FORTY ACRE ALIQUOT PART: One-quarter of one-quarter of a section.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Oxford, Iowa.
GOVERNMENT LOT: A tract, within a section, that is normally described by a lot
number as represented and identified on the township plat of the United States
public land survey system.
IMPROVEMENTS: Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites
including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving,
sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways, and other public works
appurtenances.
LOT: A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter designation
on an official plat.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: Any lot that is not a corner lot that abuts two (2)
streets.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: A description of land that uses distances and
angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the parcel
by reference to physical features of the land.
OFFICIAL PLAT: Either an auditor's plat or a subdivision plat that meets the
requirements of this title and has been filed for record in the offices of the
recorder, auditor, and assessor.
OWNER: The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or such
representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
PARCEL: A part of a tract of land.
PERMANENT REAL ESTATE INDEX NUMBER: A unique number or combination of numbers
assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to Iowa Code section 441.29.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The appointed commission designated by the governing body
for the purpose of this title, and may also be the zoning commission, in which
case such commission shall be known as the planning and zoning commission.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart on which a subdivider's plan for the subdivision
of land is presented, that he or she submits for approval and intends, in final
form, to record.
PLAT OF SURVEY: The graphical representation of survey of one or more parcels
of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel within
the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor.
PLATS OFFICER: The individual assigned the duty to administer this title by the
governing body or other appointing authority.
PROPRIETOR: A person who has a recorded interest in land, including a person
selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons holding
mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
STREET: Public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation. In
appropriate context, the term "street" may refer to the right of way bounded by
the property lines of such public property, or may refer to the paving
installed within such right of way.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part of
the city to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting property.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street primarily designed to connect smaller areas of the
community, and to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
SUBDIVIDER: The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person or
entity empowered to act on the owner's behalf.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development.
The term, when appropriate to the context, may refer to the process of
subdividing or to land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION PLAT: The graphical representation of the subdivision of land,
prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is unique for
the county where the land is located.
SURVEYOR: A registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of land
surveying pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 542B.
TRACT: An aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official plat, or a
government lot.
UTILITIES: Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
electricity, wastewater, and stormwater. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994;
amd. 2015 Code)
CHAPTER 3
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Improvements Required
11-3-2: Inspection
11-3-3: Minimum Improvements
11-3-4: Easements Required
11-3-5: Maintenance Bond Required
11-3-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
The subdivider shall, at his or her expense, install and construct all
improvements required by this title and the technical specifications of Oxford
and as shown on the preliminary plat within the subdivision proper. All
required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
aforementioned design standards established for such improvements and shall be
reviewed by the city and the city engineer.
   A.   Urban Renewal Area Exception: The city may consider waiving portions of
this section if all of the following circumstances exist:
      1.   The subdivision is located within an active urban renewal area
eligible for tax increment reimbursement; and
      2.   The subdivider can demonstrate how the city's participation in cost
sharing for improvements within the subdivision will achieve the goals and
objectives of the urban renewal area; and
      3.   The subdivider is prepared to offer the city an infrastructure
improvement, property, or service that is equal or commensurate to the city's
financial contribution and meets the stated goals and objectives of the city's
urban renewal plan.
   B.   Extending Utilities: In some cases, there may be a need to extend
municipal utilities and services to the edge of a subdivision. The city will
decide on a case by case basis as to the financial responsibilities of the
subdivider and the city regarding these utility and service extensions. (Ord.
94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-3-2: INSPECTION:
All improvements shall be inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this title by the city engineer. The cost of such inspection shall be borne
by the subdivider and shall be the actual cost of the inspection to the city.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-3-3: MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS:
The improvements set forth below shall be considered the minimum improvements
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
All of the minimum improvements mandated by this chapter shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this title, the Oxford
technical specifications, and the minimum requirements of all applicable state
or federal regulatory agencies or departments.
The subdivider must provide evidence of any and all construction permits,
highway or road easements and access, or other appropriate documentation from
state or federal regulatory agencies prior to approval of the final plat.
Easements from all utility companies will also be required.
The city reserves the right to request changes to a proposed subdivision that
may exceed the municipal capacities for streets, sewer, water, or other
services. In this event, the city may request a proportional fee from the
subdivider, to be determined by the city and the city engineer, for any
required capacity improvements.
   A.   Streets, General:
      1.   The subdivider of land being subdivided shall provide the grading of
the entire street right of way, alley or public place and provide appropriate
paving, including curb and gutter on all streets.
      2.   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, dedication and improvement of a street having a width
greater than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to
complete the city street system as it relates to both the area being platted
and other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference
in cost of improving the wider street and the street width reasonable to meet
the foreseeable needs of the subdivision taken alone. The streets shall, upon
final approval and acceptance by the city, become the property of the city.
   B.   Sanitary Sewer System, General: The subdivider of the land being
platted shall make adequate provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage from
the platted area with due regard being given to present or reasonably
foreseeable needs. There shall be constructed, at the subdivider's expense, a
sanitary sewer system including all necessary pumping stations, pumping
equipment, sewer access holes, and all other necessary or desirable
appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area to a connection with the city's
sanitary sewer. The city's role in reviewing the plans is to determine the
sanitary sewer's placement, size, and route.
      1.   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, installation of a sanitary sewer that is larger than
necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the
city sanitary sewer system as it relates to both the area being platted and
other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in
cost of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the diameter of
sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      2.   The subdivider must provide evidence of construction permits from
the Iowa department of natural resources prior to approval of the final plat.
      3.   The above mentioned facilities for the collection and disposal of
sanitary sewage from the platted area shall, upon final approval and acceptance
by the city, become the property of the city.
   C.   Storm Sewer System: The subdivider of land being platted shall install
and construct a storm sewer system adequate to serve the area, including
anticipated extension of use to serve additional areas.
      1.   The stormwater drainage system shall be separated and independent of
any sanitary sewer system. The acceptable standard for sizing storm sewers is
to be a five (5) year, twenty four (24) hour storm event.
      2.   Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across
or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than six hundred feet
(600') in the gutter. Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a
condition for approval of the plat, installation of a storm sewer system that
is larger than necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary
to complete the city storm sewer system as it relates to both the area being
platted and other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the
difference in cost of pipe and installation between the larger sewer and the
diameter of sewer reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      3.   Storm sewer facilities shall be located in the road right of way
where feasible, or in the perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate
width.
      4.   In the storm sewer design phase, the subdivider shall study the
effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside
the area of the subdivision. The subdivider's drainage studies together with
such other studies as shall be appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed
improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to
the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility, the city council may withhold approval of the subdivision
until provision has been made for the recovery of the cost for the improvement
of said potential condition in such sum as the governing body shall determine.
No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to
an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
      5.   The subdivider must document that adequate storm detention is
included in the storm sewer design. This may require work outside of the
proposed subdivision's boundaries which is the sole responsibility of the
subdivider. The city may require this work to be undertaken to protect
surrounding properties as a condition for approval of the subdivision.
      6.   The storm sewers shall, upon inspection, approval and acceptance by
the city, become the property of the city.
   D.   Water Main System, General: The subdivider of land being platted shall
install and construct a water main system to adequately serve all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area, with due regard to the present and
reasonably foreseeable needs of the entire area, and shall connect the same to
the city's existing water mains. The minimum acceptable standard for water main
design will be the same as the IDNR recommended fire flow of two hundred fifty
(250) gpm with twenty (20) psi residual.
      1.   The subdivider shall install adequate water facilities, and fire
hydrants which shall be subject to city specifications and shall be subject for
review and approval by the Oxford fire chief. The location of all fire hydrants
shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
      2.   All Iowa department of natural resources must be secured prior to
approval of the preliminary plat.
      3.   Under some circumstances, the city may require, as a condition for
approval of the plat, installation of a water main that is larger than
necessary to meet the needs of the platted area, but necessary to complete the
city water distribution system as it relates to both the area being platted and
other areas. In such event, the city will pay the subdivider the difference in
cost of pipe and installation between the larger water main and the diameter of
water main reasonable to meet the foreseeable needs of the area.
      4.   The city's inability to generate, treat, or distribute water may be
grounds for rejection of a proposed subdivision. A proportional fee may be
requested by the city, from the subdivider, to pay for the necessary upgrades
in the water system.
      5.   The water supply improvements shall, upon inspection, approval, and
acceptance by the city, become the property of the city.
   E.   Other Improvements: The owner and subdivider of the land being platted
shall be responsible for the installation of sidewalks within the street area;
the installation of erosion control measures, and the installation of street
lighting. All such improvements shall be under the direction of the city
engineer. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-3-4: EASEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   Public Utilities: Where alleys are not provided, or where otherwise
required by the present or future placement of public utilities, easements of
not less than ten feet (10') in width shall be granted by the owner along rear,
and where necessary, along side lot lines for public utility requirements.
Except where prohibited by topography, such easements shall be centered on lot
lines. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines, or across
lots when necessary for the placement and maintenance of utilities. No
buildings or structures, except as necessary for utilities, shall be permitted
on such easements. All applicable utility companies must approve the required
easements prior to approval of the final plat.
   B.   Easements Along Streams And Watercourses: Wherever any stream or
surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the
subdivider shall, at his own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper
drainage of surface water and shall provide and dedicate to the city an
easement equal to the floodway along said stream or watercourse to ensure the
proper maintenance of the watercourse, as approved by the city. (Ord. 94-90, 3-
8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-3-5: MAINTENANCE BOND REQUIRED:
The owner and subdivider of the land being platted shall be required to provide
to the city, proper maintenance bonds satisfactory to the city, so as to ensure
that for a period of one year from the date of acceptance of any improvement,
the owner and subdivider shall be responsible to maintain such improvement in
good repair. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Standards Prescribed
11-4-2: Land Suitability
11-4-3: Lands Subject To Flooding
11-4-4: Plat To Conform To Community Development Plan
11-4-5: Construction Standards For Improvements
11-4-6: Street Standards
11-4-7: Block And Lot Standards
11-4-8: Parks And Open Spaces
11-4-9: Parks And School Sites Reserved
11-4-10: Nonresidential Subdivisions
11-4-1: STANDARDS PRESCRIBED:
The standards set forth in this title shall be considered the minimum standards
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. These
standards should also be considered in accordance with the requirements of
applicable state and federal agencies. In the event that the city's minimum
standards should conflict with applicable state and federal requirements, the
state and federal requirements shall prevail. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-
1994)
11-4-2: LAND SUITABILITY:
   A.   Unsuitable Conditions: No land shall be subdivided that is found to be
unsuitable for subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage,
adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory
topography or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public health,
safety or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are corrected to
the satisfaction of the city.
   B.   Statement Of Reasons: If land is found to be unsuitable for subdivision
for any of the reasons cited in this chapter, the governing body shall state
its reasons in writing and afford the subdivider an opportunity to present data
regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the governing body may reaffirm,
modify or withdraw its determination regarding such unsuitability. (Ord. 94-90,
3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-3: LANDS SUBJECT TO FLOODING:
   A.   Compliance With Flood Control Regulations: No subdivision containing
land located in a floodway or a flood hazard area shall be approved by the city
unless it is demonstrated that the subdivision complies with all requirements
of the Oxford floodplain management ordinance (title 12 of this code). No lot
shall be located so as to include land located within a floodway or flood
hazard area unless the lot is of such size and shape that it will contain a
buildable area, not within the floodway or flood hazard area, suitable for
development as allowed by the zone in which the lot is located. Those areas
subject to flooding shall be determined by the U.S. federal emergency
management agency (FEMA) floodplain map for the city.
   B.   Conditions For City Approval: Land located within a flood hazard area
or a floodway may be included within a plat as follows, subject to the approval
of the city:
      1.   Included within individual lots in the subdivision, subject to the
limitations of this chapter.
      2.   Reserved as open space for recreation use by all owners of lots in
the subdivision, with an appropriate legal instrument, approved by the city,
providing for its care and maintenance by such owners.
      3.   If acceptable to the city, dedicated to the city as public open
space for recreation or flood control purposes. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-
8-1994)
11-4-4: PLAT TO CONFORM TO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the technical specifications for such streets as approved by
the city council. The general nature and extent of the lots and uses proposed
shall conform to the community development plan of the city, provided such plan
has been adopted by the city; and shall conform to such other plans, including,
but not limited to, a major street plan, a sanitary sewer system plan, or a
parks and open space plan, provided such plan has been adopted by the city.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-5: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Prepare Technical Standards: In addition to the standards set forth in
this title, the city engineer shall from time to time prepare, and the
governing body shall from time to time adopt by resolution, technical standards
for public improvements. Such technical standards for public improvements shall
contain the minimum acceptable specifications for the construction of public
improvements. Such technical standards may vary for classes of improvements,
giving due regard to the classification of streets or other improvements, and
the extent and character of the area served by the improvements.
   B.   Adoption Of Standards: Upon adoption by the governing body by
resolution, such technical standards for public improvements shall have such
force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994,
eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-6: STREET STANDARDS:
   A.   General: The following standards shall apply to all streets to be
located within the subdivision:
      1.   Streets shall provide for the continuation of arterial and collector
streets from adjoining platted areas, and the extension of such streets into
adjoining unplatted areas. Where a plat encompasses the location for an
arterial or collector street proposed in the community development plan or the
street plan, the plat shall provide for such street.
      2.   Street grades shall align to existing streets, and all grades for
streets shall be as approved by the city.
      3.   Arterial streets shall be located so as to not require direct access
from the arterial street to abutting lots.
      4.   Street right of way widths and pavement widths shall be as specified
in the technical standards for public improvements.
      5.   Half streets are prohibited, except, where an existing platted half
street abuts the subdivision, a platted half street to complete the street
shall be required.
      6.   Local streets should be designed to discourage through traffic while
safely connecting to collector or arterial streets.
      7.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall be prohibited, except where topography, or other
physical conditions make such jogs unavoidable.
      8.   Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible; and
no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60°).
      9.   At intersections of major streets, and otherwise as necessary, lot
corners abutting the intersection shall be rounded with a radius sufficient to
provide necessary space within the right of way for sidewalks, traffic control
devices, and other necessary improvements without encroachment onto the corner
lots.
      10.   Dead end streets are prohibited, except where a street is planned
to continue past the subdivider's property, a temporary dead end may be
allowed.
      11.   Streets that connect with other streets, or loop streets, are
preferable for maintenance, fire protection, and circulation, but cul-de-sacs
may be permitted if there are no other feasible alternatives available. Cul-de-
sacs should not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length unless a greater
length is unavoidable.
      12.   In general, alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas and
shall be required in commercial areas with normal street frontage. Dead end
alleys are prohibited, unless provided with a turnaround with a minimum right
of way diameter of one hundred feet (100').
      13.   Alleys shall have a right of way of not less than twenty feet (20')
and a roadway width of not less than sixteen feet (16').
      14.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal lots or parcels,
such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and
opening of future streets and adequate utility connections. Easements for the
future openings and extensions for such streets or utilities may, at the
discretion of the governing body, be made a requirement of the plat.
      15.   Streets that are or will become extensions of existing streets
shall be given the same name as the existing streets. New street names shall
not be the same or sound similar to existing street names. All street names
shall be at the approval of the governing body.
      16.   Private streets shall be prohibited. The governing body may approve
a variance to this rule where unusual conditions make a private street
desirable, provided adequate covenants or other legal documents ensure that the
city will not have or need to assume any maintenance or other responsibility
for such street.
   B.   Minimum Roadway And Right Of Way Standards:
      1.   Municipal arterial streets shall have a right of way width of not
less than eighty feet (80') and a roadway width of not less than thirty one
feet (31').
      2.   Municipal collector streets shall have a right of way width of not
less than sixty six feet (66') and a roadway width of not less than twenty nine
feet (29').
      3.   Municipal local streets shall have a right of way width of not less
than sixty feet (60') and a roadway width of not less than twenty five feet
(25').
      4.   Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for local streets and,
in addition, shall provide a turnaround with the outer edge of paving at a
thirty five foot (35') radius and the right of way at a fifty foot (50')
radius.
   C.   Street Grades: Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the
following:
      1.   Municipal arterial streets: Eight percent (8%).
      2.   Municipal collector streets: Ten percent (10%).
      3.   Municipal local streets: Ten percent (10%).
      4.   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
minimum length in feet equal to twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in
percents of grade.
      5.   No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent (0.5%),
unless extreme conditions warrant.
   D.   Street Surfacing And Improvements: After sewer, water and other
utilities to be located underground within the right of way have been installed
by the subdivider, the subdivider shall construct a concrete roadway with
integral curb and gutter to the following minimum standards:
      1.   Specifications:
         a.   Subgrade: Minimum four inch (4") rock base or equivalent subgrade
for all streets.
         b.   Local Streets: Minimum six inch (6") portland cement concrete
roadway with integral curb and gutter for local streets.
         c.   Collector Streets: Minimum seven inch (7") portland cement
concrete roadway with integral curb and gutter for collector streets.
         d.   Arterial Streets 1 : Minimum nine inch (9") portland cement
concrete roadway with integral curb and gutter for arterial streets.
      2.   Requirements:
         a.   All concrete shall be portland cement concrete conforming to IDOT
C-3 mix standards, ASTM C143 consistency standards, and other standards as
prescribed by the city technical specifications.
         b.   Any roadway constructed for commercial or industrial use shall be
constructed to meet the minimum recommended standards of the Iowa department of
transportation, and shall be reviewed by the city engineer.
         c.   The developer's engineer shall make a minimum of one set of
concrete test cylinders for each one thousand (1,000) square yards of paving
but no less than one set per day. A test set shall consist of three (3) test
cylinders. Slump and air content tests shall be made and the results recorded
along with appropriate test cylinder information. Cylinders shall be laboratory
cured, and conform with ASTM specification C31 and C39.
         d.   The subgrade shall be scarified to a depth of eight inches (8")
below the pavement, and compacted to ninety percent (90%) of modified proctor
density.
   E.   Railroads And Limited Access Highways: Railroad rights of way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
      1.   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least one hundred feet
(100') in depth, in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district, shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right of way or limited
access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be
designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of
structures hereon is prohibited".
      2.   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the
nearest street extended parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
      3.   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least two hundred twenty five feet (225') from the railroad
right of way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of
appropriate approach gradients.
   F.   Sidewalks: The following design standards shall apply to all sidewalks:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width except in
the central business district or in other areas specifically approved by the
governing body of the city where the width may be greater. Sidewalks shall be
located one foot (1') from the property line within the dedicated nonpavement
right of way of all streets.
      2.   All sidewalks shall slope to the street at a rate of one- fourth
inch per foot (1/4" = 1'). The street edge of the sidewalk surface shall be
located above the curb a minimum of six inches (6").
      3.   Sidewalks shall be constructed of four inch (4") thick nonreinforced
portland cement concrete with three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi strength.
      4.   Sidewalks crossing driveways shall be constructed of six inch (6")
nonreinforced portland cement concrete.
      5.   All sidewalks shall provide a curb ramp for accommodation of the
handicapped at all intersections. Curb ramps shall be located in line with the
public sidewalk. Curb ramps shall comply with all requirements for said ramps
as set forth in the Americans with disabilities act. Ramps shall be sloped from
the sidewalk intersection to the curb.
   G.   Driveways: The following standards shall apply to residential
driveways:
      1.   A single driveway shall be twelve feet (12') in width at the street.
      2.   A double driveway shall be twenty four feet (24') in width at the
street.
      3.   Residential driveways shall be six inches (6") thick nonreinforced
portland cement concrete with the same strength and mix requirements as the
adjoining street. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
 
Notes
  1. Thickness requirements for arterials are intended as a guide only.
1 Specific projects will be designed on the basis of soil conditions and
  projected traffic loading.
11-4-7: BLOCK AND LOT STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to the layout of blocks and lots in all
subdivisions:
   A.   Length And Width: No residential block shall be longer than one
thousand three hundred feet (1,300') or shorter than three hundred feet (300')
measured from street line to street line. The width of blocks should be
arranged so as to allow two (2) tiers of lots, with utility easement.
   B.   Easement: In blocks over seven hundred feet (700') in length, the
governing body may require a public way or an easement at least ten feet (10')
in width, at or near the center of the block, for use by pedestrians.
   C.   Commercial Or Industrial Use: The size and shape of lots intended for
commercial or industrial use shall be adequate to provide for the use intended,
and to meet the parking, loading, and other requirements for such uses
contained in the zoning title, title 10 of this code (see subsection E of this
section).
   D.   Building Sites: Lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots
will provide satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and
surrounding land uses.
   E.   Size Requirements: The size of all lots shall comply with the
following:
      1.   Single-Family Residential:
         a.   Area: Nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet.
         b.   Width: Eighty feet (80').
         c.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
In regard to overall minimum lot dimensions set by this title, the total area
will supersede any conflicting combinations of widths or depths that do not
equal the minimum area requirement.
      2.   Multi-Family Residential:
         a.   Area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet, plus one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per dwelling unit over two (2).
         b.   Width: Seventy five feet (75').
         c.   Depth: Minimum depth of not less than one hundred feet (100').
Minimum area supersedes width and depth as stated above.
      3.   Mobile Home Residential:
         a.   Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
         b.   Width: Sixty feet (60').
         c.   Depth: One hundred feet (100').
Mobile home residential subdivisions shall only be allowed in areas designated
for mobile home residential use by the Oxford community development plan.
      4.   Lots On Cul-De-Sacs:
         a.   Area: Shall correspond to the use of the lot as described in
subsections E1, E2 and E3 of this section.
         b.   Frontage: Minimum frontage shall be thirty feet (30') (chord
length).
   F.   Abut Public Or Private Street: All lots shall abut a public street or
an approved private street.
   G.   Access To Arterial Streets: Unless unavoidable, lots shall not front,
or have direct access to arterial streets. Where unavoidable, lots shall be so
arranged as to minimize the number of access points.
   H.   Lot Lines At Right Angles: All lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines, except where, in the
judgment of the governing body, a variation to this provision will provide a
better street and lot layout.
   I.   Setbacks: Setbacks for all lots used for the below described purposes
shall be, at minimum, as follows:
      1.   Single-family residential:
 
Front                   30 feet
Rear                    30 feet
Side                    10 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
      2.   Two-family and multi-family:
 
Front                   25 feet
Rear                    30 feet
Side:
1 story                 8 feet
2 stories               10 feet
3 stories               12 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
      3.   Mobile homes:
 
Front                   25 feet
Rear                    20 feet
Side                    10 feet
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
      4.   Commercial:
 
Front                   25 feet
                        None (except where abutting an agricultural or
Side                    residential district, a side yard of not less than 10
                        feet shall be provided)
                        None (except where abutting an agricultural or
Rear                    residential district, a side yard of not less than 10
                        feet shall be provided)
Street side, corner lot 15 feet
 
      5.   Industrial:
 
Front         35 feet
Interior side 15 feet
Corner side   25 feet
Rear          25 feet
 
   J.   Reversed Frontage And Double Frontage Lots: Reversed frontage lots are
prohibited. Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where abutting a major
street and a minor street, and such lots shall front only on the minor street.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-8: PARKS AND OPEN SPACES:
All residential subdivisions should be so designed as to meet the neighborhood
park and open space needs of their residents. The following standards and
procedures will be used to determine the park and open space requirements for
all proposed residential developments or subdivisions greater than one-half (1/
2) acre in size within the city:
   A.   Manner Of Providing: For all residential developments and subdivisions,
the subdivider shall be responsible for providing adequate park and open space
in one or both of the following ways, depending on the decision of the city:
      1.   If it is feasible and compatible with the community development plan
of the city, as determined by the city council upon the recommendation of the
planning and zoning commission, the subdivider will be required to dedicate and
reserve an area for parks and open space, without cost to the city.
         a.   The amount of land shall be determined by first calculating the
entire size of the land area of the proposed development as shown on the
preliminary plat or site plan and then to require dedication or reservation of
five percent (5%) of this amount for parks and open space.
         b.   This area shall be denoted on the final plat prior to approval of
the final plat.
      2.   Where such dedication is not feasible or compatible with the
community development plan, as determined by the city council upon
recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall, in
lieu thereof, pay to the city a fee or combination of fee and land, equivalent
to the value of the required dedication or reservation to be determined and
used in the following manner:
         a.   The city council, upon recommendation of the planning and zoning
commission, shall determine the size of the land area which it would have
required to set aside for parks and open space (5 percent of the total land
area).
         b.   The cash value of said land shall be determined by taking the
total purchase price or cost of all the land in the proposed subdivision and
charge the owner the proportionate value of the land area so designated; based
upon such purchase price or cost; provided such purchase price or cost is the
current fair and reasonable value of the land. If such purchase price or cost
does not reflect the current fair value of the land, the fair value of said
land shall be determined by an impartial appraisal, and in such manner as may
be designated by the city council, cost for said appraisal to be shared equally
between the subdivider and the city.
         c.   All funds so levied, assessed, and collected by the city shall be
deposited in a special fund to be known as the "special fund for the
acquisition and development of public service areas, open space and
recreational facilities", and said funds so levied and collected shall be used
for such purposes at such places and in such a manner as shall be approved,
ordered and directed by a recreation committee appointed by the city council.
Any interest accumulated upon such funds shall be added to the "special fund"
and be used only for acquisition and developments of open space and
recreational facilities.
   B.   Council Determination: At the time of the preliminary plat approval,
the city council, upon recommendation by the planning and zoning commission,
shall determine whether to require a dedication of land within the subdivision
or the payment of a fee, in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, from the
subdivider, for parks and open space.
   C.   Warranty Deed Or Deposit: Where a dedication is required, it shall be
accomplished with a properly executed warranty deed dedicating the required
land to the city without cost to the city. Where a fee, in lieu of dedication,
is required, the fee shall be deposited with the city clerk. Whichever action
is required, it shall be accomplished prior to the approval of the final plat.
   D.   Determining Factors: The determination by the city of whether to
require dedication of land, or a fee, in lieu thereof, shall be based on the
following:
      1.   Recreational element of the city's community development plan.
      2.   Topographic and geologic conditions and access and location of land
in subdivision available for dedication.
      3.   Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication.
      4.   The relation of the subdivision to the community development plan
map, particularly as such plan map may show proposed public service areas, open
space and recreational areas.
      5.   The character and recreational needs of the neighborhood in which
the subdivision is located.
      6.   The unsuitability in the subdivision for open space and recreational
purposes by reason of location, access, greater cost of development and
maintenance.
      7.   The possibility that land immediately adjoining the subdivision will
serve in whole or in part the public service area, open space, and recreational
needs of such subdivision.
      8.   Any and all other information relevant to a proper determination.
The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated or
reserved or a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final
and conclusive. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-9: PARKS AND SCHOOL SITES RESERVED:
When a tract being subdivided includes lands proposed to be parks or school
sites in the community development plan or other official plan of the city, the
subdivider shall indicate such areas on the plat.
   A.   Park Sites: Proposed park sites shall be reserved for three (3) years,
giving the city or other authorized public agency the option to purchase the
land at the appraised raw land value prior to the subdivision as established by
a certified land appraiser. The purchase price shall also include one-half (1/
2) of the cost for grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any
streets that are contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by
the subdivider between the date of reservation and date of purchase by the
public agency. Should the park site not be purchased within three (3) years,
the subdivider may then amend the final plat.
   B.   School Sites: Proposed school sites shall be reserved for three (3)
years, giving the appropriate school district the option to purchase the land
at the appraised raw land value prior to the subdivision as established by a
certified land appraiser. The purchase price shall also include one-half (1/2)
of the cost for grading and paving, including curbs, of the portion of any
streets that are contiguous to the site and any taxes and interest incurred by
the subdivider between the date of reservation and date of purchase by the
school district. Should the school sites not be purchased within three (3)
years, the subdivider may then amend the final plat. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994,
eff. 3-8-1994)
11-4-10: NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The following provisions shall apply to nonresidential subdivisions:
   A.   General: If a proposed subdivision includes land that is used for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land may be subject to additional provisions as the governing body may
require. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements
of these regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the
governing body, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards
established in city plans and regulations.
   B.   Standards: In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the street,
parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses
anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed:
      1.   Proposed industrial or commercial parcels shall be suitable in area
and dimensions to the following minimum requirements:
         a.   Commercial; area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
         b.   Industrial; area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
      2.   Street rights of way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
      3.   Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater
drainage.
      4.   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
      5.   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
CHAPTER 5
PLAT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Preapplication Conference
11-5-2: Sketch Plan Required
11-5-3: Presentation To Planning Commission
11-5-4: Subdivision Classified
11-5-5: Plats Required
11-5-6: Preliminary Plat Requirements
11-5-7: Procedures For Review Of Preliminary Plats
11-5-8: Duration Of Approval Of Preliminary Plat
11-5-9: Improvements
11-5-10: Final Plat Requirements
11-5-1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Schedule Of Conference: Whenever a subdivision located within the
platting jurisdiction of the city is proposed, the owner and subdivider shall
schedule a preapplication conference with the plats officer. The conference
should be attended by the plats officer and such other city or utility
representatives as is deemed desirable; and by the owner and his engineer and/
or planner, as deemed desirable.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of such conference shall be to acquaint the city
with the proposed subdivision, and to acquaint the subdivider with the
requirements, procedures, and any special problems related to the proposed
subdivision. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-2: SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED:
For the preapplication conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or sketch
showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any proposed
streets and other improvements, and the general layout and arrangement of
intended land uses, in relation to the surrounding area. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994,
eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-3: PRESENTATION TO PLANNING COMMISSION:
The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the planning commission for
review, prior to incurring significant costs preparing the preliminary or final
plat. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-4: SUBDIVISION CLASSIFIED:
Any proposed subdivision shall be classified as a minor subdivision or a major
subdivision.
   A.   Minor Subdivision: Any subdivision that contains not more than four (4)
lots fronting on an existing street and that does not require construction of
any public improvements, and that does not adversely affect the remainder of
the parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.
   B.   Major Subdivision: Any subdivision that, in the opinion of the
governing body, does not for any reason meet the definition of a "minor
subdivision", shall be classified as a major subdivision. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-
1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-5: PLATS REQUIRED:
In order to secure approval of a proposed subdivision, the owner and subdivider
shall submit to the city, plats and other information as required by this
title. The owner and subdivider of any major subdivision shall comply with the
requirements for a preliminary plat and the requirements for a final plat. The
owner and subdivider of a minor subdivision may elect to omit the submission of
a preliminary plat. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-6: PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Filing Of Plat: The subdivider shall prepare and file with the city
clerk twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plat, drawn at a scale of one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger. Sheet size shall not exceed
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). Where more than one sheet
is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the total number
of sheets in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
   B.   Plat Contents And Accompanying Documents: The preliminary plat shall be
clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall show, or have attached thereto, the
following:
      1.   Title, scale, north point and date.
      2.   Proposed name of the subdivision that shall not duplicate or
resemble existing subdivision names in the county.
      3.   The name and address of the owner and the name, address and
profession of the person preparing the plan.
      4.   A key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision
in relation to surrounding development.
      5.   The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
record owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. A list of
all owners of record of property located within two hundred feet (200') of the
subdivision boundary shall be attached.
      6.   The location of property lines, streets and alleys, easements,
buildings, utilities, watercourses, tree masses, and other existing features
affecting the plat.
      7.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and
adjoining property.
      8.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2') if the
general slope of the site is less than ten percent (10%) and at vertical
intervals of not more than five feet (5') if the general slope is ten percent
(10%) or greater.
      9.   The legal description of the area being platted.
      10.   The boundary of the area being platted, shown as a dark line with
the approximate length of boundary lines and the approximate location of the
property in reference to known section lines.
      11.   The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots.
      12.   The location, width and dimensions of all streets and alleys
proposed to be dedicated for public use.
      13.   The proposed names for all streets in the area being platted.
      14.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities,
cable utilities, telephone utilities and other facilities, and their
connections to existing utilities.
      15.   Proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes and
limitations.
      16.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public, semipublic or community purposes, or shown
for such purpose in the community development plan or other adopted plans.
      17.   A general summary description of any protective covenants or
private restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.
      18.   Any other pertinent information, as necessary.
      19.   The fee, as required by this title.
      20.   All initial developments (phase one) and all future planned
developments within the area (phase two, phase three, etc.). Failure to
completely identify all proposed developments in the subdivision area will be
grounds for rejecting the plat. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-7: PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Filing Copies Of Plat: The city clerk, upon receipt of twenty (20)
copies of the preliminary plat, shall file one copy in the records of the city,
shall retain one copy for public inspection, and shall forward the remaining
copies of the plat to the plats officer.
   B.   Provide Copies Of Plat To Officials: The plats officer shall provide
copies of the plat to the city engineer, and such other persons as necessary to
review the plat; and shall schedule the plat for consideration by the planning
commission.
   C.   Review By Planning Commission: The planning commission shall examine
the plat and the report of the city engineer, and such other information as it
deems necessary or desirable, to ascertain whether the plat conforms to the
ordinances of the city, and conforms to the community development plan and
other duly adopted plans of the city. The planning commission shall, within
forty five (45) days of the filing of the plat with the city clerk, forward a
report and recommendation regarding the plat to the governing body. If such
recommendation is to disapprove or modify the plat, the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in writing in the report, and a copy of the report and
recommendation shall be provided to the subdivider.
   D.   Review By Governing Body: The governing body shall examine the plat,
the report of the city engineer, the report of the planning commission, and
such other information as it deems necessary or desirable. Upon such
examination, the governing body shall ascertain whether the plat conforms to
the ordinances and standards of the city, conforms to the community development
plan and other duly adopted plans of the city, and will be conducive to the
orderly growth and development of the city; in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare. Following such examination, the governing body may
approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the plat. If the decision
of the governing body is to disapprove the plat, or to approve the plat subject
to conditions, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing in the
official records of the governing body, and such decisions shall be provided to
the subdivider. Action on the preliminary plat by the governing body shall be
taken within sixty (60) days of the filing of the plat with the city clerk.
(Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-8: DURATION OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The approval of a preliminary plat by the governing body shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of such approval; after which such approval
shall be void, and the subdivider shall take no action requiring the precedent
approval of a preliminary plat except upon application for and approval of an
extension of such period of validity, by the governing body. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-
1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-9: IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Authorization To Install Improvements: The approval of the preliminary
plat shall constitute authorization by the governing body for the installation
of improvements as required by this title, and as shown on the preliminary
plat; provided no such improvement shall be constructed or installed until and
unless the plans, profiles, cross sections, and specifications for the
construction of such improvement have been submitted to, and approved in
writing by, the city engineer and all necessary permits have been issued from
the appropriate state and federal agencies (i.e., Iowa department of natural
resources).
   B.   Transfer Of Lots Without Constructing Improvements: In the event the
subdivider, its assigns or successors in interest, should transfer lots in a
subdivision without having constructed or installed the pavement, water mains,
sanitary sewer, storm sewers, sidewalks, or other public improvements, the city
shall have the right to install and construct such improvements and the costs
of such improvements shall be a lien and charge against all the lots adjacent
to or in front of which the improvements are made and lots which may be
assessed for improvements under the provisions of Iowa Code chapter 384. The
cost of such improvements need not meet the requirements of notice, benefit or
value as provided by state law for assessing such improvements. In addition,
the requirement to construct such improvements is, and shall remain, a lien on
all property located within the subdivision until properly released by the
city.
   C.   Completion And Acceptance Of Improvements: Before the governing body
will approve the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements shall be
constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the city council. Before
passage of said resolution of acceptance, the city engineer shall report that
said improvements meet all city specifications and ordinances or other city
requirements, and the agreements between the subdivider and the city.
   D.   Performance Bond Permitted: In lieu of the requirement that
improvements be completed prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider
may post a performance bond with the city, guaranteeing that improvements not
completed shall be completed within a period of two (2) years from the date of
approval of such final plat; but such approval of the plat shall not constitute
final acceptance of any improvements to be constructed. Improvements will be
accepted only after their construction has been completed. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-
1994, eff. 3-8-1994)
11-5-10: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Filing Of Plat: The subdivider shall, within one year from the date of
approval of the preliminary plat, unless such time period has been extended,
prepare and file with the city clerk, twenty (20) copies of the final plat and
required attachments, as set forth in this title. Except for a final plat for a
minor subdivision as set forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by the
governing body until and unless a preliminary plat for the area included in the
proposed final plat has been approved and has not expired and become void as
set forth above.
   B.   Drawing Of Plat; Scale: The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger. Sheet size shall be no
greater than eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") nor smaller than
eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") and shall be of a size
acceptable to the county auditor. If more than one sheet is used, each sheet
shall clearly show the number of the sheet, the total number of sheets included
in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
   C.   Plat Contents And Accompanying Documents: The final plat shall be
clearly marked "final plat" and shall show the following:
      1.   The name of the subdivision.
      2.   Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
      3.   Scale, and a graphic bar scale, north arrow and date on each sheet.
      4.   All monuments to be of record, as required by Iowa Code chapter 355.
      5.   Sufficient survey data to positively describe the bounds of every
lot, block, street, easement, or other area shown on the plat, as well as the
outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.
      6.   All distance, bearing, curve, and other survey data, as required by
Iowa Code chapter 355.
      7.   All adjoining properties shall be identified, and where such
adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of the
subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is part of a previously
recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall be shown to controlling lines
appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be made.
      8.   Street names and clear designation of public alleys.
      9.   Block and lot numbers.
      10.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public use, and the purpose for which such property is dedicated or
reserved for public use.
      11.   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be confined to
only those easements pertaining to public utilities including gas, power,
telephone, cable television, water, sewer; easements for trails, bikeways,
ingress and egress; and such drainage easements as are deemed necessary for the
orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat.
      12.   All interior excepted parcels, clearly indicated and labeled, "not
a part of this plat".
      13.   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the
land is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service as
determined by the governing body.
      14.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all
subdivision boundaries shall be one to ten thousand (1:10,000) and shall be one
to fifteen thousand (1:15,000) for any individual lot.
      15.   A statement by a registered land surveyor that the plat was
prepared by the surveyor or under the surveyor's direct personal supervision,
signed and dated by the surveyor and bearing the surveyor's Iowa registration
number or seal, and a sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the
registered land surveyor who drew the plat.
      16.   Certification by the local public utility companies that the locale
of utility easements are properly placed for the installation of utilities.
      17.   Certification of dedication of streets and other public property
and perpetual easements for the installation, operation, and maintenance of
utilities.
      18.   Contain a signature block for the signature of the mayor certifying
the governing body's approval of the plat.
      19.   Show any provisions provided by the code of Iowa.
      20.   The final plat should also have the following accompanying
instruments:
         a.   An opinion by an attorney at law who has examined the abstract of
title for the land being platted, stating the names of the proprietors and
holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances, along with any bonds
securing the encumbrances.
         b.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any,
that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed, and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond in an amount double of the
amount encumbrance and approved by the recorder and clerk of the district court
and which runs to the county for the benefit of purchasers of lots within the
plat may be recorded in lieu of the consent of mortgagee or lienholder. When a
mortgagee or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or
lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the governing body or
dedicated to the public.
         c.   A certificate of the treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by a
bond double in the amount of the lien and approved by the recorder and clerk of
the district court and which runs to the county for the benefit of purchasers
of lots within the plat and filed with the recorder.
         d.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that
the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their
desire, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. The statement by the proprietors shall also include a
dedication to the public of all lands within the plat which are designated for
streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if
the dedication is approved by the governing body.
         e.   A petition signed by the owner and his or her spouse petitioning
the governing body to pave any streets abutting such subdivision, which
petition waives notice of time and place of hearing and waives statutory
protections and limitations as to the cost and assessment of improvements.
         f.   A certificate from the county auditor that the name or title of
the subdivision plat is approved by the county auditor. (Ord. 94-90, 3-8-1994,
eff. 3-8-1994)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
12-1-1: Legal Authority
12-1-2: Findings Of Fact
12-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
12-1-4: Definitions
12-1-5: Interpretation
12-1-6: Compliance Required
12-1-7: Lands To Which Regulations Apply
12-1-8: Floodplain Administrator
12-1-9: Floodplain Development Permit
12-1-10: General Floodplain Standards
12-1-11: Special Floodway Provisions
12-1-12: Special Provisions For Shallow Flooding Areas
12-1-13: Variances
12-1-14: Nonconforming Uses
12-1-15: Amendments
12-1-16: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-17: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
12-1-18: Violation; Penalty
12-1-1: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
The legislature of the state of Iowa has in Iowa Code chapter 364, as amended,
delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and perform any function it
deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and property
of the city or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety,
health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-
27-2002)
12-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Oxford are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of
the community.
   B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
      1.   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
      2.   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges and property of the city and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing those flood losses described in subsection 12-1-2A of
this chapter with provisions designed to:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
   C.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
   D.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the national flood insurance
program. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (See definition of 100-Year Flood.)
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also, see definition of Lowest
Floor.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures; mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of the community's flood insurance rate
map; may also be referred to as "existing structure".
EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes
"recreational vehicles" which are placed on a site for greater than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway
use.
FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two (2) or more factory built home lots for sale or lease.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular site
during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-
year flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway,
which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places,
maintained by the department of interior, or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either: 1) an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior or 2) directly by the secretary of the interior in states without
approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when all the following criteria are met:
   A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
12-1-10D1 of this chapter; and
   B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
   C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the 100-year flood level; and
   D.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies subsections A, B, C, and D of
this definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed
area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (New Buildings, Factory Built Home Parks): Those structures or
development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the flood insurance rate map.
NEW FACTORY BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will
be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the "100-year
flood". This land is identified as zone A, AE, A1-A30, AO and AH on the
community's flood insurance rate map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a factory built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory built homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either
of the following criteria:
   A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either: 1) before the "start of construction" of the improvement, or
2) if the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of a "historic structure", provided the alteration will not preclude
the structure's designation as a "historic structure".
   B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after August 20,
2002, shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 2002-
104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
powers granted by state statutes. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-6: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-7: LANDS TO WHICH REGULATIONS APPLY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands and uses which have
significant flood hazards. The flood insurance rate map (FIRM), panels 131,
133, and 135, dated February 16, 2007, which were prepared as part of the
Johnson County, city of Oxford flood insurance study, shall be used to identify
such flood hazard areas and all areas shown thereon to be within the boundaries
of the 100-year flood shall be considered as having significant flood hazards.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of the 100-year
flood boundary, the location shall be determined on the basis of the 100-year
flood elevation at the particular site in question. The Johnson County, city of
Oxford flood insurance study is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part
of this chapter for the purpose of administering floodplain management
regulations. (Ord. 2006-101, 11-14-2006)
12-1-8: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The mayor is hereby appointed to implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
administrator.
   B.   Duties: Duties of the administrator shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, the following:
      1.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that
the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
      2.   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and local governmental
agencies including approval when required from the department of natural
resources for floodplain construction.
      3.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved structures.
      4.   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
national geodetic vertical datum) to which all new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      5.   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the department of natural
resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the federal emergency management
agency.
      6.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter. (Ord.
2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-9: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the
administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures; mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations), including the placement of factory built homes.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished by
the administrator and shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
      2.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
      3.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
      4.   Elevation of the 100-year flood.
      5.   Elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
      6.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
      7.   Such other information as the administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
   C.   Action On Permit Application: The administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the city council.
   D.   Construction And Use As Provided In Application And Plans: Floodplain
development permits based on the basis of approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.
Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate,
registered in the state of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor
elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or
occupancy of any structure. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-10: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN STANDARDS:
All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the
following applicable performance standards. Where 100-year flood data has not
been provided in the flood insurance study, the Iowa department of natural
resources shall be contacted to determine: a) whether the land involved is
either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and b) the 100-
year flood level. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
department of natural resources with sufficient technical information to make
such determination.
   A.   All Development: All development within the areas of significant flood
hazard shall:
      1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
      4.   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, state and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa department
of natural resources.
   B.   Residential Buildings:
      1.   All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above
the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot (1') above the 100-year flood
level and extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18') beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by the city
council, where existing topography, street grades, or other factors preclude
elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be adequate to support
the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated
with flooding.
      2.   All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of
access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
   C.   Nonresidential Buildings: All new or substantially improved
nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood level, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state
of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below
the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to national geodetic vertical datum) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the administrator.
   D.   New And Substantially Improved Structures: The following shall be
required for all new and substantially improved structures:
      1.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
      2.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      3.   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   E.   Factory Built Homes:
      1.   All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory
built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot (1') above
the 100-year flood level.
      2.   All factory built homes, including those placed in existing factory
built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   F.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
      1.   On site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      2.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation.
      3.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the 100-year
flood elevation.
      4.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   G.   Storage Of Materials And Equipment: Storage of materials and equipment
that are flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-year flood
level. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or: 1)
not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to
floodwaters or 2) be readily removable from the area within the time available
after flood warning.
   H.   Flood Control Structural Works: Flood control structural works such as
levees, floodwalls, etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-
year flood with a minimum of three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall
provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control
works shall be approved by the department of natural resources.
   I.   Watercourse Alterations Or Relocations: Watercourse alterations or
relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must
be approved by the department of natural resources.
   J.   Subdivisions And Factory Built Home Parks And Subdivisions:
Subdivisions (including factory built home parks and subdivisions) shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated
with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities)
shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision
proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of
access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots
(whichever is less) shall include 100-year flood elevation data for those areas
located within the area of significant flood hazard.
   K.   Accessory Structures:
      1.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a
residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements where
the following criteria are satisfied:
         a.   The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
         b.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
         c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
         d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures.
         e.   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the
100-year flood level.
      2.   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
   L.   Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection
E of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied:
         a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and
         b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      2.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection E of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory built homes.
   M.   Pipeline River And Stream Crossings: Pipeline river and stream
crossings shall be buried in the stream bed and banks, or otherwise
sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and
meandering. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-11: SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS:
In addition to the general floodplain standards, uses within the floodway must
meet the following applicable standards. The floodway is that portion of the
floodplain which must be protected from developmental encroachment to allow the
free flow of floodwaters. Where floodway data has been provided in the flood
insurance study, such data shall be used to define the floodway. Where no
floodway data has been provided, the department of natural resources shall be
contacted to provide a floodway delineation. The applicant will be responsible
for providing the department of natural resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination.
   A.   No use shall be permitted in the floodway that would result in any
increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
   B.   All uses within the floodway shall:
      1.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      2.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      3.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
   C.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or
floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other
drainage facility or system.
   D.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted,
shall meet the applicable general floodplain standards and shall be constructed
or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
   E.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
   F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of
other material may be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the
time available after flood warning.
   G.   Watercourse alterations or relocation (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within
the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations
must be approved by the department of natural resources.
   H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
   I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed
and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 2002-104,
8-27-2002)
12-1-12: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS:
In addition to the general floodplain standards, uses within shallow flooding
areas must meet the following applicable standards:
   A.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO zone on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM), the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation
shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of
2 feet if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to
the structure.
   B.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH zone on the flood
insurance rate map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection elevation shall
be equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-13: VARIANCES:
   A.   Standards For Granting Variances: The city council may authorize, upon
request in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter that
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards:
      1.   Variances shall only be granted upon: a) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and c) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
      2.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration
of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      3.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      4.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the administrator
that: a) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and b) such construction
increases risks to life and property.
      5.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
department of natural resources.
   B.   Factors Upon Which Council Decision Based: In passing upon applications
for variances, the council shall consider all relevant factors specified in
other sections of this chapter, and:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      2.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other land or downstream
to the injury of others.
      3.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
      4.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      5.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the city.
      6.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      7.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      8.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      9.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      10.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      11.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
      12.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
      13.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   C.   Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the council may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      1.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      2.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      3.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      4.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
department of natural resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      5.   Floodproofing measures. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-14: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Conditions For Continuance: A structure or the use of a structure or
premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
      1.   If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   B.   Destruction: If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred, unless it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary, building or safety codes or
regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the national
register of historic places; provided, that the alteration shall not preclude
its continued designation. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-15: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
department of natural resources. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-16: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-17: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the designated areas
of significant flood hazard will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 2002-
104, 8-27-2002)
12-1-18: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation. (Ord. 2002-104, 8-27-
2002)
