PEOSTA, IOWA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-5 contains
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-18, passed 11-11-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE 2024-02
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Peosta, Iowa:
   Section 1.   Pursuant to published notice, a public hearing has been duly
held and the City Council hereby adopts the City of Peosta, Iowa Code of
Ordinances.
   Section 2.   An official copy of the City Code as adopted, including a
certification by the City Clerk as to its adoption and effective date is on
file at the office of the City Clerk.
   Section 3.   A copy of the code shall be kept available at the City Hall for
public inspection and copies will be made available for sale at cost.
   Section 4.   All general ordinances or parts thereof passed prior to January
10, 2006, not contained in the City of Peosta, Iowa Code of Ordinances are
hereby repealed except as hereafter provided, or special ordinances not named.
   Section 5.   The following ordinances are specifically saved from repeal:
NO ORDINANCES ARE SAVED FROM REPEAL SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF CODE OF IOWA
SECTION 380.8(1)(a)
   Section 6.   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon posting
as required by Iowa law.
Passed by the City Council of Peosta, Iowa on the 12th day of March 2024.
 
                                                           
                            Russell Pfab, Mayor
Attest:
                                             
Marcie Winkelman, City Clerk
      CITY CHARTER
Section
   
2.01   Purpose
   
2.02   Charter
   
2.03   Form of Government
   
2.04   Power and Duties
   
2.05   Number and Term of City Council
   
2.06   Term of Mayor
   
2.07   Copies on File
§ 2.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a charter embodying the
government existing on May 22, 1975.
§ 2.02 CHARTER.
   This chapter may be cited as the Charter of the City of Peosta, Iowa.
§ 2.03 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City of Peosta, Iowa, is the Mayor-Council
form of government.
(Iowa Code § 372.4)
§ 2.04 POWER AND DUTIES.
   The City Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and
shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by state law and by the
Ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Peosta, Iowa.
(Iowa Code § 376.2)
§ 2.05 NUMBER AND TERM OF CITY COUNCIL.
   In conformance with the 2003 general election and effective with the
November 2005 general election, the City Council shall consist of five (5) City
Council members elected at large. The Council members will serve four (4) year
staggered terms.
(Iowa Code § 372.4)
§ 2.06 TERM OF MAYOR.
   In conformance with the November 2003 general election and effective with
the November 2005 general election, the Mayor is elected for a term of four (4)
years.
(Iowa Code § 372.4)
§ 2.07 COPIES ON FILE.
   The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the City Clerk, shall immediately file a copy with the
Secretary of State of Iowa, and shall keep copies of the charter available at
the City Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Iowa Code § 372.1)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Definitions
   
10.02   Grammatical interpretation
   
10.03   Prohibited acts includes causing, permitting
   
10.04   Construction
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Catchlines, titles, headings, and notes
   
10.07   Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
      BUILDING. Any human-made structure permanently affixed to the ground.
      CHIEF OF POLICE. The city police officer.
      CITY. The City of Peosta, Iowa, or the area within the territorial limits
of the city, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
      CLERK. The Clerk of the city.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done. It shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the
last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the city. All its members or all Council
persons mean the total number of Council persons provided by the city charter
under the general laws of the state.
      COUNTY. The County of Dubuque, Iowa.
      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring an
officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be
construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate, and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection,
unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
      FISCAL YEAR. July 1 to June 30.
      LAW. Denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution, and statutes of
the state, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
      MAY. Confers a power.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      MUST. States a requirement.
      OATH. Construed to include an affirmative or declaration in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED shall be equivalent to the words SWEAR and SWORN.
      OR. May be read as AND; and AND may be read as OR if the sense requires
it.
      ORDINANCE. A law of the city; however, an administrative action, order,
or directive may be in the form of a resolution.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole
or part of such building or land.
      PERSON. A natural person, any other legal entity, or the manager, lessee,
agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action, and
evidences of debt.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes any interest in land.
      SHALL. Imposes a duty.
      SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      STATE. The State of Iowa.
      STREET. Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of the state.
      TENANT and OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
      TITLE OF OFFICE. Use of the title of any officer, employee, board, or
commission means that officer, employee, department, board, or commission of
the city.
      WRITTEN. Includes printed, typewritten, or electronically transmitted
such as facsimile or electronic mail.
      YEAR. A calendar year.
   (B)   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to
the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases,
and such other as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the
law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning.
   (C)   When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it
may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-1)
§ 10.02 GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION.
   The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city.
   (A)   Gender. Any gender includes the other gender.
   (B)   Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   (C)   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses, and vice versa.
   (D)   Use of words and phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the content and approved usage of the language.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-2)
§ 10.03 PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDES CAUSING, PERMITTING.
   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes
causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the
fact of such act or omission. A principal is responsible for the unauthorized
acts or omissions committed by an agent or employee which have been authorized
by the principal.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-3)
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this code and all proceeds under it are to be construed
with a view to affect its objects and to promote justice.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-4)
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision, or part of the city code or any subsequent
ordinance is adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not
affect the validity of the city code as a whole or any section provision, or
part thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-6)
§ 10.06 CATCHLINES, TITLES, HEADINGS, AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the sections of this city code printed in boldface type,
as well as the titles, headings, chapter heads, section and division heads or
titles, editor’s notes, cross-references, and state law references, unless set
out in the body of the section itself, contained in this city code, do not
constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain,
supplement, or clarify the contents of a section.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-7)
§ 10.07 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect the city code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this city code and printed for inclusion herein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or division, or any portion
thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this city code by omission
from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent
ordinances until such time as this city code, and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted, are readopted as a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this city code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section or subsection
number of this city code in substantially the following language: “That section
________of the Code of Ordinances, City of Peosta, Iowa is hereby amended to
read as follows:...” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this city code
is to be added, the following language may be used: “That the Code of
ordinances, City of Peosta, Iowa, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered ___________, which said section reads as follows:...” The new section
shall then be set out in full as desired.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-8)
   (D)   All ordinances of the City Council passed hereafter shall be in the
form of an addition or amendment to the Municipal Code of 2023 constituting
this municipal code, and shall include proper references to chapters and
sections to maintain the orderly codification of the ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1-1-5)
(Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions to division (D), see Iowa Code § 380.2
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. The doing of any act prohibited or declared to be
unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor by the city code or any ordinance or
code herein adopted by reference, or the omission or failure to perform any act
or duty required by this city code or any ordinance or code or any ordinance or
code herein adopted by reference is, unless another penalty is specified,
punishable in accordance with Iowa Code § 903.1(1)(a). No violation of the city
code shall subject an individual to incarceration.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)
   (B)   Civil penalty; municipal infraction.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a
different meaning.
         MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. Except those provisions specifically provided
under state law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 690 through 747 of the Iowa
Code, the doing of any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful, an offense or
a misdemeanor by the code of ordinances of the city, or any ordinance or code
herein adopted by reference, or omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the code of ordinances of the city, or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference, is a MUNICIPAL INFRACTION and is punishable by civil
penalty as provided herein.
         OFFICER. Any employee or official authorized to enforce the code of
ordinances of the city.
         REPEAT OFFENSE. A recurring violation of the same section of the code
of ordinances.
      (2)   Violations, penalties, and alternative relief. 
         (a)   A municipal infraction is punishable by a civil penalty as
provided in the following schedule, unless a specific schedule of civil
penalties is provided for specific offenses elsewhere in this code.
 
Schedule of Civil Penalties
First offense  Not more than $750
Repeat offense Not more than $1,000
 
         (b)   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the
violator constitutes a separate offense.
         (c)   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not
preclude the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same
action.
      (3)   Civil citations.
         (a)   Any officer authorized by the city to enforce the code of
ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal
infraction.
         (b)   The citation may be served by personal service, substituted
service, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by publication as
provided in the State Rules of Civil Procedure.
         (c)   The original of the citation shall be sent to the Clerk of the
district court. If the infraction involves real property, a copy of the
citation shall be filed with the County Treasurer.
         (d)   The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense
has been committed and shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name and address of the defendant.
            2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the
officer issuing the citation.
            3.   The location and time of the infraction.
            4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative
relief sought, or both.
            5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be
paid.
            6.   The time and place of court appearance.
            7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
            8.   The legal description of the affected property, if applicable.
      (4)   Seeking alternative relief. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized
in Iowa Code § 364.22, does not preclude the city from seeking alternative
relief from the court in the same action. Such relief may include the
imposition of a civil penalty by entry of a personal judgment against the
defendant, directing that the payment of the civil penalty be suspended or
deferred under conditions imposed by the court, ordering the defendant to abate
or cease the violation or authorizing the city to abate or correct the
violation, or ordering that the city’s cost for abatement or correction of the
violation be entered as a personal judgment against the defendant or assessed
against the property where the violation occurred, or both. If a defendant
willfully violates the terms of an order imposed by the court, the failure is
contempt.
      (5)   Peace officer. This section does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for violation of a city code or regulation if
criminal penalties are also provided for the violation, nor does it preclude or
limit the authority of the city to enforce the provisions of the code of
ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means. Each day that a
violation occurs or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a
separate offense. The violation of any provision of this code of ordinances or
any regulation promulgated thereunder shall also constitute a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $65 but not to exceed $625.
No violation of the city code shall subject an individual to incarceration. A
simple misdemeanor criminal charge filed pursuant to this code of ordinances
shall only subject an individual to a monetary fine.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)
   (C)   Scheduled fines. The scheduled fine for a violation of any provision
of the city code shall be in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 805, unless
another scheduled amount is provided in the city code or state code.
(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)
(Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Civil penalties, see Iowa Code § 364.22
   General penalties, see Iowa Code § 903.1(1)(a)
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
Posting of Ordinances
   
11.01   Purpose
   
11.02   Listing; length of notice
   
11.03   Removing notice unlawful
POSTING OF ORDINANCES
§ 11.01 PURPOSE.
   Whereas there is no newspaper published within the corporate limits of the
city, publications, ordinances, and amendments may be made by posting in three
public places which have been permanently designated by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-1)
Statutory reference
   Posting of ordinances, see Iowa Code § 362.3(2)
§ 11.02 LISTING; LENGTH OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The three public places where public notice of ordinances, amendments,
and other matters permitted to be posted are to be displayed are:
      (1)   City Hall (7896 Burds Road);
      (2)   Peosta Post Office (8554 Kapp Drive); and
      (3)   Dubuque County Library/NICC-Peosta Branch (10250 Sundown Road).
   (B)   The City Clerk is hereby directed to promptly post all ordinances,
amendments, and other matters permitted to be posted after passage.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-2) (Ord. 2012-01, passed 2-28-2012)
Statutory reference
   Related provisions, see Iowa Code § 380.7
§ 11.03 REMOVING NOTICE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the City Clerk to remove any
public notice. Any unlawful removal of a public notice or posting shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance, amendment, or action taken.
(Prior Code, § 2-6-3) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR, CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR, CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
Section
Compensation of Mayor, City Council Members
   
30.01   Council member
   
30.02   Mayor
Procedure for Hearings by City Council
   
30.15   Purpose and intent
   
30.16   General
   
30.17   Form of notice of hearing
   
30.18   Subpoenas
   
30.19   Conduct of hearing
   
30.20   Method, form of decision
Mayor
   
30.35   Powers, duties
COMPENSATION OF MAYOR, CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
§ 30.01 COUNCIL MEMBER.
   The salaries of each City Council member shall be $60 for each meeting of
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-1) (Ord. 2012-05, passed 6-26-2012)
Statutory reference
   Salaries of Council members, see Iowa Code § 372.13(8)
§ 30.02 MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall receive $75 for each meeting of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-4-2)
Statutory reference
   Salary of the Mayor, see Iowa Code § 372.13(8)
PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS BY CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.15 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish an orderly,
efficient, and expeditious process for evidentiary hearings before the City
Council.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to a proceeding required
by constitution, statute, or ordinance to be determined by the City Council
after an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)
§ 30.16 GENERAL.
   (A)   Recording. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the City Council.
   (B)   Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a
court reporter at the expense of any party.
   (C)   Continuances. The City Council may grant continuances for good cause
shown.
   (D)   Oaths, certification. The City Council or any member thereof has the
power to administer oaths and affirmations.
   (E)   Reasonable dispatch. The City Council and its representatives shall
proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard
shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties, or their
representatives.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)
§ 30.17 FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The notice to parties shall be substantially in the following form, but may
include other information:
 
You are hereby notified that an evidentiary hearing will be held before the
________________________________ City Council at ___ on the      day of     , 20  ,
at the hour ______________________________________________________________________,
upon the notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may
be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence
and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against
you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit
therefor with the City Clerk.
 
(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)
§ 30.18 SUBPOENAS.
   The City Council may issue a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the
production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of a member of the
City Council, or upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service
of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefor
which states the name and address of the proposed witness; specifies the exact
things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the
issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired things in the
witness’s possession or under the witness’s control. A subpoena need not be
issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular way.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)
§ 30.19 CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   (A)   Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules
relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (B)   Oral evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or
affirmation.
   (C)   Hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in
civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in the state.
   (D)   Admissibility of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common
law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence
over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in the
state.
   (E)   Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded.
   (F)   Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
      (1)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues
of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
      (4)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the
witness to testify;
      (5)   To rebut the evidence against the party; and
      (6)   To self-representation or to be represented by anyone of the part’s
choice who is lawfully permitted to do so.
   (G)   Official notice.
      (1)   What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be
taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact
which may be judicially noticed by the courts of the state or of official
records of the city or its departments and ordinances.
      (2)   Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be
informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be noted in the
record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.
      (3)   Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be
given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed
matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner
of such refutation to be determined by the City Council.
   (H)   Inspection of the premises. The City Council may inspect any building
or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided
that:
      (1)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made;
      (2)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
      (3)   The City Council shall state for the record, upon completion of the
inspection, the material facts observed, and the conclusions drawn therefrom.
Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-5)
§ 30.20 METHOD, FORM OF DECISION.
   (A)   Where a contested case is heard before the City Council, no member
thereof who did not hear the evidence or alternatively has not read or listened
to the entire record of the proceedings shall vote on or take part in the
decision. The City Council may designate a member or members to preside over
the receipt of evidence. Such member or members shall prepare findings of fact
for the City Council.
   (B)   The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a
determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be complied
with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the parties personally or
sent to them by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
   (C)   The effective date of the decision shall be stated therein.
(Prior Code, § 1-4-6)
MAYOR
§ 30.35 POWERS, DUTIES.
   The duties of the Mayor shall be as follows.
   (A)   The Mayor shall act as presiding officer at all regular and special
City Council meetings. The Mayor pro tem shall serve in this capacity in the
Mayor’s absence.
   (B)   The Mayor may sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution passed by the City Council. If the Mayor vetoes a
measure, the Mayor must explain in writing the reason for such veto to the City
Council members at the time of the veto. The Council may pass the measure
against by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the
Council if said action is taken within 30 days of the veto. If the Mayor takes
no action on the measure, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date
of passage and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when published, but not
sooner than 14 days after the day of passage, unless a subsequent effective
date is provided within the measure.
   (C)   The Mayor shall represent the city in all negotiations properly
entered into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent
the city where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law or
ordinance.
   (D)   The Mayor shall, whenever authorized by the City Council, sign all
contracts on behalf of the city.
   (E)   The Mayor shall call special meetings of the City Council when the
Mayor deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the city.
   (F)   The Mayor shall make such oral or written reports to the City Council
at the first meeting of every month as referred. These reports shall concern
municipal affairs generally, the municipal departments, and recommendations
suitable for City Council action.
   (G)   Immediately after taking office the Mayor shall designate one member
of the City Council as Mayor pro tempore. The Mayor pro tempore shall be Vice-
President of the City Council. Except for the limitations otherwise provided
herein, the Mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of
absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of the office. In the
exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor pro tempore shall not have power
to employ or discharge from employment officers or employees that the Mayor has
the power to appoint, employ, or discharge. The Mayor pro tempore shall have
the right to vote as a member of the City Council.
   (H)   The Mayor shall, upon order of the City Council, secure for the city
such specialized and professional services not already available to the city.
In executing the order of the City Council the Mayor shall conduct said duties
in accordance with the city ordinance and the laws of the state.
   (I)   The Mayor shall sign all licenses and permits which have been granted
by the City Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued
by another municipal officer.
   (J)   Upon authorization of the City Council, the Mayor shall revoke permits
or licenses granted by the City Council when their terms, the ordinances of the
city, or the laws of the state are violated by holders of said permits or
licenses.
   (K)   The Mayor shall order to be removed, at public expense, any nuisance
for which no person can be found responsible and liable. This order shall be in
writing. The order to remove said nuisances shall be carried out by the police
officer or other person designated by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-5) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Duties of the Mayor, see Iowa Code §§ 372.14(1) and (3), 380.5, and 380.6(2)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Right of entry
   
31.02   General duties
   
31.03   Books and records
   
31.04   Deposit of municipal funds
   
31.05   Compensation
Appointment and Qualifications of Officers
   
31.20   Creation of appointive officers
   
31.21   Appointment of officers
   
31.22   Terms of appointive officers
   
31.23   Vacancies in offices
   
31.24   Bonds required
   
31.25   Surety
   
31.26   Blanket position bond
   
31.27   Bonds filed
Officials and Employees
   
31.40   Powers, duties of City Attorney
   
31.41   Powers, duties of City Administrator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance, or
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance
violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the
city, any authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper
credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
the same and to perform any duty imposed upon such official by ordinance;
provided that, except in emergency situations, such official shall first give
the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24-
hour written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect.
   (B)   In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official is
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
(Prior Code, § 1-2-1)
§ 31.02 GENERAL DUTIES.
   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and ordinance, or as otherwise directed by the City Council
unless contrary to state law or city charter.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)
Statutory reference
   General responsibilities of the officers of the city, see Iowa Code § 372.13
(4)
§ 31.03 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Public records, subject to exceptions provided within Chapter 22 of the Iowa
Code, shall be open to inspection by the public upon request.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)
Statutory reference
   Viewing of records, books, see Iowa Code §§ 22.1, 22.2, and 22.7 
§ 31.04 DEPOSIT OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS.
   Prior to the fifth day of each month, each office or Department shall
deposit all funds collected on behalf of the municipality during the preceding
month.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)
§ 31.05 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation of all other officers and employees shall be set by
resolution by the City Council
(Prior Code, § 2-4-3) (Ord. 01-05, passed 10-24-2001)
Statutory reference
   Compensation of the officers of the city, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS
§ 31.20 CREATION OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   There are hereby created the following appointive officers: City
Administrator, Clerk, and Attorney.   
(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)
§ 31.21 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint the officers of the city.
   (B)   All other boards and commissions shall be appointed or selected by the
City Council unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)
§ 31.22 TERMS OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   The appointive boards and commissions of the city shall be appointed to and
removed from office by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-3) (Ord. 2016-03, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 31.23 VACANCIES IN OFFICES.
   Vacancies in appointive office shall be filled in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)
§ 31.24 BONDS REQUIRED.
   Each municipal officer required by law or ordinance to be bonded shall,
before entering upon the duties of the office, execute to the city a good and
sufficient bond, to be approved by the City Council, conditioned on the
faithful performance of the duties and the proper handling and accounting for
the money and property of the city in the official’s charge unless the City
Council shall have provided for a blanket position surety bond.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)
Statutory reference
   Bond regulations, see Iowa Code § 64.13 
§ 31.25 SURETY.
   Any association or corporation which makes a business of insuring the
fidelity of others and which has authority to do such business within the state
shall be accepted as surety on any of the bonds.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)
§ 31.26 BLANKET POSITION BOND.
   (A)   The City Council shall provide for a blanket position bond to cover
all officers and employees of the city, but the City Council may provide by
resolution for a surety bond for any other officer or employee that the City
Council deems necessary.
   (B)   The city shall pay the premium on any official bond.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-7)
Statutory reference
   Bond regulations, see Iowa Code § 64.13 
§ 31.27 BONDS FILED.
   All bonds when duly executed shall be filed with the Clerk, except that the
Clerk’s bond shall be filed with the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-2-8)
Statutory reference
   Bond regulations, see Iowa Code § 64.23 
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 31.40 POWERS, DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The duties of the City Attorney shall be as follows (per Iowa Code § 372.13
(4)):
   (A)   If requested, the City Attorney shall attend every regular meeting of
the City Council and attend those special meetings of the City Council at which
the City Attorney is required to be present.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings which may be required for the use of the city.
   (C)   The City Attorney shall keep in proper files a record of all official
opinions and a docket or register of all actions prosecuted and defined by the
City Attorney accompanied by all proceedings relating to said actions.
   (D)   The City Attorney shall, upon request, give an opinion in writing upon
all questions of law relating to municipal matters submitted by the City
Council, the Mayor, members of the City Council individually, municipal boards,
or the head of any municipal department.
   (E)   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances when the City Council
may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the City Council upon all
ordinances before their final passage by the City Council and publication.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the city in all matters
affecting the city’s interest and appear on behalf of the city before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or City
Council.
   (G)   (1)   The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any municipal
office or employee before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit
of said officer or employee.
      (2)   The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the City Council,
appear to defend any municipal officer or employee in any cause of action
arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her
office or employment.
   (H)   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the city to all appeal bonds
and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the city shall be bound
upon the same.
   (I)   The City Attorney shall make a written report to the City Council and
interested department heads of the defects in all contracts, documents,
authorized power of any city officer, and ordinances submitted to said City
Attorney or coming under said City Attorney’s notice.
   (J)   The City Attorney shall, upon request, after due examination, offer a
written opinion on, and recommend alterations pertaining to, contracts
involving the city before they become binding upon the city or are published.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-7)
§ 31.41 POWERS, DUTIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Office created. There is hereby created the office of City
Administrator. The office shall be filled by a resolution adopted by majority
vote of the Council. The person appointed shall hold office at the discretion
of the Council and shall be subject to removal by a resolution adopted by a
majority vote of the Council. The qualifications for the position shall include
competency through education or experience to perform the duties placed upon
the Administrator.
(Prior Code § 2-2A-1)
   (B)   Compensation. The compensation for the City Administrator, including
expenses shall be in an amount and in the form as may from time to time be
fixed by Council by resolution. The Council is hereby authorized, in its
discretion, to enter into employment contracts with the City Administrator as
may be necessary for his or her employment.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-2)
   (C)   Duties generally.
      (1)   The City Administrator is directly responsible to the Council for
the administration of municipal affairs as directed by that body. All city
departmental administration requiring the attention of the Council shall be
brought before the Council by the Administrator. Council involvement in
administration initiated by the Council must be coordinated through the
Administrator. A specific job description for the position of City
Administrator shall be adopted by separate resolution of the Council and may be
changed from time to time as may be warranted.
      (2)   The duties of the Administrator include the following:
         (a)   Supervise enforcement and execution of city laws and assure
resolutions, ordinances, laws, and Council directives and operational policies
are enforced and executed, or referred to the proper official for compliance.
         (b)   Attend meetings of the Council, unless excused by the Mayor.
         (c)   Recommend to the Council measures necessary or expedient for
good government and welfare of the city, including evaluation, development, and
updating operating procedures and policies.
         (d)   Provide general supervision and direction for the administration
of city government to expedite efficient administration of city’s business.
         (e)   Supervise the performance of contracts for work to be done for
the city, and all purchases of material and supplies; ensure that material and
supplies are received and are of the quality and specification called for by
the contract, and consult with department heads with reference to said
contracts.
         (f)   To direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials,
supplies, capital outlay, and services for all departments of the city that
have been budgeted and appropriated by appropriate resolution of the Council
and to enforce a program to determine that such purchases are received and are
of the quality and charter called for in the order.
         (g)   Cooperate and advise present or future administrative agencies,
boards, or commissions which are responsible to the Mayor and Council.
         (h)   Together with the Clerk, communicate and keep the Council fully
informed of the condition of city departments, including their financial
management, progress, budgets, background or historical information, future
needs, goals, and objectives in language and format for public consumption.
         (i)   Introduce new and approved methods for the elimination of
wasteful practices following modern municipal procedures and law requirements.
         (j)   Perform administrative duties designated by resolution of the
Council.
         (k)   Advise the Council on participation in programs and policies
with other government political subdivisions, including city, county, state, or
federal entities, and/or which may be affected by court decisions, liability,
or other related matters and suggest and coordinate city grant proposals.
         (l)   Participate in public relations and public information
activities and programs to keep the public informed through speeches, attending
meetings, and attending social gatherings, and provide information to the
media.
         (m)   Provide to the Council periodic itemized financial reports in
writing concerning current and completed projects.
         (n)   In coordination with the City Clerk, prepare and administer
city’s operating budget.
         (o)   Coordinate with the Clerk to cause accurate records of the city
to be kept.
         (p)   Order the abatement of nuisances at city expense.
         (q)   Supervise and direct the official conduct of all officers,
departments, and employees of the city.
         (r)   Recommend the hiring or discharging of all employees of the
city. This shall not include employees appointed by the Mayor or Council under
other ordinances.
         (s)   Obtain for the city, upon order of the Council, such specialized
and professional services deemed necessary by the Council and not already
available to the city.
         (t)   Serve as city liaison with local economic development groups.
         (u)   Administer and enforce the city’s zoning ordinance.
         (v)   Perform such other duties as the Council may direct.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-3)
   (D)   Residency requirement. The City Administrator shall become a resident
of the city, and continued residency in the city is a requirement for continued
employment with the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-4)
   (E)   Bond. The City Administrator shall be bonded for the performance of
all duties in favor of the city, in an amount to be determined by the Council
by resolution, but in no event shall the bond be less than $10,000. The city
shall pay the cost of the bond.
(Prior Code, § 2-2A-5)
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning and Zoning Commission
   
32.01   Commission created
   
32.02   Membership of the Commission
   
32.03   Term of office
   
32.04   Vacancies
   
32.05   Compensation
   
32.06   Powers and duties
Community Centre Board of Directors
   
32.20   Created; composition; appointment
   
32.21   Terms; filling of vacancies
   
32.22   Compensation
   
32.23   Organization
   
32.24   Powers and duties
   
32.25   Executive Director
   
32.26   Reports
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 32.01 COMMISSION CREATED.
   Under and by virtue of the authority conferred by Chapter 414.6 of the Iowa
Code, 2013, a City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as
the Commission, is hereby created and established.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-1)
§ 32.02 MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall consist of five members, at least four of whom are
residents of the city. The additional member of the Commission may reside
outside of the city limits, but in that event must reside within two miles of
the city limits. All members shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to
act in matters pertaining to the development of a city plan and who shall not
hold any elective office in the city government. All five members shall be
appointed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-2) (Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-23-2021)
§ 32.03 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-3)
§ 32.04 VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy shall exist on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, the City Council shall appoint a successor for the residue of said
term.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-4)
§ 32.05 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-5)
§ 32.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission has and exercises the following powers and duties.
   (A)   Selection of officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
   (B)   Adopt rules and regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedures as it may deem necessary.
   (C)   Annual report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts,
disbursements, and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
   (D)   Comprehensive plan. The Commission shall have full power and authority
to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans, or charts of
the whole or any portion of the city, or of any land outside thereof which, in
the opinion of the Commission, bear relation to the comprehensive plan, and
shall bring its studies and recommendations to the attention of the Council and
may also publish such studies and recommendations.
      (1)   Comprehensive plan, preparation. For the purpose of making a
comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city, the Commission
shall make careful and comprehensive studies of present conditions and future
growth of the city, and with due regard to its relation to neighboring
territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the city
and its environs which will, in accordance with the present and future needs,
best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and
general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development.
      (2)   Comprehensive plan, public hearing. Before adopting a comprehensive
plan as referred to in the preceding division (D)(1) above, or any part of it,
or any substantial amendment thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than
seven or more than 20 days before the date of hearing. However, in no case
shall the public hearing be held earlier than the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting following the published notice. The adoption of the plan or
part or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the Commission carried by
the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the members of the
Commission. After adoption of said plan by the Commission an attested copy
thereof shall be certified to the Council and the Council may approve the same.
When said plan or any modification or amendment thereof shall receive the
approval of the Council, the said plan, until subsequently modified or amended
as herein authorized, shall constitute the official city comprehensive plan.
      (3)   Comprehensive plan, amendments. When the comprehensive plan has
been adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made
without such proposed change first being referred to the Commission for its
recommendations. If the Commission disapproves the proposed change it may be
adopted by the Council only by the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths
of the members of the Council.
   (E)   Recommendations of improvements. No statuary, memorial, or work of art
in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures,
public structure, or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site
therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the city
for the erection or location thereof until and unless the design and proposed
location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Commission
and its recommendations thereon obtained, except such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement
when the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such
recommendations, shall have failed to file the same.
   (F)   Review and comment of street and park improvements. No plan for any
street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, or other public improvement
affecting the city plan shall be finally approved by the city, or the character
or location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been
submitted to the Commission, and the Commission shall have had 30 days within
which to file its recommendations thereon.
   (G)   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in preparing and amending the city zoning code, as
provided by Chapter 414 of the Iowa Code.
   (H)   Fiscal responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the city all sums of money
appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments
whatsoever which are received by the city for city planning and zoning
purposes.
   (I)   Limitation on entering contracts. The Commission shall have no power
to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Prior Code, § 6-17-6) (Ord. 2013-03, passed 1-28-2014)
COMMUNITY CENTRE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 32.20 CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Directors to provide leadership,
organization, structure, and planning for the City Community Centre and City
Sports Complex. The City Community Centre Board of Directors shall consist of
five members, who are members in good standing of the City Community Centre,
and none of whom hold any elective position in the city government.
   (B)   Appointments to the Board of Directors shall be recommended by the
Board and approved by the City Council. The City Council shall have the
authority and power to remove a Board member based on recommendation of the
Board.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-1)
§ 32.21 TERMS; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   The term of office of the members of the Board is three years. The terms are
staggered so that two members are appointed each year with the exception that
each third year only one member is appointed. Terms shall begin March 1.
Vacancies occurring on the Board caused by resignation or otherwise shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments, in
compliance with Iowa Code 372.15.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-2) (Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-12-2016)
§ 32.22 COMPENSATION.
   Each Board member shall serve without compensation for service, but shall be
entitled to reimbursement for necessary and actual expenses incurred in the
discharge of his or her duties subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-3)
§ 32.23 ORGANIZATION.
   The powers and duties of the Board shall be exercised by the Board. A
majority of the Board members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of
conducting business and exercising the powers of the Board of Directors, and
for all other purposes. The Board shall adopt such by-laws, rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedures as may be deemed
necessary. Action may be taken by the Board upon a vote of a majority of the
Board members present, unless in any case the rules or regulations adopted by
the Board require a larger number. The Board elects its Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and Secretary every year from among the Board members.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-4)
§ 32.24 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To determine the Board’s mission and purpose;
   (B)   To receive and make recommendations to the City Council relative to
hiring and firing the Executive Director. The City Council shall have the sole
authority and power to hire and fire the Executive Director;
   (C)   To support the Executive Director and review his or her performance
and make reports to the City Council;
   (D)   To oversee the operation of the City Community Centre and City Sports
Complex through broad policies and objectives;
   (E)   To elect a Secretary who shall have the duty to keep the true and
correct record of all proceedings at all meetings and to file the same with the
City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. The Secretary and presiding officer at the meeting shall sign
the minutes, resolutions, and other official documents adopted or approved by
the Board. The minutes, along with the next meeting agenda, shall be provided
to the members and posted for public inspection at least four days, but not
more than 20 days prior to the meeting. Minutes from Board meetings shall also
be accepted by the City Council at the first regular meeting of the month;
   (F)   To determine salaries and wages for employees of the City Community
Centre. Salaries and wages to be paid to the Executive Director and all
employees of the City Community Centre shall be included in the annual budget.
Salaries and wages shall be recommended by the Board but subject to final
approval by the Council.
   (G)   To submit a complete annual line item budget of all anticipated fiscal
year expenditures. This budget, together with the recommendations of the Board,
shall be subject to final approval by the Council.
   (H)   To make rules and regulations for the use of the City Community Centre
and City Sports Complex or for the conduct of recreation programs.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-5)
§ 32.25 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
   An Executive Director of the City Community Centre shall be recommended by
the City Community Centre Board of Directors and approved by the City Council.
The Director shall assume such duties established in the job description
approved by the Board of Directors. The Director shall be under the direct
supervision of the Board. The Board of Directors will receive from the Director
such assistance and information as necessary in the performance of its duties
as specified in §
32.24. The Director shall meet regularly with the Board of Directors to discuss
policies and programs relating to the City Community Centre and City Sports
Complex.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-6)
§ 32.26 REPORTS.
   (A)   The revenues and expenditures of the City Community Centre shall be
reported monthly in the City Clerk’s report to the City Council at its regular
meetings.
   (B)   The Board Chairperson or Executive Director of the City Community
Centre shall attend the first regular meeting of the City Council each month.
(Prior Code, § 4-3-7) (Ord. 2007-01, passed 2-13-2007)
CHAPTER 33: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Police protection
   
33.02   Powers, duties of Police Chief
Fire Department
   
33.15   Fire protection
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 POLICE PROTECTION.
   Police protection in the city shall be provided by the City Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-1) (Ord. 99-01, passed 10-12-1999)
§ 33.02 POWERS, DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   (A)   The duties of the Police Chief shall be as follows (per the Iowa Code
§ 372.13(4)):
      (1)   The Police Chief shall assist prosecutors in prosecuting any
persons for the violation of an ordinance by gathering all the facts and
circumstances surrounding the case.
      (2)   The Police Chief shall be sergeant-at-arms of the Council chamber
when requested by the City Council.
      (3)   The Police Chief shall report to the City Council upon activities
as Police Chief when requested.
      (4)   The Police Chief shall protect the rights of persons and property,
preserve order at all public gatherings, prevent and abate nuisances, and
protect persons against every manner of unlawful disorder and offense.
      (5)   The Police Chief shall make arrangements to convey any persons
requiring detention to the county jail as provided by law and agreements with
the county.
      (6)   The Police Chief shall execute all lawful orders of any board or
commission established by the City Council.
      (7)   The Police Chief shall be in command of all officers appointed for
police work and be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all
vehicles and equipment for the Department.
      (8)   The Police Chief may appoint one or more assistant Police Chiefs,
with approval of the City Council, who may perform the Police Chief’s duties
and who shall be members of the police force.
      (9)   (a)   The Police Chief shall make such rules, not in conflict with
the provisions of this subchapter, as needed for the detailed operation of the
Police Department, subject to the approval of the City Council. Such rules
shall cover off-duty and on-duty conduct and activity of members, the wearing
and care of the uniform, the use and practice with side arms and other police
weapons, the use of police radio and other communications, attendance at
training meetings, and such other matters as the Police Chief determines to be
necessary for the operation of the Police Department.
         (b)   The Police Chief shall see that the discipline and conduct of
the department conforms to rules of the Department.
         (c)   In the event of an emergency the Police Chief may make temporary
rules for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the City and its
citizens until due consideration by the City Council may be had.
      (10)   The Police Chief shall, when requested, aid other municipal
officers in the execution of their official duties.
      (11)   The Police Chief shall report all motor vehicle accidents the
Police Department investigates in the regular course of duty to the State
Department of Public Safety as provided by law.
      (12)   The Police Chief shall keep a record of all arrests made in the
city by police officers. The Police Chief shall record whether said arrest was
made under provisions of the laws of the state or ordinances of the city. The
record shall show the offense for which arrest was made, who made the arrest,
and the disposition made of the charge.
   (B)   (1)   At least every year the Police Chief shall review and determine
the current status of all state arrests reported, which are at least one year
old with no disposition data.
      (2)   Any state arrest recorded within a computer data storage system
which has no disposition data after four years shall be removed unless there is
an outstanding arrest warrant or detained on such charge.
(Prior Code, § 2-3-8)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.15 FIRE PROTECTION.
   Fire protection in the city shall be provided by a 28 E Agreement with the
Centralia Peosta Community Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
City Finance
   
34.01   Budget adoption
   
34.02   Budget amendment
   
34.03   Accounts and programs
   
34.04   Annual report
   
34.05   Council transfers
   
34.06   Budget Officer
   
34.07   Accounting
   
34.08   Budget accounts
   
34.09   Contingency accounts
Industrial Property Tax Exemption
   
34.20   Partial exemption
   
34.21   New construction
   
34.22   Reconstruction
   
34.23   Duration
   
34.24   Amount of exemption
   
34.25   Application
   
34.26   Limitation on tax exemptions
CITY FINANCE
§ 34.01 BUDGET ADOPTION.
   Annually, the city shall prepare and adopt a budget, and shall certify taxes
as follows (per Iowa Code § 384.16).
   (A)   (1)   A budget shall be prepared for at least the following fiscal
year. When required by rules of the State City Finance Committee, a tentative
budget shall be prepared for one or two ensuing years. The proposed budget
shall show estimates of the following:
         (a)   Expenditures for each program;
         (b)   Income from sources other than property taxation; and
         (c)   Amount to be raised by property taxation, and the property tax
rate expressed in dollars per $1,000 valuation.
      (2)   The budget shall show comparisons between the estimated
expenditures in each program in the following year and the actual expenditures
in each program during the two preceding years. Wherever practicable, as
provided in rules of the State Department of Management City Finance Committee,
a budget shall show comparisons between the levels of service provided by each
program as estimated for the following year, and actual levels of service
provided by each program during the two preceding years.
   (B)   Not less than 20 days before the date that the budget must be
certified to the County Auditor and, not less than ten days before the date set
for hearing, the Clerk-Treasurer shall make available a sufficient number of
copies of the budget to meet reasonable demands of taxpayers, and have them
available for review at the offices of the Clerk.
   (C)   The City Council shall set a time and place for public hearing on the
budget before the final certification date and shall publish notice before the
hearing as provided by state law. Proof of publication shall be filed with the
County Auditor.
   (D)   At the hearing, any resident or taxpayer of the city may present to
the City Council objections to any part of the budget for the following fiscal
year or arguments in favor of any part of the budget.
   (E)   After the hearing, the City Council shall adopt a budget for at least
the following fiscal year, and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy
for the following year to the County Auditor and the County Board of
Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the
amount estimated in the proposed budget, unless an additional tax levy is
approved at a city election. Two copies of the complete budget as adopted shall
be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-1) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 384.16(2)
§ 34.02 BUDGET AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The city budget, as finally adopted for the following fiscal year,
becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the city appropriation for each
program and purpose specified therein until amended. The city budget for the
current fiscal year may be amended for any of the following purposes (per Iowa
Code § 384.18):
      (1)   To permit the appropriation and expenditures of unexpended,
unencumbered cash balances on hand at the end of the preceding fiscal year
which had not been anticipated in the budget.
      (2)   To permit the appropriation and expenditure of amounts anticipated
to be available from sources other than property taxation, and which had not
been anticipated in the budget.
      (3)   To permit transfers from the Debt Service Fund, the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund, the Emergency Fund, or other funds established by
state law, to any other city fund, unless specifically prohibited by state law.
      (4)   To permit transfers between programs within the General Fund.
   (B)   The budget amendment shall be prepared and adopted in the same manner
as the original budget.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)
§ 34.03 ACCOUNTS AND PROGRAMS.
   (A)   The city shall keep separate accounts corresponding to the programs
and items in its adopted or amended budget, as recommended by the State
Department of Management, City Finance Committee.
   (B)   The city shall keep accounts which show an accurate and detailed
statement of all public funds collected, received, or expended for any city
purpose, by any city officer, employee, or other person, and which show the
receipt, use, and disposition of all city property. Public monies may not be
expended or encumbered except under an annual or continuing appropriation.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)
Statutory reference
   Accounts and programs regulations, see Iowa Code § 384.20 
§ 34.04 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Not later than December 1 of each year the city shall publish an annual
report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections
and receipts, all accounts due the city, and all expenditures, the current
public debt of the city, and the legal debt limit of the city for the current
fiscal year. A copy of this report shall be furnished to the auditor of state.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-5) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Regulations on annual reports, see Iowa Code § 384.22 
§ 34.05 COUNCIL TRANSFERS.
   When the City Clerk determines that one or more appropriation accounts need
added authorizations to meet required expenditures therein the City Clerk shall
inform the City Council, or if the City Council, upon its own investigation, so
determines, and another account within the same programs has an appropriation
in excess of foreseeable needs, or, in the case of a clear emergency or
unforeseeable need, the contingency account has an unexpended appropriation
which alone or with the other accounts can provide the needed appropriations,
the City Council shall set forth by resolution the reductions and increases in
the appropriations and the reason for such transfers. Upon the passage of the
resolution and approval by the Mayor, as provided by law for resolutions, the
City Clerk shall cause the transfers to be set out in full in the minutes and
be included in the posted proceedings of the City Council. Thereupon the Clerk
shall cause the appropriation to be revised upon the appropriation expenditure
ledgers of the city, but in no case shall the total of the appropriation of a
program be increased except for transfers from the contingency account, nor
shall the total appropriation for all purposes be increased except by a budget
amendment made after notice and hearing as required by law for such amendments.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Administrative Code, § 545.2.4 (384, 388)
§ 34.06 BUDGET OFFICER.
   The City Clerk shall be the city budget officer and is responsible for
preparing the budget data in cooperation with the City Administrator, City
Council, or Mayor. The City Clerk shall be responsible for carrying out the
authorizations and plans in the budget as set forth in the budget, subject to
City Council control and the limitations set out in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-8)
Cross reference
   City Clerk or City Administrator, see § 31.42(c)(2)(n)
Statutory reference
   Duties of the Budget Officer, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
§ 34.07 ACCOUNTING.
   The Clerk shall set up and maintain books of original entry to provide a
chronological record of cash received and disbursed through all receipts given
and warrants written, which receipts and warrants shall be prenumbered, in
accordance with modern, accepted methods, and the requirement of the state. The
Clerk shall keep a general ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary
accounts, and recording unappropriated surpluses. Warrants/checks shall be
signed by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-9)
Statutory reference
   Clerk-Treasurer’s duties pertaining to accounting, see Iowa Code § 384.20 
§ 34.08 BUDGET ACCOUNTS.
   The Clerk shall set up such individual accounts to record receipts by source
and expenditures by program and purpose as will provide adequate information
and control for budgetary purposes as planned and approved by the City Council.
Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund as required
by City Council order or state law and shall be so kept that receipts can be
immediately and directly compared with specific estimates, and expenditures can
be related to the appropriation which authorized it. No expenditure shall be
posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the
expense was incurred.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-10)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 384.20 
§ 34.09 CONTINGENCY ACCOUNTS.
   Whenever the City Council shall have budgeted for a contingency account the
Clerk shall set up in the accounting records, but the Clerk shall not charge
any claim to a contingency account. Said contingency accounts may be drawn upon
only by City Council resolution directing a transfer to a specific purpose
account within its fund, and then only upon compelling evidence of an
unexpected and unforeseeable need or emergency.
(Prior Code, § 2-5-11)
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
§ 34.20 PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
   This section does hereby provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to the industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to § 427A.1,
subsection (1), paragraph e of the 1983 Iowa Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-1)
§ 34.21 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION, as referred to herein, means new buildings and structures,
and includes new buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to
existing buildings and structures.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-2)
§ 34.22 RECONSTRUCTION.
   New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building or
structure, which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing
building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, unless
the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement
recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific
products, and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or
structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products
which determination shall receive prior approval from the City Council of the
city upon the recommendation of the State Development Commission.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-3)
§ 34.23 DURATION.
   The partial exemption shall be available until such time as this subchapter
is repealed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-5)
§ 34.24 AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The actual value added to industrial real estate for the reasons
specified in the section is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five years. ACTUAL VALUE ADDED, as used in this
section, means the actual value added as of the first of the year for which the
exemption is received. The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be
exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
      (1)   For the first year, 75%;
      (2)   For the second year, 60%;
      (3)   For the third year, 45%;
      (4)   For the fourth year, 30%; and
      (5)   For the fifth year, 15%.
   (B)   However, the granting of the exemption under this section for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or
structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate
being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the
start of the new construction added.
(Prior Code. § 6-9-6)
§ 34.25 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed. The application for exemption
shall be filed by the owner of the property with the County Assessor by
February first of the assessment year in which the value added is first
assessed for taxation. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Director of Revenue, and shall contain information pertaining
to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed
necessary by the Director of Revenue.
   (B)   A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. The City
Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new
construction if the new construction is in conformance with the zoning plans
for the city. The prior approval shall also be subject to the hearing
requirements of the section. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to
exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found
to be qualified real estate. However, if the tax exemption for new construction
is not approved, the person may submit an amended proposal to the City Council
to approve or reject.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-7)
§ 34.26 LIMITATION ON TAX EXEMPTIONS.
   A property tax exemption under this section shall not be granted if the
property, for which the exemption is claimed, has received any other property
tax exemption authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-9-9)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWAGE
      
53.   GARBAGE, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Utility defined
   
50.02   Districts
Billing Charges
   
50.15   Disposition of fees, charges
   
50.16   Violations
   
50.17   Discontinuing services; fees, reactivation
   
50.18   Lien exemption
Rates
   
50.30   Water rates
   
50.31   Fees and charges for solid waste; management, refuse collection rates
   
50.32   Rate of sewer rent; manner of payment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 UTILITY DEFINED.
   For use in this chapter, UTILITY is the sewer and water systems operated by
the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-1)
§ 50.02 DISTRICTS.
   There shall be three sewer and water districts which encompasses all of the
city: residential rates, industrial and commercial areas under 20k, and those
customers outside of city limits over 20k.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-2)
BILLING CHARGES
§ 50.15 DISPOSITION OF FEES, CHARGES.
   All money received under this chapter shall be deposited in the city
treasury not later than the last day of the month in which it was received and
a written report of the amount and source of the fees and charges shall be on
file with the City Clerk.
   (A)   Utility funds. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of
the City Utility Systems shall be paid to and held by the city separate and
apart from all other funds of the city, and all of said sums and all other
funds and moneys incident to the operation of said systems, as may be delivered
to the city, shall be deposited in separate funds designated the Water Fund and
Sewer Fund, and the Council shall administer said funds in the manner provided
by the Iowa Code and all laws pertaining thereto.
   (B)   System of accounts. The city shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper records, books, and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the utility
systems, and when required the Council shall cause an audit to show the
receipts and disbursements of the utility systems. The city shall be required
annually to prepare a budget of the utility systems to show the required
revenues and expenses. The city shall review the monthly user charge as it
deems required and, if necessary, the user charge rates will be adjusted to
produce adequate income to retire the indebtedness, meet operation,
maintenance, and replacement needs, and establish required reserves.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-3)
§ 50.16 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Billing invoices for the rates and charges, as established in
this chapter, shall be sent by the sixth day of the month following service.
All billing invoices shall be payable on or before the last day of the month at
the office of the City Clerk.
      (2)   Any charge for the service of the system that is not paid in full
by the first day of the month following the date it became due and payable
shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the amount due and owing.
   (B)   If any billing invoices remain unpaid ten days following the due date,
service for the lot, parcel of land, or premises affected will be discontinued
in the manner described in §
50.17 and shall not be restored except upon satisfactory payment of the
delinquent charges (per Iowa Code § 384.84(1)).
   (C)   All costs incurred by the city in collecting unpaid utility bills,
including, but not limited to, costs of disconnection, attorney fees, and court
costs shall be paid by said owner or user who is delinquent in payment.
   (D)   All remedies of the city shall be cumulative and none shall exclude
any other right or remedy allowed by law or equity, and said rights and
remedies may be exercised and enforced concurrently, and whenever and as often
as occasion therefor arises.
   (E)   Any question or dispute which arises concerning the number of
connection charges assessed to a person and/or entity whose premises is
directly or indirectly served shall be determined by a majority vote of the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-4) (Ord. 89-04, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-23-2017)
§ 50.17 DISCONTINUING SERVICES; FEES, REACTIVATION.
   If any account is not paid by the first day of the month following the date
it became due and payable, the service to such owner or person so supplied with
the utility shall be discontinued after the following procedures have been
complied with.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall send a disconnect or discontinuance notice by
regular mail to the address on file with the Clerk providing the following
notice to customers: “You are advised that you may request a hearing on this
matter to the City Clerk by noon on the day preceding the scheduled shut-off
date or discontinuance of service.”
   (B)   (1)   There shall be a $25 fee charged for posting a 24-hour service
notice on a customer’s door for non-payment of utilities after a disconnect
notice has been mailed to the customers.
      (2)   A trip fee of $25 will be added to the account for attempted shut
offs.
   (C)   When a hearing is requested by a customer, the Mayor or the Mayor’s
designee shall conduct a hearing within two business days following the
request. The customer shall have the right to present evidence or propose a
payment plan. The decision of the Mayor or Mayor’s designee is final.
   (D)   A lien shall not be certified to the County Treasurer for collection
unless 30 days’ prior written notice by ordinary mail of the intent to certify
a lien is given to the account holder of the delinquent account. If the account
holder is a tenant, and if the owner or property lessor of the property has
made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner
(per Iowa Code § 384.84(3)).
   (E)   If water service is discontinued for non-payment of fees and charges,
or for the violation of any ordinance, the property owner shall pay a fee of
$75 to the Clerk in addition to the rates or charges then due before such
service is restored. No service shall be restored after regular business hours.
   (D)   If the property in which there are delinquent utilities owing is sold
before the city certifies the lien to the County Treasurer, the city may
certify the delinquent utilities against another property located in this state
owned by the delinquent user (per Iowa Code § 384.84(3)(a)(3)).
(Prior Code, § 6-5-5) (Ord. 02-05, passed 6-11-2002; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-23-
2017; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 50.18 LIEN EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Water service exemption. The lien for non-payment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the city by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the city that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
city may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the city. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the city shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. In the event the final invoice is not paid in full, the deposit shall be
applied to any remaining balance before returning any unused portion of the
deposit to the tenant. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges
for repairs related to any of the services.
   (B)   Other service exemption. The lien for non-payment shall not apply to
the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the city by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the city that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The city may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the city. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the city shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. In the event the final invoice is not paid in
full, the deposit shall be applied to any remaining balance before returning
any unused portion of the deposit to the tenant. The lien exemption does not
apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   (C)   Written notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name
of the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property leased by the tenant, the occupancy date, and
payment in full of the deposit as determined by the City Clerk’s office under
divisions (A) and (B) above. Upon receipt, the city shall acknowledge the
notice and deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the city within 30 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the city within ten business days
of the change in tenant. A change in ownership of residential rental property
shall require written notice of such change to be given to the city within 30
business days of the property transfer. A change in the ownership of commercial
rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the
city within ten business days of the transfer date. Until the receipt of notice
provided above the city will continue to invoice according to previously
submitted information.
   (D)   Mobile homes, modular homes, and manufactured homes. A lien for non-
payment of utility services described in divisions (A) and (B) above shall not
be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured
home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is owned by a
tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and
the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the
account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is
responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the
account holder.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-6) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2021-05, passed 8-10-
2021)
RATES
§ 50.30 WATER RATES.
   (A)   For the fiscal year of 2026:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $23.82 per month and
a use rate of $0.003315 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $23.82 per month and a
use rate of $0.006379 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $86.93 per month and a use rate of $0.006379 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $23.82 per month and a
use rate of $0.006379 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $86.93 per month and a use rate of $0.006379 per gallon;
      (6)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay. The water rate for customers outside the
corporate boundaries shall pay a flat fee of $35.75 and a use rate of
$0.004972; and
      (7)   Customers who pay for water services in bulk shall pay a flat fee
of $50 and a use rate of $0.009568.
   (B)   For the fiscal year of 2027:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $26.68 per month and
a use rate of $0.003712 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $26.68 per month and a
use rate of $0.007144 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $97.36 per month and a use rate of $0.007144 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $26.68 per month and a
use rate of $0.007144 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $97.36 per month and a use rate of $0.007144 per gallon;
      (6)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay. The water rate for customers outside the
corporate boundaries shall pay a flat fee of $40.02 and a use rate of
$0.005568; and
      (7)   Customers who pay for water services in bulk shall pay a flat fee
of $50 and a use rate of $0.010716.
   (C)   For the fiscal year of 2028:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $30.69 per month and
a use rate of $0.004269 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $30.69 per month and a
use rate of $0.008216 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $111.97 per month and a use rate of $0.008216 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $30.69 per month and a
use rate of $0.008216 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $111.97 per month and a use rate of $0.008216 per gallon;
      (6)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay. The water rate for customers outside the
corporate boundaries shall pay a flat fee of $46.04 and a use rate of
$0.006403; and
      (7)   Customers who pay for water services in bulk shall pay a flat fee
of $50 and a use rate of $0.012323.
   (D)   For the fiscal year of 2029:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.30 per month and
a use rate of $0.004354 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.30 per month and a
use rate of $0.008380 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $114.21 per month and a use rate of $0.008380 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.30 per month and a
use rate of $0.008380 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $114.21 per month and a use rate of $0.008380 per gallon;
      (6)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay. The water rate for customers outside the
corporate boundaries shall pay a flat fee of $46.95 and a use rate of
$0.006531; and
      (7)   Customers who pay for water services in bulk shall pay a flat fee
of $50 and a use rate of $0.012570.
   (E)   For the fiscal year of 2030:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.93 per month and
a use rate of $0.004441 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.93 per month and a
use rate of $0.008548 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $116.49 per month and a use rate of $0.008548 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $31.93 per month and a
use rate of $0.008548 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $116.49 per month and a use rate of $0.008548 per gallon;
      (6)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay. The water rate for customers outside the
corporate boundaries shall pay a flat fee of $47.90 and a use rate of
$0.006662; and
      (7)   Customers who pay for water services in bulk shall pay a flat fee
of $50 and a use rate of $0.012821.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-8) (Ord. 2015-02, passed 5-26-2015; Ord. 2016-04, passed 5-
24-2016; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-23-2017; Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-22-2018; Ord.
2019-05, passed 6-25-2019; Ord. 2023-03; passed 4-11-2023 ; Ord. 2025-15,
passed 10-28-2025 )
§ 50.31 FEES AND CHARGES FOR SOLID WASTE; MANAGEMENT, REFUSE COLLECTION RATES.
   (A)   (1)   For the fiscal year 2026, starting July 1, 2025, the base fee
for the collection of mixed household waste and recycling shall be $16.48 per
month per household. The rate for residents outside the corporate boundary of
the City of Peosta shall be $24.72. The rate will increase 3% each fiscal year.
      (2)   For the fiscal year of 2027 the base fee for the collection of
mixed household waste and recycling shall be $16.97 per month per household.
The rate for residents outside the corporate boundary of the City of Peosta
shall be $25.45.
      (3)   For the fiscal year of 2028 the base fee for the collection of
mixed household waste and recycling shall be $17.47 per month per household.
The rate for residents outside the corporate boundary of the City of Peosta
shall be $26.20.
      (4)   Said regular fee shall entitle a household to set out unlimited
recycling material in containers approved by the city or provided by the City
Contractor and one solid waste container up to 65 gallons provided by the City
Contractor.
      (5)   Additional garbage bags not exceeding 30 gallons in size or solid
waste containers not exceeding 33 gallons in size will be collected, provided a
garbage tag is attached to each additional bag or container. The fee for each
garbage tag shall be $1.25.
   (B)   The fee for collection of recyclable waste shall be $1.50 per month
per household. Each household may set out for collection an unlimited amount of
acceptable recyclable waste at no additional charge.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-9) (Ord. 2007-03, passed 5-8-2007; Ord. 2012-04, passed 6-
26-2012; Ord. 2015-03, passed 7-28-2015; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-23-2017; Ord.
2018-01, passed 5-22-2018; Ord. 2023-03; passed 4-11-2023; Ord. 2024-06, passed
5-14-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 50.32 RATE OF SEWER RENT; MANNER OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   For the fiscal year of 2026:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $34.38 per month and
a use rate of $0.005883 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $34.38 per month and a
use rate of $0.011971 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $230.88 per month and a use rate of $0.011971 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $34.38 per month and a
use rate of $0.011971 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $230.88 per month and a use rate of $0.011971 per gallon;
      (6)   The sewer rate for customers outside the corporate boundaries shall
begin at a flat fee of $51.57 and a use rate of $0.008824; and
      (7)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay.
   (B)   For the fiscal year of 2027:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $36.09 per month and
a use rate of $0.006177 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $36.09 per month and a
use rate of $0.012570 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $242.42 per month and a use rate of $0.012570 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $36.09 per month and a
use rate of $0.012570 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $242.42 per month and a use rate of $0.012570 per gallon;
      (6)   The sewer rate for customers outside the corporate boundaries shall
begin at a flat fee of $54.15 and a use rate of $0.009265; and
      (7)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay.
   (C)   For the fiscal year of 2028:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $37.90 per month and
a use rate of $0.006486 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $37.90 per month and a
use rate of $0.013198 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $254.54 per month and a use rate of $0.013198 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $37.90 per month and a
use rate of $0.013198 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $254.54 per month and a use rate of $0.013198 per gallon;
      (6)   The sewer rate for customers outside the corporate boundaries shall
begin at a flat fee of $56.85 and a use rate of $0.009729; and
      (7)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay.
   (D)   For the fiscal year of 2029:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $38.66 per month and
a use rate of $0.006616 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $38.66 per month and a
use rate of $0.013462 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $259.63 per month and a use rate of $0.013462 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $38.66 per month and a
use rate of $0.013462 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $259.63 per month and a use rate of $0.013462 per gallon;
      (6)   The sewer rate for customers outside the corporate boundaries shall
begin at a flat fee of $57.99 and a use rate of $0.009923; and
      (7)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries pay 150% of the current
rates that city residents pay.
   (E)   For the fiscal year of 2030:
      (1)   Residential customers shall pay a flat fee of $39.43 per month and
a use rate of $0.006748 per gallon;
      (2)   Industrial customers shall pay a flat fee of $39.43 per month and a
use rate of $0.013732 per gallon;
      (3)   Industrial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $264.83 per month and a use rate of $0.013732 per gallon;
      (4)   Commercial customers shall pay a flat fee of $39.43 per month and a
use rate of $0.013732 per gallon;
      (5)   Commercial customers using 20,001 gallons or more per month shall
pay a flat rate of $264.83 per month and a use rate of $0.013732 per gallon;
      (6)   The sewer rate for customers outside the corporate boundaries shall
begin at a flat fee of $59.15 and a use rate of $0.010122; and
      (7)   Customers outside the corporate boundaries shall pay 150% of the
current rates that city residents pay.
(Prior Code, § 6-5-10) (Ord. 2016-04, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-
23-2017; Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-22-2018; Ord. 2019-05, passed 6-25-2019; Ord.
2019-07, passed 9-24-2019; Ord. 2020-03, passed 8-11-2020; Ord. 2023-18, passed
10-10-2023 ; Ord. 2025-15, passed 10-28-2025 )
Statutory reference
   Concerning establishing districts and connection fees, see Iowa Code §
384.38(3)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Enforcement
   
51.02   State Plumbing Code
   
51.03   License required
   
51.04   Mandatory connection
   
51.05   Permit
   
51.06   Water supply control
   
51.07   Bulk water sales
   
51.08   Making the connection
   
51.09   Excavations
   
51.10   Inspection, approval
   
51.11   Completion by city
   
51.12   Shutting off water supply
   
51.13   Service line ownership, maintenance
   
51.14   Meter requirements
   
51.15   Meter accuracy and test
Contamination of Wells
   
51.30   Definitions
   
51.31   Location
   
51.32   Proscriptions
   
51.33   Use of structures
Cross-reference
   Lien exemption, water service, see §
50.18(A)
   Water rates, see §
50.30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Utilities (hereinafter, “the
Superintendent”) shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and
their connections to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to
water services in this city in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall
apply to all replacements of existing service pipes as well as to new ones.
   (B)   The City Council shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as needed for the detailed operation of the
waterworks. In the event of an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary
rules for the protection of the system until due consideration by the City
Council may be had.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-1)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
§ 51.02 STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water-service pipe and any connection with the
municipal water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable
provisions, whether regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the
State Plumbing Code, as amended and as published by the State Department of
Public Health, which is hereby adopted. An official copy of the State Plumbing
Code as adopted and a certified copy of this chapter are on file in the office
of the City Clerk for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-2)
Cross-reference
   Plumbing code adoption, regulations, see §§
150.085 through 150.095
§ 51.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All installation of water service pipes and connections to the
municipal water system shall be made by a plumber licensed by the city. The
Superintendent shall have the power to suspend the license of any plumber for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A suspension, unless revoked, shall continue until the next regular
meeting of the City Council. The Superintendent shall notify the plumber
immediately by personal written notice of the suspension, the reasons for the
suspension, and the time and place of the City Council meeting at which the
plumber will be granted a hearing. At this City Council meeting the
Superintendent shall make a written report to the City Council stating the
Superintendent’s reasons for the suspension, and the City Council, after fair
hearing, shall revoke the suspension or take any further action that is
necessary and proper.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-3)
§ 51.04 MANDATORY CONNECTION.
   All residences and business establishments within the city limits intended
or used for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be connected to the
public water supply if it is reasonably available, and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-4)
§ 51.05 PERMIT.
   Before any person, firm, corporation, or other association shall make a
connection with the public water system, a written permit must be obtained from
the Superintendent. The application for the permit shall be filed with the
Superintendent on blanks furnished by the Superintendent. The application shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. No different or additional uses shall be allowed except by
written permission of the Superintendent. The Superintendent shall issue the
permit, bearing the Superintendent’s signature and stating the time of
issuance, if the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and
if all fees required under this chapter have been paid. Work under any permit
must be begun within six months after it is issued. The Superintendent may, at
any time, revoke the permit for any violation of this chapter and require that
the work be stopped. The owner or plumber may appeal such action in the manner
provided in §
51.03.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-5)
Statutory reference
   Permits, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
§ 51.06 WATER SUPPLY CONTROL.
   (A)   The plumber who makes the connection to the municipal water system
shall install a main shut-off valve of the inverted key type on the water-
service pipe near the curb with a suitable lock of a pattern approved by the
Superintendent. The shut-off valve shall be covered with a heavy metal cover
having the letter “W” marked thereon, visible and even with the pavement or
ground.
   (B)   The plumber also shall install a shut-off valve and waste cock on
every service pipe inside the building near the entrance of the water-service
pipe into the building; this must be located so that the water can be shut off
conveniently and the pipes drained. Where one service pipe is installed to
supply more than one customer, there shall be separate shut-off valves inside
the building for each customer so that service to one customer can be shut off
without interfering with service to the others.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-6)
§ 51.07 BULK WATER SALES.
   Any bulk-water sales will require a 48-hour minimum notice to be scheduled
when an authorized city official is available to open the fire hydrant. There
must be an air-gap separation maintained at all times from the potable water
supply tank being filled. Bulk water rates will be established as a policy and
are subject to be changed as deemed necessary by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-7) (Ord. 02-03, passed 2-12-2002)
§ 51.08 MAKING THE CONNECTION.
   Any connection with the municipal water system must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s authorized
assistant. All taps in the water main must be at least 12 inches apart and on
the side and near the top, and not in any case within 18 inches of the hub.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-8)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
§ 51.09 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Excavations to do work under this chapter shall be dug so as to
occasion the least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the
passage of water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper
barricades at all times, and warning lights placed from one-half hour before
sunset to one-half hour after sunrise. In refilling the excavation the earth
must be laid in layers and each layer tamped thoroughly to prevent settlement,
and this work, and any street, sidewalk, pavement, or other public property
that is affected, must be restored to as good a condition as it was previous to
the excavation.
   (B)   The plumber must maintain the affected area in good repair to the
satisfaction of the City Council for three months after refilling. All water
service pipes must be laid so as to prevent rupture by settlement or freezing.
No excavation shall be made within six feet of any laid water or sewer pipe
while the ground is frozen, and no water or sewer pipe shall be exposed to
frost, except by special written permission of the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-9)
§ 51.10 INSPECTION, APPROVAL.
   All water-service pipes and their connections to the municipal water system
must be inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed
immediately to correct the work so that it will meet with the Superintendent’s
approval. Every person who uses or intends to use the municipal water system
shall permit the Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s authorized assistants,
to enter the premises to inspect and make necessary alterations or repairs at
all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-10)
Statutory reference
   Superintendent to inspect pipes, see Iowa Code § 372.13(4)
§ 51.11 COMPLETION BY CITY.
   (A)   Should any excavation be left open or partly refilled for 24 hours
after the water-service pipe is installed and connected with the municipal
water system, or should the work be improperly done, the Superintendent shall
have the right to finish or correct the work with the costs thereof to be, and
the city shall assessed against the property owner and the plumber.
   (B)   If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before the
plumber can receive another permit, and the plumber’s bond required by the
plumbing ordinance shall be security for the assessment. If the property owner
is assessed, such assessment shall be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-11)
Statutory reference
   Work to be completed by the city, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 51.12 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   After giving reasonable notice as described in 6-5-5-(1), the Superintendent
may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of any substantial
violation of this chapter. The supply shall not be turned on again until all
violations have been corrected and the Superintendent has ordered the water to
be turned on.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-12)
§ 51.13 SERVICE LINE OWNERSHIP, MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   (1)   The city shall install and maintain water mains and required
support and supply equipment. The property owner shall install and maintain
service lines from the corporation, including the saddle if one exists, to the
meter including excavation and replacement of the lateral service line. If
applicable, the city will be responsible for, or at the option of the city pay
for or reimburse the property owner for, the removal and replacement of
asphalt, concrete, oil, and base rock.
      (2)   The property owner shall be responsible for removal and disposal of
all other excavation materials, and shall be responsible for replacement and
proper compaction of imported crushed stone backfill. The city must approve and
authorize costs, contractor, and specifications of removal and replacement of
said street before the work is started. All work shall be done in accordance
with required regulations and specifications in place at that time.
   (B)   If any part of the service line is not properly maintained by the
property owner, the city has the authority to make all necessary repairs to the
service line and recover from the property owner any and all costs incurred.
Payment by the property owner must be made in full before water service will be
restored.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-13) (Ord. 02-03, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 02-05, passed 6-11-
2002)
§ 51.14 METER REQUIREMENTS.
   Residents may, at their expense, install a second meter for outdoor use
provided that water from this meter does not flow into the sanitary sewer
system. All installations of this type must be inspected by the city before the
service begins. Subject to annual inspection by city at any other time to
confirm outdoor use only upon any reasonable inspection. Violators ordered to
remove and be prohibited from and to the second meter penalties. Meters for
residential use (including outdoor water use) must be five-eighths inches in
size and purchased from the city. Installation of the meter shall be the
responsibility of the homeowner. All meter installations shall be inspected by
the Water Superintendent before water service begins. Touchpad readers for the
subtract meter shall be located on the same side of the structure as the
touchpad for the whole house meter. All commercial and industrial
establishments requiring a meter larger than five-eighths inches shall purchase
a meter that will accurately measure the amount of water used and install an
outside remote reader. All meters must have the approval of the Water
Superintendent before installation. All meter installations shall be inspected
by the Water Superintendent before water service begins. All meters shall be
located on the exterior of the property or in a separate room that is
accessible to city staff. Additionally, all rental units shall have the water
shut off located on the exterior of the building or separate room, not located
within the residential unit and where city staff can gain access. If located in
a separate room, access codes or keys shall be provided by the owner/landlord
of the property so that city staff can gain access as needed.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-14) (Ord. 03-03, passed 7-8-2003; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 51.15 METER ACCURACY AND TEST.
   All water shall be supplied through meters that accurately measure the
amount of water supplied to any building. The Superintendent, or the
Superintendent’s assistant, shall make a test of the accuracy of any water
meter at any time when requested in writing. If it is found that such member
overruns to the extent of 5% or more, the cost of the tests shall be paid by
the city and a refund shall be made to the customer for overcharges collected
since the last known date of accuracy, but not for longer than six months. If
the meter is found to be accurate or slow less than 5% fast, the patron shall
pay the reasonable costs of the tests. Any meter found inaccurate beyond a
tolerance of 5% shall not be returned to service until properly adjusted.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-15) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Concerning establishing districts and connection fees (H.F. 2343, 1994
legislative session), see Iowa Code § 384.38(3)
CONTAMINATION OF WELLS
§ 51.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALL WELLS. Any public water well located in the city.
   DEEP WELL. A well located and constructed in such a manner that there is a
continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock at least five feet thick
located at least 25 feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer
from which water is to be drawn.
   PUBLIC WATER WELL. Any well owned and/or constructed by the city.
   SHALLOW WELL. A well located and constructed in such a manner that there is
not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock (or equivalent
retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least five feet thick, the
top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal ground surface and
above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-16) (Ord. 02-06, passed 8-29-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
§ 51.31 LOCATION.
   (A)   R egulation. No structure or facility of the types enumerated in
division (B) below (“Schedule A”) shall be located within the distances set
forth therein from a public water well within the city.
   (B)   Schedule.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-17) (Ord. 02-06, passed 8-29-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
Statutory reference
   Concerning establishing districts and connection fees (H.F. 2343, 1994
legislative session), see Iowa Code § 384.38(3)
§ 51.32 PROSCRIPTIONS.
   Proscriptions set forth in this subchapter herein shall apply to all public
water wells existing within the city, except public water wells formerly
abandoned for use by resolution of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-18) (Ord. 02-06, passed 8-29-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
§ 51.33 USE OF STRUCTURES.
   The use of structures or facilities identified by §
51.31 existing at the time of enactment of this subchapter may be continued
even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this subchapter.
However, such structure or facility may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or substituted subsequent to adoption of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-3-19) (Ord. 02-06, passed 8-29-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
CHAPTER 52: SEWAGE
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Prohibited acts and use of public sewers
   
52.04   Private sewage disposal
   
52.05   Building sewers and connections
   
52.06   Use of the public sewers
   
52.07   Protection from damage
   
52.08   Powers and authority to inspectors
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference
   Lien exemption, sewage treatment, see §
50.18(B)
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to govern the use of the wastewater treatment
system within the city in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and to ensure that the sewage system will deliver the service for which
it was planned.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20C, expressed in milligrams per liter, or parts per million.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   CONTRIBUTOR. Any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into
the utility sewer system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sales of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. The West Dubuque Industrial Park.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSPECTOR. The person duly authorized by the city to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connections to the utility sewer
system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, or other body of
surface or groundwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from the preparation, cooking, or
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories,
or institutions, and free from storm or surface water and industrial waste.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface,
and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SLUDGE. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STORM DRAIN (OR STORM SEWER). A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Sewage Works and/or of Water Pollution
Control of the city, or the SUPERINTENDENT’S authorized deputy, agent, or
representative, or a person authorized by the City Council.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   THE UTILITY. The owner of the industrial park sanitary sewer system
originally owned and installed by the Dubuque Area Industrial Development
Corporation.
   UTILITY SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by the utility.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-2) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
Statutory reference
   Definition of “building drain,” and “building sewer,” see I.A.C. § 567-69.3
(1)
§ 52.03 PROHIBITED ACTS AND USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect a roof downspout,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected
directly or indirectly to a utility sewer.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to open or enter any manhole of
the sewer system, except by authority of the utility.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (G)   (1)   The owner of any house, building, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the city, is hereby required at such owner’s expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that
said public sewer is within 150 feet of the property line.
      (2)   Billing for sanitary sewer service shall begin 60 days following
official notice to connect to the public sewer.
   (H)   Whenever any such connection is ordered and the person owning the real
estate shall fail to make the connection within the time fixed by the Council,
the Council shall cause such connection to be made, and shall assess against
the property for which such connection is made the cost and expense thereof.
      (1)   Whenever the Council shall cause such connection to be made, the
person having charge of the making of the same shall make a return of the
actual cost and expense thereof to the Council at its first regular meeting
thereafter, giving a detailed statement and the description of the property,
and the names of the owners of the same, and the amount of cost and expense for
making said connection.
      (2)   Upon the making of the return as prescribed in division (H)(1)
above, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to give notice to all whom it may
concern, by publication as provided by state law, that the cost and expense
will be assessed against the property for which such connection has been made
by the city, and will be acted upon at the first regular meeting of the Council
thereafter, and that any objections thereto will be heard at the Council
meeting.
      (3)   (a)   After hearing objections, if there be any made, and making
such alteration in the assessment as the Council may deem just, the Council
shall make the assessment; thereupon the City Clerk shall give a certified copy
of the assessment to the County Treasurer; and it shall be the duty of the
person owning the property so assessed to pay the assessment within 30 days
after the levy of the assessment.
         (b)   At the expiration of 30 days, the County Treasurer shall report
those having failed to pay, whereupon the City Clerk shall certify said
assessment, if there are any delinquent assessments thereon, to the County
Auditor to be collected and paid over to the County Treasurer in the same
manner as other taxes.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-3) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989) Penalty, see §
52.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f)
   Similar provisions, see I.A.C. § 567-69.3(3)
§ 52.04 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provision of §
52.03(G), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain authorization from the City Council, or
its duly appointed representative. The owner shall then satisfy any and all
requirements of the County Board of Health. The application shall furnish such
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
County Board of Health. The construction, maintenance and usage of said private
sewage disposal system shall be subject to any and all requirements as imposed
by the County Board of Health.
   (C)   (1)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city.
      (2)   The Superintendent, or designated inspector, shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the Superintendent, or inspector, when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the
Superintendent.
   (D)   (1)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the State Department of
Natural Resources of the state and the County Health Department.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in division (D) above, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material in accordance
with state law and regulations.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by County Sanitation.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with legally permissible fill.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-4) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f)
§ 52.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In
either case, the owner, or the owner’s agent, shall make application on a
special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
      (2)   (a)   Before a permit may be issued for excavating for plumbing in
any public street, way, or alley, the person applying for such permit shall
have executed unto the city and deposited with the City Clerk a corporate
surety in the sum of $5,000, or cash equivalent, conditioned that the applicant
will perform faithfully all work with due care and skill, and in accordance
with the laws, rules, and regulations established under the authority of any
ordinances of the city pertaining to plumbing.
         (b)   This bond shall state that the person will indemnify and save
harmless the city and the owner of the premises against all damages, costs,
expenses, outlay, and claims of every nature and kind arising out of
unskillfulness or negligence on the applicant’s part in connection with
plumbing or excavating for plumbing as prescribed in this chapter. Such bond or
cash equivalent shall remain in force and must be executed and/or retained for
a period of two years except that on such expiration it shall remain in force
as to all penalties, claims, and demands that may have accrued thereunder prior
to such expiration.
   (C)   All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new building sewers
only when they are found, upon examination and testing by the Superintendent,
to meet all requirements of this chapter. The Superintendent may require that
the old sewer be excavated for the purpose of facilitating inspection. No old
cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of a building sewer
that is also connected to the public sewer. Cesspools and septic tanks shall be
located and drained in a manner approved by the Superintendent and removed or
filled with legally permissible material approved by the Superintendent.
   (F)   The building sewer shall be constructed in accordance with applicable
portions of the last published State Plumbing Code, and applicable
specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).
      (1)   Each connection to the public sewer shall be made to the fittings
designated for that property. If a fitting in the public sewer is not available
for the designated property, the connection shall then be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent. Connections to the public sewer not made to
an existing wye or tee shall be made by installing a wye branch fitting or a
saddle approved by the city and using a hole cutter. Chisel cutting is not
allowed. The connection shall be rendered water and gastight, by use of rubber
gaskets. The building sewer shall not protrude into the public sewer.
      (2)   All building sewers shall be constructed of the following materials
conforming to the indicated standards:
         (a)   Cast iron soil pipe.
            1.   For pipe and fittings: ASTM A-74 “Standard Specification for
Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings”or ASTM A888 “Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and
Fittings.”
            2.   For joints: ASTM C-564 “Standard Specification for Rubber
Gaskets for Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings.”
            3.   For couplings: CISPI310 “Coupling for Hubless CISP and
Fittings,” and polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC).
         (b)   Polyvinyl chloride. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and joints shall be
installed according to the manufacturers’ recommendations and shall conform to:
            1.   For pipe: ASTM D-3034, For “PVC Sewer Pipe.”
 
  Minimum wall thickness (SDR 26 or 23.5)
4�0.162”
6�0.241”
8�0.323”
 
            2.   For fittings: ASTM F1336 for “PVC Gasketed Sewer Fittings,”
SDR 26 or 23.5.
            3.   For joints: ASTM D-3212, “Flexible Elastomeric Seals.”
      (3)   No building sewer for residential or commercial buildings shall be
less than four inches in diameter. No building sewer for industries or multiple
dwellings shall be less than six inches in diameter.
      (4)   Unless otherwise authorized, all building sewers shall have a grade
of not less than one-eighth inch per foot. A grade of one-fourth inch per foot
shall be used wherever practical.
      (5)   All excavation shall be open trench work unless authorized by the
Superintendent. The foundation in the trench shall be formed to prevent any
subsequent settlement of the pipes. Appropriate pipe bedding shall be placed.
Bell holes shall be dug. Where the floor of the trench is of hard or rocky
material, the trench shall be excavated to four inches below the pipe and
brought back to the proper grade with crushed stone or similar material so as
to provide a firm foundation and uniform support for the building sewer line.
Backfilling shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed up to two
feet above the pipe. Back-filling shall not be done until final inspection is
made by the Superintendent. Building sewers shall be laid straight at uniform
grade between connections or fittings.
      (6)   Cleanouts shall be provided for each change in direction or grade
if the change exceeds 45 degrees and at least every 100 feet.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the installation of
a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
said Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance
with ASTM. Specification (Designation D2321). No backfill shall be placed until
the work has been inspected by the Superintendent, or the Superintendent’s
representative. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   (J)   Each and every part of the building sewer shall be inspected and
approved by the Superintendent before being concealed or back-filled. The
applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent, or
the Superintendent’s representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   (L)   The city shall, in no event, be held responsible for claims made
against it by reason of the breaking of any mains or service pipes, or by
reason of any other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of
machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to
damages nor have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption.
   (M)   The premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall, at all reasonable
hours, be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the city.
   (N)   (1)   The owner of the property served by a building sewer shall be
responsible for the operation, maintenance, repair, blockage, surface
replacement, and any damage resulting from operation, maintenance, repair, and
blockage of said building sewer from the point of connection with the building
drain to the public sewer. If the operation, maintenance, repair, and/or
blockage requires street removal, the city will be responsible for the removal
and replacement of asphalt, concrete, oil, and base rock.
      (2)   The property owner shall be responsible for removal and disposal of
all excavation materials, and shall be responsible for placement and proper
compaction of imported crushed stone backfill. The city must approve and
authorize costs, contractor, and specifications of removal and replacement of
said street before the work is started. All work shall be done in accordance
with required regulations and specification in place at that time.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-5) (Ord. 02-02, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
§ 52.06 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including
interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Applications may be
cancelled and/or sewer service discontinued by the city for any violation of
any rule, regulation, or condition of service, and especially for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Misrepresented in the application as to the property or fixtures to
be serviced by the sanitary sewer system;
      (2)   Non-payment of bills;
      (3)   Improper or imperfect service pipes and fixtures, or failure to
keep same in suitable state of repair; and
      (4)   All restaurants, gas stations, and schools are required to have a
grease trap and inspection records.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet. Combined sewers shall not be permitted in the city.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers.
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited
to, cyanides in excess of 2 mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to,
cyanides in excess of 2 mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the utility
sewer.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes having a ph lower than 5.5, or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      (5)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow of sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      (6)   (a)   Any water or wastes having (subject to the review of the
Superintendent):
            1.   A five-day bio-chemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts
per million by weight;
            2.   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight, or
suspended solids; or
            3.   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
sewage flow of the city.
         (b)   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
            1.   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
by weight;
            2.   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight; or
            3.   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes.
         (c)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information
relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for
the approval of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities
shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears
likely, in the opinion of the Superintendent, that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance.
      (2)   In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
         (a)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150F (or
65C);
         (b)   Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32F and 150F (or 0C and
65C);
         (c)   Water or wastes containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32F and 150F (or 0C and 65C);
         (d)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent;
         (e)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
         (f)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
lead, cadmium, nickle, molybdenum, silver and similar objectionable or toxic
substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials;
         (g)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-or-odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits, which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet with requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies with jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
         (h)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (i)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
         (j)   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of waters constituting
slugs, as defined herein.
      (11)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in division (D) above, and which, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provision
of division (J) below.
      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
   (H)   (1)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.
      (2)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times and agree to the terms of DNR approved pre-treatment agreement and
related testing.
   (I)   (1)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
      (2)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate, or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD
and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composite of all
outfalls where pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.)
   (J)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989)
§ 52.07 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-7) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 716.1 
§ 52.08 POWERS AND AUTHORITY TO INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Superintendent, or duly authorized employees of the
city, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by the city employees and against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
52.06(H).
   (C)   The Superintendent, and other duly authorized employees of the city,
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-8) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
52.07, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A) above shall be subject to penalties as described
in §
10.99. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is liable
to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violations.
(Prior Code, § 6-2-9) (Ord. 89-05, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Administration
   
53.03   Solid waste collection
   
53.04   Separation of solid waste required
   
53.05   Mixed household waste collection
   
53.06   Recyclable waste collection
   
53.07   Collection locations
   
53.08   Disposal of hazardous waste
   
53.09   Disposal of residential yard and garden waste
   
53.10   Enforcement
   
53.11   Withholding of services
   
53.12   Nuisance
   
53.13   Prohibited acts
   
53.14   Necessity of permit
   
53.15   Anti-scavenging
 
   
53.99   Penalty
Cross-reference
   Fees, charges for solid waste; management, refuse collection rates, see §
50.31
    Lien exemption, waste collection, waste disposal, see §
50.18(B)
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Peosta, Iowa.
   GARBAGE. All solid and semi-solid, putrescible animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by-products, and shall include all such substances
from all residences.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste materials, including, but not limited to, poisons,
pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, biohazardous waste, flammable or
explosive materials, and similar harmful wastes which require special handling
and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment
and protect the public health and safety.
   MIXED HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Solid waste which is not recyclable waste.
   OWNER. In addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in any premises
and as between such parties, the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and
obligations hereafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   PREMISES. A building or part of a building and its grounds.
   RECYCLABLE WASTE. Clean and dry newspapers and inserts, magazines, mixed
home and office paper, corrugated cardboard and brown paper grocery bags,
aluminum and tin cans, plastic containers, jugs and bottles that have a #1 PET
or a #2 HDPE in the recycling symbol, and other items as deemed necessary by
the City Council.
   REFUSE. Putrescible and nonputrescible wastes including, but not limited to,
garbage, rubbish, and ashes.
   RESIDENTIAL YARD AND GARDEN WASTE.
      (1)   Yard waste generated from households to only include the following:
garden plants, grass clippings and leaves, twigs, tree branches, and shrubs.
      (2)   Tree branches shall be no longer than four feet in length, four
inches in diameter and not to weigh more than 50 pounds.
      (3)   Tree stumps do not fall within this definition and shall not be
accepted at the c’s compost site.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
noncombustible wastes.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded solid or
semi-solid materials. SOLID WASTE does not include toxic and hazardous wastes
as defined by the State Department of Natural Resources.
   SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. 
      (1)   Provided with a handle and tight fitting cover;
      (2)   Made of noncorrosive material;
      (3)   Watertight;
      (4)   With a capacity of no more than 65 gallons; and/or
      (5)   Provided by City Contractor or approved by city.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-1) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2023-17, passed 9-12-
2023; Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-14-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 53.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   Administration of this chapter shall be by the City Clerk or such employee
designated by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-2)
§ 53.03 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Residential premises. The city will provide solid waste collection
through a city contractor for all single-family residences and any multi-family
premises, at the request of the building owner, within the city that are in
compliance with the provisions and the regulations of this chapter. Such
collection shall be provided on a regular basis at least once a week, weather
and calamities allowing. Solid waste, which is collected by the city as a part
of its regular residential collection, shall include recyclable waste and mixed
household waste. The city will not collect any of the following solid waste:
      (1)   Hazardous waste;
      (2)   Building demolition materials;
      (3)   Commercial solid waste;
      (4)   Yard waste; and
      (5)   Any substance or material determined to be unacceptable for
collection.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial premises. The owners of commercial and
industrial premises are responsible for the collection and transportation of
all solid waste resulting from any operation on such premises.
   (C)   Construction premises. The owner or contractor of any premises upon
which construction or demolition takes place shall be responsible for the
collection and transportation of all of the building demolition materials on
said premises.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-3) (Ord. 2010-05, passed 10-12-2010)
§ 53.04 SEPARATION OF SOLID WASTE REQUIRED.
   All residential solid waste to be collected by the City Contractor shall be
separated by the owner, operator, or occupant into recyclable waste and mixed
household waste. The Council shall designate by ordinance or resolution what
solid wastes shall be included in the above classifications. All residents of
the city shall be deemed to be on notice of the designations of the Council and
the provisions of this chapter regarding solid waste collection and disposal.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-4)
§ 53.05 MIXED HOUSEHOLD WASTE COLLECTION.
   All mixed household waste to be collected by the City Contractor shall be
stored for collection in a solid waste container approved by the city or
provided by the City Contractor. Only mixed household waste, as defined by this
chapter and the regulations of the Council, shall be stored in those containers
and picked up for collection by the City Contractor.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-5) (Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-14-2024; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-
28-2025)
§ 53.06 RECYCLABLE WASTE COLLECTION.
   All recyclable waste to be collected by the City Contractor shall be stored
in recycling containers approved by the city or provided by the City
Contractor. The owner and resident of the premises are responsible for the
upkeep and maintenance of the recycling container and if a container is
damaged, the owner and resident will be responsible for the cost of
replacement. All recyclable waste shall be deposited in the recycling container
and placed at curbside for pickup by the City Contractor.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-6)
§ 53.07 COLLECTION LOCATIONS.
    All waste, including both recyclable waste and mixed household waste, shall
be placed for collection at the curb or property line adjacent to the city
street. Placement of the containers at the curb or property line shall occur
prior to 6:00 a.m. on the regularly scheduled collection day. Containers may be
placed at the curb or property line no earlier than 4:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. All solid waste containers
shall be removed from the curb or property line on the same day that the
collection is completed. Solid waste which is not placed at the curb in
compliance with this chapter shall not be collected. For solid waste to be in
compliance with this chapter, it must be segregated, as required in §
53.04, into recyclable waste and mixed household waste. Failure by the City
Contractor to collect solid waste not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall not relieve the resident, owner, operator, or occupant of
liability for violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-7) (Ord. 2025-07, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 53.08 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   Residents of the city and residents of Thunder Ridge who pay for solid waste
disposal, may dispose of residential yard and garden waste at the city compost
site.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-8) (Ord. 2024-06, passed 5-14-2024)
§ 53.09 DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL YARD AND GARDEN WASTE.
    Residents of the city and residents outside the corporate boundaries of the
City of Peosta who pay for solid waste disposal, may dispose of residential
yard and garden waste at the city compost site.
(Ord. 2023-17, passed 9-12-2023; Ord. 2025-02, passed 1-28-2025) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, together
with all applicable state statutes, the regulations of the State Department of
Natural Resources, and the regulations of the County Board of Health, Public
Works Director or his or her designee (which may include the City Contractor),
is hereby authorized to inspect all phases of the solid waste storage and
collection in the city. The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall
further enforce the provisions of this chapter by selection of any appropriate
method allowed by this chapter or the provisions of state law.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-9)
§ 53.11 WITHHOLDING OF SERVICES.
   In the event an inspection reveals that any resident, owner, operator, or
occupant of any residence in the city is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the city may elect, in addition to any other remedies, to withhold
solid waste services from that person. Election to withhold services shall not
prevent the city from taking additional action against the person or premises
which is allowable under this chapter or federal or state law. In the event
services are withheld, the regular monthly fee shall continue to be assessed
assess costs thereof against the property as allowed and provided by
Chapter 90.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-10)
§ 53.12 NUISANCE.
   In the event any person is in violation of this chapter or federal law or
regulations, state law, or the regulations of the State Department of Natural
Resources, county ordinances, or the regulations of the County Board of Health,
such violation shall constitute a nuisance and the city may abate the nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-11)
§ 53.13 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following acts are hereby prohibited and the performance of any such
acts by any person is a violation of this chapter and may be punished as
provided herein.
   (A)   Depositing solid waste in a container other than a solid waste
container or garbage bag.
   (B)   Burning or incinerating any garbage, rubbish, or refuse within the
city, except by permission of the City Council. This section shall not apply to
any incinerator operated under a license granted by the city or any burning
conducted under the direction of the Fire Department for training purposes.
This section shall not apply to outdoor cooking appliances used for residential
or recreational purposes using commonly acceptable fuels.
   (C)   Depositing refuse or garbage or yard waste, or other solid waste not
designated as recyclable, in a recycling container.
   (D)   Littering on the streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and other public
places of the city or upon any real estate, or any commercial establishment or
governmental institutions in the city, or upon any private property in the city
whether residential or commercial.
   (E)   Littering while a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle.
   (F)   Operating a truck of any kind within the city carrying a load of
materials so constructed or loaded so as to permit part of its load whether
litter or other solid waste, including sand or gravel to drop, sift, leak, or
otherwise fall therefrom.
   (G)   Depositing or attempting to deposit for collection any solid waste in
solid waste containers when such solid waste is declared by this chapter not
subject to regular collection by the City Contractor.
   (H)   Interfering in any manner with the collection, storage, or
transportation of solid waste as established by the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Failing in any manner to follow the requirements of this chapter
regarding any mandatory provision regarding solid waste management.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-12)
Cross-reference
   Related traffic provisions, see §
70.016
§ 53.14 NECESSITY OF PERMIT.
   No person or entity shall collect garbage mixed household waste, recyclable
waste, refuse, or solid waste, or rubbish within the city limits unless
permitted to do so by the city or under contract with the city, except such
person’s unless otherwise by contract or permit approved by the City Clerk and
issued by the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-13) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
§ 53.15 ANTI-SCAVENGING.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sort through,
scavenge, or remove any garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish, or recycling material
that has been placed in a designated garbage or recycling container.
Unauthorized collection, removal, or scavenging of material placed in a garbage
or recycling container shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable as
set forth in the municipal code.
(Prior Code, § 6-4-14)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Non-residents of the city found to be depositing any type of waste,
including, but not limited to, residential yard and garden waste, will be
subject to maximum civil penalties of up to $750 per violation and costs of
related to the removal or abatement of the deposited waste.
(Ord. 2023-17, passed 9-12-2023)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   SNOW REMOVAL
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Short title
   
70.002   Definitions
   
70.003   Traffic accident reports
   
70.004   Engine and compression brakes
Enforcement, Obedience to Traffic Regulations
   
70.015   Authority of Police, Fire Department officials
   
70.016   State codes adopted
   
70.017   Parade regulated
Traffic Control Devices
   
70.030   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
70.031   City Council to designate crosswalks; establish, mark traffic lanes
Turning Movements
   
70.045   Turning markers, buttons, and signs
   
70.046   Authority to place restricted turn signs
   
70.047   Obedience to no-turn signs
   
70.048   U-turns
   
70.049   Stop and yield intersections
One-Way Streets and Alleys
   
70.060   Authority to designate one-way streets and alleys
   
70.061   Authority on streets during certain periods
Special Stops Required
   
70.075   Stop intersections
   
70.076   Authority to erect stop signs
   
70.077   Stops at intersecting through highways; other intersections
   
70.078   Stop when traffic is obstructed
   
70.079   Obstructiong view at intersections
Pedestrians’ Right and Duties
   
70.090   Prohibited crossing
   
70.091   Pedestrians on left
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
   
70.105   Clinging to vehicles
Funeral, Other Processions
   
70.120   Driving through funeral or other processions
   
70.121   Drivers in a procession
   
70.122   Funeral processions to be identified
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and cited as the “Traffic Code.”
(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)
§ 70.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DISTRICTS. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
   CITY STREETS. All streets within the city limits, except for those located
in the school district.
   PARK AND PARKING. The stopping or standing of a vehicle, except for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. All areas of the city not included in business
districts.
   SCHOOL DISTRICT. For Peosta Elementary, includes Burds Road between Elm
Ridge and 7896 Burds Road; and Peosta Street NICC between Kapp Drive and
Enterprise Drive; and Burds Road and Springs Road for the Seton School.
   STAND OR STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging
passengers.
   STOP OR STOPPING. Complete cessation of movement. When prohibited, the term
means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily, whether occupied or not,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-2) (Ord. 05-04, passed 7-12-2005)
Statutory reference
   Definition of residential districts, see Iowa Code § 321.1
§ 70.003 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the
limits of the city shall file a report as, and when, required by the State
Department of Public Safety.
      (2)   A copy of this report shall be filed with the police officer.
   (B)   (1)   All such reports shall be for the confidential use of the police
department and shall be subject to the provisions of the Iowa Code § 321.271
      (2)    The city shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.266
§ 70.004 ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate, or
cause to be used or operated, within the city any engine brake, compression
brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or
deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or
explosive noise from such vehicle.
   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute
evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-68) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENFORCEMENT, OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 70.015 AUTHORITY OF POLICE, FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   Provisions of this chapter and the state law relating to motor vehicles and
laws of the road shall be enforced by certified law enforcement officers of the
city, county, or state. The certified law enforcement officers are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with
traffic laws. In the event of a fire or other emergency, the certified law
enforcement officers may direct traffic as conditions require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws. Members of the Centralia/Peosta Fire
Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there at or in
the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.229
§ 70.016 STATE CODES ADOPTED.
   Any person who willingly fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department Officer during a fire, or who
shall fail to abide by the provisions of this chapter and the applicable
provisions of the following state statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and
the statutory law of the road, is in violation of this chapter. These sections
of the Iowa Code are adopted by reference and are as follows.
Iowa Code Section Description
Iowa
Code     Description
Section
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
123.47   Possess/Purchase open container of alcohol by person 18-20 YOA (1st
(3)      offense)
         (juvenile court if < 18 YOA)
123.49   Providing alcohol to person under legal age
(2h)
123.49   Licensee or permittee
(2h)
123.49   Employee
(2h)
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
126.23A  Pseudoephedrine violation by employee
        (First Offense)
        (Second Offense)
        (Third Offense)
126.23A  Purchase of pseudoephedrine
        (First Offense)
        (Second Offense)
        (Third Offense)
321.17   Operating non-registered vehicle
321.20B  Failure to prove security against liability (non-accident related)
321.20B  Failure to prove security against liability (accident related)
321.25   Improper use of registration card
321.32   Fail to carry registration card
321.34   Registration violation
321.37   Fail to display registration plate
321.38   Fail to maintain registration plate
321.41   Fail to give notice of address/name change
321.45   Failure to transfer title
321.46   Violation of new title and registration upon transfer to new owner
321.47   Transfers by operation of law
321.48   Violations of title-vehicles acquired for resale
321.52   Violations of title-out-of-state sale, junked, dismantled, wrecked, or
         salvage vehicles
321.54   Registration required/certain non-resident carriers
321.55   Registration required/other non-resident carriers
321.57   Violation of special plate requirements
321.62   Special plates - records violation
321.67   Failure to deliver certificate of title upon sale of vehicle
(1)
321.67   Failure to acquire certificate of title upon purchase of vehicle
(2)
321.91   Abandonment of a motor vehicle
321.95   Failure to maintain motor vehicle records
321.98   Operation without registration
321.99   Improper use of registration
321.104  Operation with cancelled title or suspended or revoked registration
(1)
321.104  Failure to obtain mfg’s or importer’s certificate
(2)
321.104  Failure to surrender plates, title or registration
(3)
321.104  Failure to deliver title, as required
(4)
321.104  Penal offenses against title law
(5)
321.104  Improper transfer of mobile home or mfg. housing
(6)
321.115  Improper use of antique plates
321.115A Replica vehicle/street rod registration violation (effective 07-01-09)
321.174  Failure to have valid license or permit while operating a motor vehicle
321.174A Operation of motor vehicle with expired license
321.178  Use of electronic communication device while driving
(2)(a)
321.180  Violation of instruction permit limitation
321.180B Violation of graduated driver’s license conditions
321.180B Use of electronic communication device while driving
(6A)(a)
321.193  Violation of conditions of restricted license
321.194  Violation of conditions of minor’s school license
321.194
(2)(B)   Use of electronic communication device while driving
(2)
321.216  Unlawful use of license
321.216B Misuse of license or ID card to acquire alcohol
321.216C Misuse of license or ID card to acquire tobacco
321.219  Permitting unauthorized minor to drive
321.220  Permitting unauthorized person to drive
321.229  Fail to comply with order of peace officer
321.231  Fail of caution by driver of emergency vehicle
321.232  Radar jamming devices
321.234  (3,4) Failure to observe seating requirements
321.234A ATV violation
321.235A Imp. op/Elec. Personal Mobile Assististive Dev.
LOCAL ORDINANCE
321.247  Unlawful golf cart operation
321.256  Fail to obey traffic control device
321.257  Vehicles fail to respond to steady red signal
(2a)
321.257  Pedestrians and bicyclist failing to stop
(2a)
321.257  Vehicles fail to respond to yellow caution signal
(2b)
321.257  Pedestrians fail to respond to yellow caution signal
(2b)
321.257  Fail to yield to pedestrian in crosswalk under green arrow
(2d)
321.257  Fail to obey flashing red stop signal
(2e)
321.257  Fail to respond to flashing yellow caution signal
(2f)
321.257  Pedestrians failure to obey “Don’t Walk” light
(2g)
321.257  Fail to yield to pedestrian within intersection
(2h)
321.275  Motorcycle and motorized bike violation
(1-7)
321.275  Failure to display safety flag
(8)
321.276  Use of electronic communication device while driving
321.277A Careless driving
321.281  Steer unreasonably close to bicyclist
(1)
321.281  Project object or substance at bicyclist
(2)
321.284  Open container-drivers >21 YOA (for drivers under 21 YOA refer to §
         123.47)
321.284A Open container-passengers >21 YOA (for passengers under 21 YOA refer §
         123.47)
321.285 EXCESSIVE SPEED-ZONES 55 MPH OR LESS
        (1 through 5 over)
        (6 through 10 over)
        (11 through 15 over)
        (16 through 20 over)
        (20 mph over + $5.00 each mile)
321.285  EXCESSIVE SPEED-ZONES GREATER THAN 55 MPH
        (1 through 5 over)
        (6 through 10 over)
        (11 through 15 over)
        (16 through 20 over)
        (20 mph over + $5.00 each mile)
321.285 EXCESSIVE SPEED - ALL SPEED ZONES (EXCEPT WORK ZONES)
        (1 through 5 over)
        (6 through 10 over)
        (11 through 15 over)
        (16 through 20 over)
        (21 mph over + $5.00 each mph over 20)
321.285  EXCESSIVE SPEED-ROAD WORK ZONES
        (1 through 10 over)
        (11 through 20 over)
        (21 through 25 over)
        (Greater than 25 over)
EXCESSIVE SPEED-(SCHOOL BUS)
321.285  Excessive speed by school bus (1 through 10 over)
321.288  Fail to maintain control
(1)
321.288  Fail to reduce speed to reasonable and proper rate
(2)
321.294  Fail to maintain minimum speed
321.295  Excessive speed on bridge
321.297  Driving on wrong side of two-way highway
321.298  Fail to yield half of roadway when meeting vehicle
321.299  Passing on wrong side
321.302  Improper overtaking on the right
321.303  Unsafe passing
321.304  Passing on grade or hill
(1)
321.304  Passing too near bridge, intersection, or railroad
(2)
321.304  Passing contrary to highway sign or marking
(3)
321.305  Violating one-way traffic designation
321.306  Improper use of lanes
321.307  Following too closely
321.309  Following too closely (trucks and towing vehicles)
321.309  Towing for hire without a transporter plate
321.309  Towing in convoy maintenance at least 500 feet between units
321.310  Unlawful towing of four-wheeled trailer
321.311  Turning from improper lane
321.312  Making U-turn on curve or hill
321.313  Unsafe starting of a stopped vehicle
321.314  Unsafe turn or fail to give signal
321.315  Fail to give continuous turn signal
321.316  Fail to signal stop or rapid deceleration
321.317  Signal light requirement
321.318  Incorrect hand signal
321.319  Fail to yield to vehicle on right
321.320  Fail to yield upon left turn
321.321  Fail to yield upon entering through highway
321.322  Fail to obey stop or yield sign
321.323  Unsafe backing on highway
321.323A Unsafe approach to certain stationary vehicles
321.324  Fail to yield to emergency vehicle
321.325  Pedestrian disobeying traffic control signal
321.326  Pedestrian walking on wrong side of highway
321.327  Failure to yield to pedestrians’ right-of-way
321.328  Pedestrian failing to use crosswalk
321.329  Vehicle failing to yield to pedestrian
321.331  Soliciting ride from within roadway
321.332  Unlawful use of white cane
321.333  Failure to yield to blind person
321.340  Driving in or through safety zone
321.341  Failure to properly stop at railroad crossing
321.342  Failure to obey stop sign at railroad crossing
321.343  Failure to stop certain cargo or passenger vehicles at railroad
(1)      crossing
321.343  CMV-Fail to slow/check railroad crossing
(2)(a)
321.343  CMV-Fail to stop/railroad track not clear
(2)(b)
321.343  CMV-Blocks railroad crossing
(2)(c)
321.343  CMV-Disobeys traffic control at railroad
(2)(d)
321.343  CMV-Insufficient clearance at railroad
(2)(e)
321.344  Unlawful movement of construction equipment at railroad track
321.344B Creating an immediate safety threat at RR crossing
321.353  Unsafe entry onto sidewalk or roadway
321.354  Stopping on paved part of highway
(1)
321.354  Stopping on traveled part of unpaved highway
(2)
321.358  Stopping, standing, or parking where prohibited
321.360  Prohibited parking in front of theaters and hotels
321.361  Parking too far from curb/angular parking
321.362  Parking without stopping engine and setting brake
321.363  Driving with obstructed view or control
321.364  Contaminated food-hazardous materials
321.365  Coasting upon downgrade
321.366  Improper use of median, curb, or access facility
321.367  Fail to maintain distance from fire vehicle
321.368  Crossing unprotected fire hose
321.369  Depositing or throwing litter
321.370  Removing injurious material
321.372  Failure of school bus driver to signal
(1)
321.372  Improper discharge of school bus passenger
(2)
321.372  Unlawful passing of school bus
(3)
321.381  Driving or towing unsafe vehicle
321.381A Improper operation of low-speed vehicle
321.382  Operating underpowered vehicle
321.383  Failure to display reflective device on slow-moving vehicle
321.384  Failure to use headlamps when required
321.385  Insufficient number of headlamps
321.386  Insufficient number of headlamps-motorcycle
321.387  Improper rear lamp(s)
321.388  Improper registration plate lamp
321.389  Improper rear reflector
321.390  Reflector requirements
321.392  Improper clearance lighting on truck or trailer
321.393  Lighting device color and mounting
321.394  No lamp or flag on rear-projecting load
321.395  Parking on certain roadways without parking lights
321.397  Improper light on bicycle
321.398  Improper light on other vehicle
321.402  Improper use of spotlight
321.403  Improper use of auxiliary driving lights
321.404  Improper brake light
321.404A Use of light-restricting device
321.409  Improperly adjusted headlamp
321.415  Failure to dim
321.419  Improper headlighting when night driving
321.420  Excessive number of driving lights
321.421  Violation of special restrictions on lamps
321.422  Lights of improper color-front or rear
321.423  Unauthorized use of emergency vehicle lighting equipment
(2)
321.423  Failure to use flashing signal on slow-moving vehicle
(6)
321.430  Defective braking equipment
321.432  Defective audible warning device
321.433  Unauthorized use of emergency audible warning device
321.433  Unauthorized use of emergency vehicle
321.434  Use of siren or whistle on bicycle
321.436  Defective or unauthorized muffler system
321.437  Failure to meet mirror requirements
321.437  Failure to have proper exterior mirror (towing)
321.438  Windshield and window-obstructed vision
(1)
321.438  Dark window/windshield
(2)
321.438  Windshield and window requirements
(3)
321.439  Defective windshield wiper
321.440  Defective tires
321.441  Unauthorized use of metal tire or track
321.442  Unauthorized use of metal projections on wheels
321.444  Failure to use safety glass
321.445  Failure to wear/maintain safety belts
321.446  Failure to secure child < 18 YOA
321.449  Failure to comply with safety regulations rules
321.449  Operation by unqualified driver
321.449  Hours of service violation
321.449  Presence of alcohol - CMV
321.450  Violation of hazardous materials transportation
321.454  Width violation
321.455  Excessive side projection of load - passenger vehicle
321.456  Excessive height
321.457  Excessive length
321.458  Excessive projection from front of vehicle
321.460  Spilling on highway
321.461  Excessive tow-bar length
321.462  Failure to use required towing equipment
321.466  Gross weight in excess of registered gross weight
SNOWMOBILES
321G.3   Resident registration/non-resident user permit required
321G.5   Display of identification number
321G.9   Improper operation on roadways/highways
321G.11  Mufflers
321G.12  Lights required and brakes required
321G.13  Operate at rate of speed greater than reasonable/proper
(1a)
321G.13  Operate in a careless/reckless/negligent manner
(1b)
321G.13  Lights
(1d)
321G.13  Operate in tree nursery or planting damaging growing stock
(1e)
321G.13  Operate on public land/ice/snow in violation of official signs
(1f)
321G.13  Operate in prohibited park/wildlife areas/preserves/streambeds
(1g)
321G.13  Operate upon an operating railroad right-of-way
(1h)
321G.13  Operate or ride with a loaded or uncased firearm
(2)
321G.13  Operate snowmobile on public land without measurable snow cover
(3)
321G.17  Violation of stop signal
321G.19  Rented snowmobile
321G.20  Operation by persons <12 or allowing operation by persons <12
321G.21  Violation by manufacturer/distributor/dealer
321G.24  Safety certificate violation
(1)
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
321L.2A  Misuse of wheelchair parking cone
(2)
321L.2A  Interference with wheelchair parking cone
(3)
321L.3   Failure to return handicapped ID
321L.4   Improper use of handicapped ID device
(2)
321L.4   Improper use of handicapped parking space
(2)
321L.7   Failure to provide persons with disabilities parking space-signs
EMERGENCY ENERGY
473.8    Violations of executive order
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)
§ 70.017 PARADE REGULATED.
   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
   (A)   Definition. PARADE means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented
or advertised to the public as a parade.
   (B)   Approval required. No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining approval from the City Administrator. The person organizing or
sponsoring the parade must provide information concerning the time and date for
the parade and the streets or general route therefor, and any approval given to
such person includes all participants in the parade, provided they have been
invited to participate.
   (C)   Parade not a street obstruction. Any parade for which approval has
been given and the persons lawfully participating therein shall not be deemed
an obstruction of the streets, notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance to the contrary.
   (D)   Control by peace officers and firefighters. Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in
the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 4-9-2024)
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.030 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The City Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-
control devices when and as required under this chapter or other ordinances of
the city to make effective their provisions, and may so cause to be placed and
maintained such additional, emergency, or temporary traffic-control devices for
the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may
require, to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under
state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   The Police Department shall keep a record of all traffic-control
devices maintained by the city.
   (C)   All traffic-control devices shall comply with current standards
established by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-6) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code, §§ 321.255 and 321.256
§ 70.031 CITY COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS; ESTABLISH, MARK TRAFFIC LANES.
   The City Council shall:
   (A)   Designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
   (B)   Direct the marking of lanes for traffic on street pavements at such
places as traffic conditions require, consistent with the traffic code of the
city. Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of a lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-7) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 70.045 TURNING MARKERS, BUTTONS, AND SIGNS.
   The City Council may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections, and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the state
law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers,
buttons, or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at
an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers, buttons, or
signs, including right-hand turns at intersections with automatic traffic
signals.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-10)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.311
§ 70.046 AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   (A)   The City Council is authorized to determine those intersections, as
traffic conditions require, at which the drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right or left turn.
   (B)   The making of turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any
day, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on signs.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-11)
§ 70.047 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such
signs.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-12)
§ 70.048 U-TURNS.
   It shall be unlawful for a driver to make a “U” turn except at an
intersection. “U” turns are prohibited at intersections within the Business
District and at intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.049 STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Stop intersections.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated
by a stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked
stop line, before entering the crosswalk, before entering the intersection, or
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
      (2)   Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right of way to any
vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which
is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
   (B)   Yield intersections.
      (1)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall
stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line, before
entering the crosswalk, before entering the intersection, or at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway.
      (2)   After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way
to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection
or which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
   (C)   Signs.
      (1)   Stop signs shall be erected at entrances to through streets and at
one or more entrances to stop intersections. Every driver of a vehicle shall
stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering an
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic
control signal.
      (2)   Yield signs shall be erected at the specified entrances to the
yield intersections designated and shall be located as near as practical to the
property line of the highway at the entrance at which the yield must be made,
or at the nearest line of the crosswalk thereat, or, if none, at the nearest
line of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 9-7-321.322) (Ord. 65-10, 12-20-2010)
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
§ 70.060 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any traffic code of this city designates any one-way
street or alley the City Council shall cause to be placed and maintained signs
giving notice thereof and the regulation shall not be effective unless the
signs are in place.
      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of traffic movement shall be placed
at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is
prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of markings, signs, barriers, or other devices placed in accordance
with this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.061 AUTHORITY ON STREETS DURING CERTAIN PERIODS.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor or police officer is authorized to determine and
recommend to the Council certain streets, or specified lanes thereon, upon
which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and
the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall, upon
authority given by ordinance, place and maintain appropriate markings, signs,
barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof.
      (2)   The City Council may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to
be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the
centerline of the roadway.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in
violation of markings, signs, barriers, or other devices placed in accordance
with this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 70.075 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line
or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle on the intersecting roadway, which has entered the intersection or
which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time the driver is moving across or within the intersection. The list of stop
signs are adopted for reference by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-17)
§ 70.076 AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through
highway it shall be the duty of the City Council to cause to be placed and
maintained a stop sign on each and every street intersecting through highway
except as modified in the case of intersecting through highways.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-19)
§ 70.077 STOPS AT INTERSECTING THROUGH HIGHWAYS; OTHER INTERSECTIONS.
   At the intersections of through highways and at intersections upon streets
other than through highways where, because of heavy cross-traffic or other
traffic conditions, particular hazard exists, police officers are hereby
authorized to determine whether vehicles shall stop or yield at one or more
entrances to the intersection and shall present recommendations to the Council,
and, upon approval of the Council, shall erect an appropriate sign at every
place where a stop or yield is required.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-20)
§ 70.078 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-21)
§ 70.079 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided this code.
   (B)   Traffic visibility across corner lots. On a corner lot in all zoning
districts, no fence, wall, hedge, or other planting or structure that will
obstruct vision between a height of two and one-half feet and ten feet above
the centerline grades of the intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, or
maintained within the triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines at such
corner and a straight line joining the right-of-way lines at points which are
25 feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, and measured
along the right-of-way lines.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 4-9-2024)
PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT AND DUTIES
§ 70.090 PROHIBITED CROSSING.
   Pedestrians crossing a street in the Business District shall cross in the
crosswalks only.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-23)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.327
§ 70.091 PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT.
   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.326
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
§ 70.105 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of this city unless all
passengers of the vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. No
person shall ride in the bed of a truck in an unsafe manner.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-37)
FUNERAL, OTHER PROCESSIONS
§ 70.120 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS.
   No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-39)
§ 70.121 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as closely as is practical and safe.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-40)
§ 70.122 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral procession composed of vehicles shall be identified as such by the
display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the
Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-41)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Parking signs required
   
71.02   Parking during snow emergency
   
71.03   All-night parking prohibited
   
71.04   Commercial vehicle prohibited parking
   
71.05   Citation placed on illegally parked vehicle
   
71.06   Presumption in reference to illegal parking; fines
   
71.07   Failure to pay parking citations
   
71.08   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
71.09   Parking of unregistered vehicles illegal
Method of Parking
   
71.20   Standing or parking close to curb
   
71.21   Standing or parking on the left-hand side of one-way streets
   
71.22   Signs or marking indicating angle parking
   
71.23   Obedience to angle parking signs or markings
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
   
71.35   Stopping, standing, or parking
   
71.36   Authority to paint curbs and erect signs prohibiting standing or
parking
   
71.37   Authority to impound vehicles
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever, by this or any other chapter of the city code, any parking
time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or
portions of streets, it shall be the duty of the City Council to direct that
appropriate signs be erected giving notice thereof and the regulations shall
not be effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any
alleged offense.
   (B)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey
the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-32)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.236
§ 71.02 PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle
on any public street, alley, or city-owned off-street parking area during any
snow emergency proclaimed by the Mayor unless the snow has been removed or
plowed from said street, alley, or parking area and the snow has ceased to
fall.
      (2)   A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its proclamation
through the duration of the snow or ice storm and the 48-hour period after
cessation of the storm except as above provided upon streets which have been
fully opened.
   (B)   (1)   The ban shall be of uniform application and the Mayor is
directed to publicize the requirements widely, using all available news media,
in early November each year.
      (2)   When predictions or occurrences indicate the need, the Mayor shall
proclaim a snow emergency and the Police Department shall inform the news media
to publicize the proclamation and the parking rules under the emergency.
      (3)   Such emergency may be extended or shortened when conditions
warrant.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-33)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.236
§ 71.03 ALL-NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park
a vehicle on any street marked to prohibit all night parking and giving notice
thereof, for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.04 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   Commercial vehicle. Includes, but is not limited to, box trucks,
delivery vehicles, moving trucks, and vehicles with a GVWR exceeding 10,000
pounds.
   (B)   Prohibited parking.
      (1)   No commercial vehicle as defined above shall be parked, stopped, or
left standing on any residential street within city limits, at any time.
      (2)   Temporary stops for active loading/unloading are permitted for no
more than 60 minutes, provided the vehicle is attended at all times.
      (3)   Overnight parking (between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.) of commercial
vehicles is strictly prohibited.
   (C)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Government and emergency response vehicles.
      (2)   Public utility or infrastructure repair vehicles engaged in active
service.
      (3)   Vehicles with valid, city issued temporary parking permit or
permission from either the Police Chief or City Administrator.
   (D)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   Violations shall be considered a municipal infraction and subject
to a civil penalty (see §
10.99).
      (2)   Repeat violations may result in vehicle towing and impoundment at
the owner's expense.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-35) (Ord. 02-07, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 2025-08, passed 7-
22-2025)
§ 71.05 CITATION PLACED ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by any ordinance of the city or
state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall prepare a written parking
citation giving the registration number, and other identifying information to
such vehicle in a conspicuous place and directing the driver of the vehicle to
appear at City Hall within 48 hours, or to pay the local scheduled fine
established by §
71.06(B) at the City Clerk’s office as provided therein.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-64)
§ 71.06 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING; FINES.
   (A)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any parking ordinance or
state law governing the standing, stopping, or parking of a vehicle, proof that
the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any such ordinance or law, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was at the time of such parking violation the registered owner of
such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner
of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which such violation occurred.
   (B)   Scheduled fines as follows are established, payable by mail or in
person at the City Clerk office within 30 days of the violation, for the
following parking violations:
Violation Fine
Violation                                                      Fine
18 inches from curb                                            $20
48-hour parking violation                                      $25
Alley                                                          $25
Blocking alley                                                 $20
Blocking mailbox                                               $25
Blocking sidewalk or drive                                     $25
Fire hydrant                                                   $50
Other                                                          $25
Parked wrong direction                                         $20
Persons with disabilities parking                              $100
Prohibited/restricted area/school pick up and drop off parking $25
Snow emergency                                                 $50
Yellow curb                                                    $20
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-65) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 06-02, passed 5-23-
2006; Ord. 2024-05, passed 4-9-2024)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321L.4 Sub. 2
§ 71.07 FAILURE TO PAY PARKING CITATIONS.
   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under
the parking ordinances of the city or of state law fails to make payment of the
scheduled fine as specified on a parking citation affixed to such motor vehicle
within the 30 days, the city shall send the owner of the motor vehicle to which
the parking citation was affixed a letter informing the owner of the violation
and warning that in the event the penalty is not paid within five days from
date of mailing, a court citation will be issued requiring a court appearance
and subjecting the violator to court costs.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-66) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
§ 71.08 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon the roadway, city parking lots or city
parks for the principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   (B)   Displaying advertising.
   (C)   Selling merchandise from the vehicle except in a duly established
marketplace or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Storage or as junk or dead storage for more than 48 hours.
   (E)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Government and emergency response vehicles.
      (2)   Public utility or infrastructure repair vehicles engaged in active
service.
      (3)   Vehicles with valid, city issued temporary parking permit or
permission from either the Police Chief or City Administrator.
   (F)   Enforcement and penalties.
      (1)   Violations shall be considered a municipal infraction and subject
to a civil penalty.
      (2)   Repeat violations may result in vehicle towing and impoundment at
the owner's expense.
   (G)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-38) (Ord. 2025-17, passed 11-11-2025)
§ 71.09 PARKING OF UNREGISTERED VEHICLES ILLEGAL.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park an unregistered vehicle upon
public property. Only vehicles that are currently registered and have the
registration properly displayed on the rear license plate are permitted to be
parked on public property.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth within this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-08, passed 7-22-2025)
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 71.20 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.361
§ 71.21 STANDING OR PARKING ON THE LEFT-HAND SIDE OF ONE-WAY STREETS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as provided in the case of
angle parking.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-26) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.361
§ 71.22 SIGNS OR MARKING INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.
   The City Council, as traffic conditions require, shall determine upon what
streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign the streets or
portions thereof indicating the method of angle parking. The determination
shall be subject to approval by Council resolution.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-27)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.361
§ 71.23 OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
   Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by the signs and markings.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-28)
STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
§ 71.35 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within five feet of either side of the point on the curb nearest to a
fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway;
   (G)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when
parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light;
   (H)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance when properly signposted;
   (I)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of street;
   (K)   Opposite the entrance to a garage or driveway in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic;
   (L)   Upon any street or in any alley in any part of the city in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway of such street or alley for the free movement of vehicular
traffic, except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs, or signals of a police officer;
   (M)   At any place where official signs or curb markings prohibit stopping,
standing, or parking;
   (N)   Within ten feet of the crosswalk at all intersections within the city;
   (O)   In an alley under any fire escape at any time; and
   (P)   Within five feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so
equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-29) (Ord. 2015-01, passed 4-14-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.358
§ 71.36 AUTHORITY TO PAINT CURBS AND ERECT SIGNS PROHIBITING STANDING OR
PARKING.
   (A)   When because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked
vehicles constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the City Council may cause curbings to be painted with a
yellow or orange color and erect “No Parking” or “Standing” signs. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than after having first secured the permission
of the City Council, to paint any curbing, sidewalk, or street with yellow or
orange-colored paint or erect “No Parking” signs.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on those
streets or city-owned properties or portions thereof designated from time to
time as areas where parking is prohibited, whether at all times, or between
certain hours, or longer than specified times between certain hours or for
longer than specified times, in violation of such regulations when signs have
been posted in such areas giving notice of such regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-30) (Ord. 06-02, passed 5-23-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.37 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove, or cause to
be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, or highway to the nearest
garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the
Police Department, or otherwise maintained by the city, under the following
circumstances.
      (1)   When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are, by reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
      (2)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and constitutes a
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
      (3)   When any vehicle is left parked upon a street for a continuous
period of 48 hours or more. After a diligent effort to locate the owner has
proven successful. If the owner is found, the owner shall be given the
opportunity to remove the vehicle.
      (4)   When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking
during a snow emergency, as proclaimed by the City Administrator and Police
Chiefunder §
11.02.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties hereinafter provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be required to pay the cost of towing charges and storage.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-31) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycle Regulations
   
72.01   Definition
   
72.02   Traffic code applies to persons riding bicycles
   
72.03   Riding on bicycles
   
72.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
72.05   Speed
   
72.06   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
72.07   Carrying articles
   
72.08   Parking
   
72.09   Riding on sidewalks
   
72.10   Lamps, other equipment on bicycles
Snowmobiles
   
72.25   Definitions
   
72.26   Permitted areas of operation
   
72.27   Regulations
   
72.28   Equipment required
   
72.29   Unattended vehicles
   
72.30   Restriction on operation
   
72.31   Traffic regulations
Off-Road Vehicles
   
72.45   Purpose
   
72.46   Definitions
   
72.47   General regulations
   
72.48   Places of operation
   
72.49   Negligence
   
72.50   Accident reports
   
72.51   Equipment
   
72.52   Unlawful operation
   
72.53   Parking
   
72.54   ATVs and UTVs permit
   
72.55   Suspension of permit
   
72.56   Golf cart prohibition
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference
   Occupancy in recreational vehicles, travel trailers, see §§
154.20 and
154.21
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
§ 72.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   BICYCLES. Either of the following:
      (1)   A device having two wheels and having at least one saddle or seat
for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
      (2)   A device having two or more wheels with fully operable peddles and
an electric motor less than 750 watts (one horsepower), whose maximum speed on
a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a motor while ridden, is
less than 20 miles per hour.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-44)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.1
§ 72.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to drivers of
vehicles by the laws of the state regarding rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to drivers of
vehicles, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Whenever a person dismounts from a bicycle such person shall be
subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-45)
§ 72.03 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-46)
§ 72.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons
riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on
paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-47)
§ 72.05 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under existing conditions.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-48) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operators of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-49)
§ 72.07 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-50) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING.
   Bicycles shall be parked upon the roadway of a street against the curb, or
upon the sidewalk in a rack to support bicycles, or against a building, or at
the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian
traffic.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-51)
§ 72.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within a business
district.
   (B)   When signs are erected on a sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding
of bicycles on the sidewalk or roadway, no person shall disobey such signs.
   (C)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give a timely audible
signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-52) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 LAMPS, OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type that
is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
      (2)   A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-53)
SNOWMOBILES
§ 72.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   OPERATE. To control the operation of a snowmobile.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual control of a snowmobile.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice in a
natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-54)
§ 72.26 PERMITTED AREAS OF OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles will be allowed to operate in the city as follows: The route
established herein shall be the only permitted snowmobile route and the
snowmobiles shall be operated within the roadways of said public streets and
shall also be subject to regulations set out in §
72.27.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-55)
§ 72.27 REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the
following circumstances.
   (A)   On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner or occupant of said property.
   (B)   On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational
areas, and golf courses without express permission to do so by the proper
public authority.
   (C)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
   (D)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the
safety of any person or property of any other person.
   (E)   Without having such snowmobile registered as provided for by state
statute, except that this provision shall not apply to the operation of a
snowmobile on the private property of the owner by the owner or a member of his
or her immediate family.
   (F)   Within the right-of-way of any public street or alley within the city
unless the operator shall have a valid driver’s license; or an instruction
permit and accompanied by a qualified licensed driver.
   (G)   No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city from 11:00 p.m. to 8:
00 a.m., except for the purpose of loading and unloading a snowmobile from
another vehicle or trailer.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-56) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.28 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   All snowmobiles operated within the city shall have the following equipment:
   (A)   Mufflers, which are properly attached and which reduce the noise of
operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for operating the
vehicle, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass, or similar device
on said vehicle.
   (B)   Adequate brakes in good condition, and at least one headlight and one
taillight.
   (C)   A safety or so-called “dead-man” throttle in operating condition; a
SAFETY or DEADMAN THROTTLE is defined as a device which, when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged
from the driving track.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-57)
§ 72.29 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for the owner or operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to
be or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or the
key left in the ignition.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-58) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.30 RESTRICTION ON OPERATION.
   The City Council may, by resolution, prohibit the operation of snowmobiles
within the right-of-way of the public roads, streets, or alley, or other city
property within the city when the public safety and welfare so requires.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-59)
§ 72.31 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Each person operating a snowmobile shall strictly observe all traffic signs
and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and
shall obey the orders and directions of any police officer of the city
authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-60) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ 72.45 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of all-terrain
vehicles (ATVs) and off-road utility vehicles/utility terrain vehicles (UTVs)
on certain streets in the city. This chapter applies whenever an ATV or UTV is
operated on any street or alley of the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-1) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OR ATV. A motorized vehicle with not less than three and
not more than six non-highway tires that is limited in engine displacement to
less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1,200,
and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and
handlebars for steering control. ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE includes OFF-ROAD
MOTORCYCLES.
   OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE OR UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE or UTV. A motorized
vehicle with not less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or
rubberized tracks that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not
intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control
levers for control. OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE includes the following vehicles:
      (1)   OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE—TYPE 1. An off-road utility vehicle with a
total dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      (2)   OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE—TYPE 2. An off-road utility vehicle, other
than OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE—TYPE 1, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds
or less, and a width of 65 inches or less.
      (3)   OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE—TYPE 3. An off-road utility vehicle with a
total dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches,
or both.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-2) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.17
§ 72.47 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV within the city in violation of
the provisions of Chapter 321 of the Iowa Code or rules established by the
Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing
their registration, numbering, equipment, and manner of operation.
   (B)   No owner shall permit a person to operate an ATV or UTV within the
city unless the person is at least 18 years of age and possesses a valid
driver’s license.
   (C)   No ATV or UTV shall be operated on a city street at a speed in excess
of 35 miles per hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is less.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-3) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2022-10, passed 7-
12-2022)
§ 72.48 PLACES OF OPERATION.
   The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions
as to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the city:
   (A)   ATVs and UTVs may be operated on all city streets unless prohibited by
this section. ATVs and UTVs may stop at service stations or convenience stores
along any permitted street.
   (B)   ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the city property or City
Hall Parking lot and the City Community Center Parking lot Monday through
Friday for the purpose of the City Elementary School morning drop off and
afternoon pickup of children.
   (C)   The time of operation shall be 24 hours a day, seven days a week in
accordance with the Iowa Code § 321.
   (D)   Employees of the city, since it is political subdivision, can legally
operate a UTV/ATV on prohibited streets for the purpose of construction or
maintenance per the Iowa Code § 321.234A.
   (E)   An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way
only at an established crossing and, notwithstanding any other provisions of
law, may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing
after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-4) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2022-10, passed 7-
12-2022)
§ 72.49 NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of an ATV or UTV are liable for any injury or damage
occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or UTV.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-5) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.50 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an ATV or UTV is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer as required under the Iowa Code §§ 321.11 and 321.266.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-6) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.51 EQUIPMENT.
   ATVs and UTVs operated upon city streets shall be equipped with the addition
of the following:
   (A)   Brakes lights (per Iowa Code § 321.13);
   (B)   Headlights;
   (C)   Taillights;
   (D)   Rear mirrors;
   (E)   Side mirrors;
   (F)   Safety belts (UTVs only);
   (G)   Muffler system limiting engine noise to not more than 86 decibels and/
or no modified exhaust (per Iowa Code § 321.12); and
   (H)   Horn (per Iowa Code § 321.12).
(Prior Code, § 3-14-7) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2022-10, passed 7-
12-2022)
§ 72.52 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   (A)   No ATVs or UTVs shall be operated or parked upon city sidewalks,
trails, city parks, or other city land.
   (B)   No ATVs or UTVs shall be operated on private property without the
express consent of the owner.
   (C)   No ATV or UTV shall be operated while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, narcotics, or habit-forming drugs (per Iowa Code § 3211.14
(1c)).
   (D)   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV in a careless, reckless, or
negligent manner endangering the person or property of another, or causing
injury or damage to the same (per Iowa Code § 3211.14(1a)).
   (E)   No ATV or UTV shall be operated in violation of the traffic laws of
the city and the state.
   (F)   No ATV or UTV shall carry more passengers than which the ATV or UTV is
designed.
   (G)   No person shall ride in a UTV unless seated in a designated seat and
secured with a safety belt.
   (H)   No seat shall be used by more than one person at a time.
   (I)   No cargo, materials, supplies, or other items may be transported on
the ATV or UTV without being properly restrained.
   (J)   No owner shall permit a person to operate an ATV or UTV unless the
person is at least 18 years of age and possesses a valid driver’s license (per
Iowa Code § 3211.14(1d)).
   (K)   No person shall leave an ATV unattended on public property while the
motor is running or the keys are in the ignition switch.
   (L)   No person shall operate an ATV or UTV on any trail unless the trail is
designated as open for operation of that vehicle.
   (M)   Proof of valid insurance and registration must be maintained during
operation.
   (N)   Proof of insurance and registration must be maintained during
operation.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-8) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2022-10, passed 7-
12-2022) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.53 PARKING.
   ATVs and UTVs may be parked in city parking lots or on any city street where
vehicle parking is permitted, except no ATV or UTV may be parked on any primary
road extension.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-9) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.54 ATVS AND UTVS PERMIT.
   No owner shall allow a person to operate an ATV or UTV on any public street
or alley, for any purpose, unless the vehicle is registered with the Department
of Natural Resources.
   (A)   Proof of ownership. The owner of each ATV or UTV shall be required to
provide proof of ownership, including State Department of Natural Resources
registration and proof of liability insurance with appropriate minimum
standards as required by the Iowa Code § 321.20B.
   (B)   Current registration. ATV or UTV vehicles registered in the state are
required to display their current State Department of Natural Resources
registration decal.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-10) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.55 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   Violation of this subchapter may result in the suspension of permit to
operate all-terrain and off-road utility vehicles within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-11) (Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 72.56 GOLF CART PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Purpose. The city finds that the operation of golf carts on public
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and trails within city limits poses a risk to
public safety and is inconsistent with the intended use of city infrastructure.
   (B)   Prohibited operation. No person shall operate a golf cart on any
public roadway, street, alley, sidewalk, trail, or other public right-of-way
within the corporate limits of the city.
   (C)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, GOLF CART means a
motorized vehicle originally designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and not designed for use on public
streets.
   (D)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Golf carts used by city personnel or contractors for official
municipal purposes, provided such use is authorized in writing by the City
Administrator or Public Works Director.
      (2)   Golf carts operated in a parade or special event authorized by the
City Council, subject to any conditions imposed by the city.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in §
72.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-11, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Except those provisions specifically provided under state law as a
felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor or a simple
misdemeanor under Chapters 690 through 747 of the Iowa Code, a violation of §§
72.45 through
72.55 shall be a municipal infraction subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of $125; and
      (2)   For a second and each subsequent offense within a two-year period,
a fine of at least $250, but not more than $750.
(Prior Code, § 3-14-12)
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 9-14-2021)
CHAPTER 73: SNOW REMOVAL
Section
   
73.01   Purpose
   
73.02   Snow emergency declaration
   
73.03   Snow removal routes
   
73.04   Driveways and snow from private properties
   
73.05   Removal of snow and ice accumulating on sidewalks
   
73.06   Vehicle parking during snow emergency
   
73.07   Pushing snow into streets
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish and maintain uniform
definitions and procedures concerning snow and ice removal for the city. The
city will provide snow and ice removal in a safe and cost-effective manner,
taking into account safety, budget, personnel, and environmental concerns.
   (B)   This chapter does not guarantee that the streets, public parking lots,
city maintained sidewalk, and other public areas will be free of snow and ice;
but rather attempts to maintain an adequate traveling surface for properly
equipped vehicles and pedestrians during winter conditions.
   (C)   Snow and ice removal from public streets, public parking areas, city
maintained sidewalks, and other public areas is an emergency operation that
takes precedence over other non-emergency work for the Public Works Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-1)
§ 73.02 SNOW EMERGENCY DECLARATION.
   A SNOW EMERGENCY is defined as any amount of snow. Snow combined with ice,
rain, and/or wind may also constitute a snow emergency. The Mayor, and/or his
or her designee, may declare a snow emergency. A snow emergency may be declared
in advance of an anticipated storm, during a storm, or after a storm. A snow
emergency will normally not last more than 24 hours past the end of the last
snowfall, but may be extended or shortened when conditions warrant. The public
will be informed of a snow emergency through mass media outlets as deemed
necessary by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-2)
§ 73.03 SNOW REMOVAL ROUTES.
   The City Council shall establish and maintain a priority list of streets,
public parking areas, city-maintained sidewalks, and other public areas for
snow and ice removal by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-3)
§ 73.04 DRIVEWAYS AND SNOW FROM PRIVATE PROPERTIES.
   City snowplows will not clear private driveways. The snow placed in
driveways by the city plows is an unavoidable consequence of removing snow from
the streets, and it is the responsibility of the property owner to remove. Snow
from private driveways, private parking lots, and sidewalks may not be placed
on city streets.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-4)
§ 73.05 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE ACCUMULATING ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow and
ice accumulations from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow and
ice accumulations within 24 hours after deposit of accumulation, the city will
attempt to notify the resident and give an additional 24 hours to clear or the
city may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection
in the same manner as a property tax, as provided in §
151.42.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-5)
§ 73.06 VEHICLE PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any
public street, alley, or city-owned off-street parking area during a snow
emergency proclaimed by the Mayor unless the snow has been removed or plowed
from said street, alley, or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall.
Vehicles parked on the street during a snow emergency are subject to tow
without notice to the owners at the owner’s expense.
   (B)   A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its proclamation
through the duration of the snow or ice storm, and the 24-hour period after
cessation of the storm, except as above provided upon streets that have been
fully opened. The ban shall be of uniform application and the Police Chief is
directed to publicize the requirements, using all available news media, in
early November each year. The emergency may be extended or shortened when
conditions warrant.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-6) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 PUSHING SNOW INTO STREETS.
   A person or entity shall not push, plow, or place any snow into, onto, or
across any public street.
(Prior Code, § 3-12-7) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Penalties per violation of §
73.07 in a 12-month period are as follows:
 
Offense        Penalty
First offense  Warning
Second offense Warning
Third offense  $25 civil penalty, plus court costs
Fourth offense $50 civil penalty, plus court costs
Fifth offense  $100 civil penalty, plus court costs
 
(Prior Code, § 3-12-7) (Ord. 2014-04, passed 9-9-2014)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   One-way streets
      
III.   Traffic lanes
      
IV.   Through highways
      
V.   Load restrictions
      
VI.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets
or portions thereof is greater than is necessary for the safe operation of
vehicles thereon, and it is declared that the maximum speed limit upon these
streets or portions thereof described shall be as follows:
   (A)   Cox Springs Road: 25 mph;
   (B)   Thunder Hills Road: 35 mph; and
   (C)   All other city streets: 25 mph.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-28-2023; Ord. 2024-10, passed 10-22-2024)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic shall move only in
the indicated direction: None designated.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-15)
SCHEDULE III. TRAFFIC LANES.
   The following streets may have variable laning or direction of traffic at
different times of day as marked by authorized signs under the provisions of
this section: None designated.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-16)
SCHEDULE IV. THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   Streets or portions of streets described herein are declared to be through
highways: Peosta Street.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-18)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.350
SCHEDULE V. LOAD RESTRICTIONS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle licensed in excess of the amounts specified on the signs at any time
upon any of the following streets within the city and none other: None
designated.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-42) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle licensed for five tons or more, when loaded or
empty, having no fixed terminal within the city or making no schedule or
definite stops within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading, shall
travel over or upon the following streets within the city and none other: Burds
Road, Deerwood Street, Enterprise Drive, Kapp Court, Kapp Drive, and Peosta
Street.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle licensed for five tons or more, having a fixed
terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the city for the purpose
of loading or unloading, shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set
out in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and
shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and return by the most direct route to
its point of departure from the designated route.
   (C)   The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the
driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of
such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-43) (Ord. 02-07, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-
2003)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   When, because of restricted visibility, or when standing or
parked vehicles constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the City Council may cause curbings to be painted with a
yellow or orange color and erect “No Parking” or “Standing” signs. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than after having first secured the permission
of the City Council, to paint any curbing, sidewalk, or street with yellow or
orange-colored paint or erect “No Parking” signs.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle on
those streets or city-owned properties or portions thereof designated from time
to time as areas where parking is prohibited, whether at all times, or between
certain hours, or longer than specified times between certain hours or for
longer than specified times, in violation of such regulations when signs have
been posted in such areas giving notice of such regulations.
      (3)   No person shall park a motor vehicle for a period of more than two
consecutive hours Monday through Friday on the city-owned lot on Peosta Street
between Kapp Drive and Enterprise Drive.
(Prior Code, § 3-3-30)
   (B)   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
specifically designated no parking zones, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace
officer or traffic control signal (per the Iowa Code § 321.236(1)):
      (1)   Burds Road on the north and south sides from Peosta Street to Cox-
Springs Road;
      (2)   Peosta Street on the east side from Highway 20 Interchange to Old
Highway Road;
      (3)   Peosta Street on the west side from Highway 20 Interchange to Royal
Oaks Drive and Cashel Drive to Old Highway Road;
      (4)   Ulyana Drive on the south side from Cox-Springs Road to Thunder
Hills Road; and
      (5)   Thunder Valley Drive on the south side of the road.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 5-23-2006; Ord. 2022-12, passed 8-9-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Nuisances enumerated
   
90.003   Other conditions regulated
   
90.004   Notice to abate nuisance or condition
   
90.005   Contents of notice to abate
   
90.006   Method of service
   
90.007   Request for hearing and appeal
   
90.008   Abatement in emergency
   
90.009   Abatement by city
   
90.010   Collection of cost of abatement
   
90.011   Installment payment of cost of abatement
   
90.012   Condemnation of nuisance
Noise Control
   
90.025   Purpose
   
90.026   Scope of regulations
   
90.027   Definitions
   
90.028   Noise disturbance prohibited
   
90.029   Sounds not allowed
   
90.030   Exceptions to this subchapter
   
90.031   Noise variance permits
   
90.032   Other laws and ordinances
Outdoor Furnaces
   
90.045   Purpose
   
90.046   Definitions
   
90.047   Existing outdoor furnaces
   
90.048   General requirements
   
90.049   Permit application
   
90.050   Enforcement, violations
Junk, Abandoned Vehicles
   
90.065   Purpose
   
90.066   Definitions
   
90.067   Removal of abandoned vehicles
   
90.068   Notification of owners and lienholders
   
90.069   Impoundment fees and bonds
   
90.070   Hearing procedures
   
90.071   Auction or disposal of abandoned vehicles
   
90.072   Junk vehicles declared a nuisance
   
90.073   Notice to abate
   
90.074   Abatement by city
   
90.075   Collection of cost of abatement
   
90.076   Exceptions
   
90.077   Interference with enforcement
NUISANCES
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably
offensive to the senses or an obstacle to the free use of property, so as
essentially to unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property. NUISANCES shall include, but not be limited to, those activities and
items hereinafter set forth in this section below (per Iowa Code § 657.1).
      (1)   The erecting, continuing, or using any building or other place for
the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances,
becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of
individuals or the public (per Iowa Code § 657.2(1)).
      (2)   The causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome substance to
accumulate or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others (per Iowa Code
§ 657.2(2)).
      (3)   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of
any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water (per Iowa Code § 657.2(3)).
      (4)   The polluting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any
river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural
course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others (per the Iowa Code §
657.2(4)).
      (5)   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings, or otherwise
the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, or
burying grounds (per Iowa Code § 657.2(5)).
      (6)   Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution and
lewdness, gambling houses, or houses resorted for the use of opium or hashish,
or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are
carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others (per Iowa Code § 657.2
(6)).
      (7)   Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, or
alley, or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof, especially near intersecting streets (per Iowa Code § 657.2(7)).
      (8)   Cotton-bearing cottonwood trees and all other cotton-bearing poplar
trees in the city.
      (9)   Any object or structure hereafter erected within 1,000 feet of the
limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing place,
which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation, including take-off and
landing (per Iowa Code § 657.2(8)).
      (10)   The depositing or storing of inflammable junk, such as old rags,
rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by any person, including a dealer in
such articles, unless it be in a building of fire resistant construction (per
Iowa Code § 657.2(9)).
      (11)   The emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash (per the
Iowa Code § 657.2(10)).
      (12)   Any condition relating to weeds which is described as a nuisance
in the city municipal code of ordinances or under state law. Grass and/or weeds
in excess of ten inches including dense growth of vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the city so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard
including any city owned property between the abutting property line and the
street right-of-way any condition related to weeds and or grass described or
defined as a nuisance under the state code or the city municipal code (per the
Iowa Code § 657.2(11)).
         (a)   When the property owner has been notified of a violation of this
section during the previous growing season, the property owner shall be
notified by letter at the beginning of the current season of the property
owner’s obligation to provide for the cutting of weeds or grass on the
property. The notice shall constitute reasonable notice for the entire growing
season.
         (b)   When the property owner has not been notified of a violation of
this section during the previous growing season, the property owner shall be
provided, by letter, a ten-day time period in which to arrange for the removal
of weeds and grass currently in violation of this section. This letter will
also constitute reasonable notice for the remainder of the growing season.
         (c)   If subsequent violations are observed during the same growth
season, the grass and weeds will be cut immediately, and the owner will be
billed for the cost thereof.
         (d)   An undeveloped lot (meaning one that does not have any
infrastructure) must maintain 30 feet behind the curb and 30 feet along any
adjoining neighbors to city ordinance standards, with mowing of at least bi-
monthly for the remainder of lots. An undeveloped lot in a subdivision will no
longer be considered an undeveloped lot once 70% of the subdivision lots are
sold or built out over a period of five years.
      (13)   Trees infected with Dutch elm disease (per Iowa Code § 657.2(12)).
      (14)   Any article or substance placed upon a street, alley, sidewalk,
public ground, or in any ditch, waterway, or gutter so as to obstruct the
drainage (per Iowa Code § 716.1).
      (15)   Accumulations of rubbish or trash tending to harbor vermin,
rodents, and rank growth of weeds or other vegetation and plants, which is
conducive to hazard (per Iowa Code § 657.2).
      (16)   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk, or salvage materials to be collected or to remain in
any place to the prejudice to others; causing or suffering any refuse, garbage,
obnoxious substances, hazardous wastes, junk, or salvage materials or other
offensive or disagreeable substances, to be thrown, left, or deposited in or
upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public square, public
enclosure, lot, vacant or occupied, or upon any pond or pool of water; except
for compost piles established and maintained with written permission from the
County Public Health Department, and junk or salvage materials properly stored
in accordance with the city municipal code.
      (17)   Any dead, diseased, or damaged trees or shrubs, which may harbor
insects or diseased pests, or diseases injurious to other trees or shrubs, or
any healthy tree which is in such a state of deterioration that any part of
such tree may fall and damage property or cause injury to persons.
      (18)   Any ditch, drain, or watercourse which is now or hereafter may be
constructed so as to prevent surface water and overflow water from adjacent
lands entering or draining into and through the same; any stormwater detention
basins not maintained in an appropriate manner so as to allow its proper
function.
      (19)   Stagnant water standing on any property, container, or material
kept in such condition that water can accumulate and stagnate.
      (20)   Infestations of vermin such as rats, mice, skunks, snakes,
starlings, pigeons, bees, wasps, cockroaches, or flies.
      (21)   Facilities for the storage or processing of sewage, such as
privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks, cesspools, and drainage
fields, which have failed or do not function properly or which are overflowing,
leaking, or emanating odors; septic tanks, cisterns, and cesspools which are
abandoned or no longer in use unless they are empty and cleaned with clean
fill; any evolved cesspool or septic tanks which does not comply with the
County Department of Health regulation.
      (22)   Unoccupied buildings or unoccupied portions of buildings which are
unsecured.
      (23)   Dangerous buildings or structures.
      (24)   Abandoned buildings.
      (25)   Any hazardous thing or condition on property which may contribute
to injury of any person present on the property; hazards include, but are not
limited to, open holes, open wells, open foundation, dangerous trees or limbs,
abandoned and unsecured refrigerators, or trapping devices.
      (26)   (a)   The storage, parking, leaving, or permitting the storage,
parking, or leaving of any inoperable or obsolete vehicle upon private property
within the city for a period in excess of 48 hours, unless exempted herein.
         (b)   This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a legal
junk yard or automobile or truck-oriented use operated in the appropriate zone
and in compliance with the city municipal code of ordinances.
      (27)   All junk yard or salvage operations except those permitted by
ordinance and operating in full compliance with the city municipal code of
ordinances.
      (28)   (a)   The open burning of trash, refuse, garbage, junk or salvage
materials, yard waste, leaves and tree trimmings shall be prohibited within the
city limits, provided, however, the City Council may designate up to three
weekends each year to allow city residents to burn leaves and tree trimmings in
accordance with the city’s open burning policy.
         (b)   Outdoor cooking or burning of wood is permitted if performed in
a container constructed of steel, brick, or masonry and the fire is no larger
than two feet in diameter. Additional open burning may be permitted upon
written request only with the special permission of the City Council, provided
the burning is in compliance with open burning policy guidelines established by
the city in consultation with the Fire Department.
      (29)   Any accumulations of ice, water, and snow on public sidewalks, or
the failure to remove said accumulations within 48 hours after the creation of
such accumulations exist, shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated
pursuant to the provisions specified in the city municipal code of ordinances.
      (30)   Any nuisance described as such or declared by Chapter 657 of the
Iowa Code.
      (31)   The sounding of any horn or other signaling device on any vehicle
on any street, public, or private place within the city, except as a danger
warning, which makes a loud or harsh sound to the disturbance or annoyance of
any person, and can be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet.
      (32)   The use of amplified sound creating a disturbance or annoyance to
others and can be plainly heard 100 feet from the source of the amplified
sound.
      (33)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing at any time or
place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in the
vicinity.
      (34)   The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, repair, or
construction of any building or other property between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, except in the case of an emergency of a
public health and safety nature, with the approval of the city.
      (35)   No person shall obstruct, deface, destroy, or injure any public
right-of-way in any manner by breaking up, plowing, or digging within the
right-of-way without city permission.
      (36)   No person shall throw or deposit on any public or private property
any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, or any other debris or like substance which may injure or damage any
person, animal, or vehicle or which may annoy, injure, or become dangerous to
the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the public.
      (37)   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk, or salvage materials, to be collected or to remain in
any place that prejudices others.
      (38)   Causing or suffering any refuse, garbage, obnoxious substances,
hazardous wastes, junk, or salvage materials, or other offensive or
disagreeable substances, to be thrown, left, or deposited in or upon any
street, alley, avenue, sidewalk, park, public square, public enclosure, lot,
vacant or occupied.
      (39)   The storage of any appliances, scrap metal, indoor furniture,
broken furniture, used building material, unstacked wood, broken toys, broken
bicycles and tricycles, bathroom fixtures, and similar objects visible from the
public right-of-way or adjoining property.
      (40)   Pipes, lumber, drywall, flooring, roofing shingles, and other
building material left on the property visible from the public right-of-way or
adjoining property for a period of time exceeding 72 hours.
      (41)   Rusty, deteriorated, dilapidated, or unusable play equipment
visible from any adjoining property.
      (42)   Dilapidated dwelling units exhibiting peeling paint, untreated
wood, broken gutters, broken windows, dry rot, missing banisters, railings and
spindles, broken doors, and the like creating an eyesore and offending members
of the public.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise
the record holder of legal title (per Iowa Code § 364.1).
(Prior Code, § 3-2-1) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2022-07, passed 7-12-
2022; Ord. 2022-13, passed 8-23-2022 ; Ord. 2025-18, passed 11-11-2025 )
§ 90.002 NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions which
are deemed to be nuisances in the city:
   (A)   Offensive smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public;
   (B)   Filth or noisome substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others;
   (C)   Impeding passage of navigable river. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water;
   (D)   Water pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (E)   Blocking public and private ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds;
   (F)   Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof;
   (G)   Storing of flammable junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones, and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the city, unless in a building of fireproof
construction;
   (H)   Air pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash;
   (I)   Weeds, brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the city so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard;
   (J)   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease;
   (K)   Airport air space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-
off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located;
   (L)   Houses of ill fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Iowa Code Chapter 723A or
places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as defined in Iowa
Code § 124.101, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling,
fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the
disturbance of others;
   (M)   Septic tanks. Effluent from septic tank or drain field running or
ponding on the ground in the open;
   (N)   Obstruction to drainage. Any article or substance placed upon a
street, alley, sidewalk, public ground, or in any ditch, waterway, or gutter so
as to obstruct the drainage;
   (O)   Refuse or yard waste. The accumulation on any premises, improved or
vacant, or any public place in the city, any quantities of refuse or yard
waste, either in containers or not; and
   (P)   (1)   Water discharged onto other property. No landowner or tenant
shall cause or allow surface water above ground) or other water from any source
to be drained, discharged, or cast upon or into public property or the private
property of another by any device or other means which alters the natural
direction or volume of water in such a manner as to cause erosion, subsidence,
loss of lateral support, or other interference with or impairment of the lawful
use and enjoyment of such property.
      (2)   Devices shall be terminated at a minimum of ten-foot from the
property line if the slope of the yard is less than a ratio of three to one (3:
1). When the slope of the yard is greater than a ratio of three to one (3:1),
devices shall be terminated at a minimum of ten foot before the top of the
slope.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 2023-11, passed 6-27-2023)
Statutory reference
   Drainage obstruction, see Iowa Code § 716.1
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 657.2
§ 90.003 OTHER CONDITIONS REGULATED.
   The following actions are required and may also be abated in the manner
provided in this subchapter.
   (A)   The removal of diseased trees or dead wood, but not diseased trees and
dead wood outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public street (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(b)).
   (B)   The removal, repair, or dismantling of dangerous buildings or
structures (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(c)).
   (C)   The numbering of buildings (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(d)).
   (D)   The connection to public drainage systems from abutting property when
necessary for public health or safety (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(e)).
   (E)   The connection to public sewer systems from abutting property, and the
installation of sanitary toilet facilities and removal of other toilet
facilities on such property (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f)).
   (F)   The cutting or destruction of weeds or other growth which constitutes
a health, safety, or fire hazard (per Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(g)).
   (G)   The maintenance, by the property owner, of all property outside the
lot and property lines and inside the curb line upon public streets, including
the maintenance of trees as provided in §§
153.01 through
153.07.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-3) (Ord.2014-03, passed 7-22-2014)
§ 90.004 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE OR CONDITION.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor, or other authorized municipal officer, finds that
a nuisance or other prohibited condition exists, the Mayor, or officer, may
notify the property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor to
abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
   (B)   Notice and opportunity to abate the nuisance is not required prior to
bringing legal action.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.005 CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE.
   The notice to abate shall contain:
   (A)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance or other condition;
   (B)   The location of the nuisance or condition;
   (C)   A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance or
condition;
   (D)   A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement; and
   (E)   A statement that if the nuisance or condition is not abated as
directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the
city will abate it and assess the costs against such person.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.006 METHOD OF SERVICE.
   The notice may be sent by regular mail to the property owner as shown by the
records of the County Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.007 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Any person ordered to abate a nuisance or condition may have a
hearing with the officer ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance or
prohibited condition exists. A request for a hearing must be made in writing
and delivered to the officer/employee ordering the abatement within seven
working days of the receipt of the notice or the right to a hearing shall be
waived.
      (2)   If an appeal is not filed as set forth herein, it will be
conclusively presumed that a nuisance or prohibited condition exists, and it
must be abated as ordered.
   (B)   (1)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
render a written decision as to whether a nuisance or prohibited condition
exists. If the officer finds that a nuisance or prohibited condition exists,
the officer must order it abated within an additional time which must be
reasonable under the circumstances.
      (2)   The property owner may appeal this decision by filing written
notice with the City Clerk within five calendar days of the decision. This
appeal shall be heard before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the
Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance or
prohibited condition is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a
time reasonable under the circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)
§ 90.008 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.
   If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the continuing
maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any action that
may be required under this subchapter without prior notice, and assess the
costs as provided herein, after notice to the property owner under the
applicable provision of §§
90.004 and
90.005, and hearing as provided in §
90.007.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-8)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.009 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   (A)   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or
fails to abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate,
keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
   (B)   The itemized expense account shall be filed with the City Clerk, who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.010 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
   The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the
property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the
amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the City
Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and they shall then be
collected with, and in the same manner as general property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-10)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.011 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
   If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $100, the
city may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten annual installments, to
be paid in the same manner and at the same rate of interest charged delinquent
real estate taxes by the County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-11)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.13
§ 90.012 CONDEMNATION OF NUISANCE.
   The city may condemn a residential, commercial, or industrial building found
to be abandoned and a public nuisance and take title to the property for the
public purpose of disposing of the property under Iowa Code Chapter 657A by
conveying the property to a private individual for rehabilitation, or for
demolition and construction of housing.
(Prior Code, § 3-2-12)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code §§ 364.12A, 657A.1, 657A.10a
NOISE CONTROL
§ 90.025 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish standards for the control of
noise pollution in the city, thereby protecting the public’s health, safety,
and general welfare.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
§ 90.026 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   This subchapter applies to the control of all noise originating within the
limits of the city, except in the following cases:
   (A)   Where a state or federal agency has adopted a different standard or
rule than prescribed within this subchapter, which preempts the regulation of
noise from a particular source so as to render this subchapter inapplicable;
and/or
   (B)   Where the City Council has granted a variance consistent with the
provisions of this subchapter, where there is public acceptance of the activity
producing a particular noise or noises, resulting in a finding by the Council
that said noise is generally deemed acceptable by the community.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
§ 90.027 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms have the following meanings.
Definitions of technical terms used in this subchapter, which are not herein
defined, shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued
by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
   APPLICATION. The application submitted to the city requesting an outside
services permit.
   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands
immediate action.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or
resolving an emergency.
   HOLIDAY. New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
   NOISE. Any sound which disturbs humans, or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. As defined in §
90.029.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
unaided hearing faculties, including, but not limited to, the understanding of
spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or
comprehension of musical rhythms. The detection of the rhythmic bass component
of the music is sufficient to constitute a PLAINLY AUDIBLE sound.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Also known as MOTORIZED VEHICLE or AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLE, is a
self-propelled land vehicle, commonly wheeled, that does not operate on rails
and is used for the transportation of people or cargo.
   POWERED MODEL VEHICLE. Any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne, or land
borne model, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons,
including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. Any imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property
division.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any motor-powered vehicle designed to carry at least
one passenger or driver and equipped for use in racing or other recreational
events, or uses off of public right-of-way on public or private property;
except, however, for the purposes of this subchapter, any such vehicle which is
licensed for use on the public highways is deemed a motor vehicle (or
motorcycle if two or three-wheeled) and not a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. (Examples
of RECREATIONAL VEHICLES are snowmobiles, minibikes, stockcars, four wheelers
or motorboats, golf carts, and go karts.)
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property on which is located a building or
structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes.
   SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity,
or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of SOUND may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
   SOUND EQUIPMENT. Any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loud
speaker, amplifier, sound track, or other device for producing, reproducing, or
amplifying sound; except, however, SOUND EQUIPMENT does not include sirens and
other equipment used to alert persons to the existence of an emergency;
equipment used by law enforcement and other public safety officials in the
performance of their official duties; church carillons, bells, or chimes;
mobile radio or telephone signaling devices; and motor vehicle radios, tape
decks, or players, or other such standard equipment used and intended for the
use and enjoyment of the occupants, provided that the sound emitted therefrom
is not audible from a distance of 50 feet or greater from such motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
§ 90.028 NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, cause, or allow
any noise disturbance within the city.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.029 SOUNDS NOT ALLOWED.
   The term NOISE DISTURBANCE means any of the following sounds:
   (A)   Alarm testing. The sound emitted by the intentional sounding outdoors
of any privately-owned fire alarm, burglar alarm, siren, whistle, or similar
stationary emergency signaling device for the essential testing of such device,
when conducted between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (B)   Motor vehicle radios. The sound emitted by a motor vehicle radio, tape
deck, or compact disk player, or other such standard equipment used and
intended for the use and enjoyment of such vehicle’s occupants while such
vehicle is on the public right-of-way if the sound emitted therefrom is audible
from a distance of 50 feet or greater from the motor vehicle.
   (C)   Chain saws. The sound emitted by motor-powered chain saws, tree
trimming equipment, and weed cutters operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday, and holidays.
   (D)   Construction noise. The sound made by privately-owned and operated
tools or equipment in erection, demolition, excavation, drilling, or other such
construction work between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through
Sunday, and holidays.
   (E)   Engine brakes and compression brakes. The sound made by an engine
brake device, compression brake, or a mechanical exhaust device designed to aid
in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle at all times.
   (F)   Engine repairs and testing. The sound made by the repairing,
rebuilding, modifying, or testing a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday, and
holidays.
   (G)   Lawn and garden equipment. The sound emitted by motor-powered lawn and
garden equipment operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Sunday, and holidays.
   (H)   Loading and unloading. The sound made by outdoor loading, unloading,
opening, closing, or handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
trash cans, containers, receptacles, and/or dumpsters between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday, and holidays.
   (I)   Musical instruments. The sound made by a drum, horn, reed, and/or
string instrument, or other musical instrument or device used to make sounds
typical to what one would expect from a musical instrument, between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Sundays, and holidays.
   (J)   Noisy exhaust system. The sound made by a motor vehicle or a
recreational vehicle whose exhaust system is defective or has been modified by
the installation of a muffler cutout or bypass.
   (K)   Off-road motorcycle and recreational vehicle noise. The sound made on
private or city-owned property other than a public right-of-way by an off-road
motorcycle or recreational vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Sunday, and holidays; provided, however, the sound made by an
offroad motorcycle when traveling from private property to a public right-of-
way, or vice versa, in pursuance of normal ingress or egress for purposeful
transportation is not a noise disturbance, unless made so by some other
provision of this section.
   (L)   Powered model vehicles. The sound made by the operation of a powered
model vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through
Sunday, and holidays.
   (M)   Racing. The sound made by a motor vehicle or recreational vehicle on
private property or public right-of-way during any operations, including, but
not limited to, recreational use, practice for a racing event or time trial, or
racing event or time trial, whether organized or unorganized, at all times.
   (N)   Screeching/squealing tires. The sound made by the reckless or
intentional screeching or squealing of the tires of a motor vehicle,
motorcycle, or recreational vehicle at all times.
   (O)   Selling by “hawking” or “barking.” The sound of selling by shout or
outcry when made within the area of the city zoned residential or commercial.
   (P)   Sound equipment. The sound made by sound equipment operated upon the
public right-of-way or in any building, or upon any public or private premises,
if plainly audible for more than 50 feet from the real property boundary, at
all times unless the operator(s) has an outdoor services permit. Any commercial
business that regularly uses, operates, or causes to be used or operated, sound
equipment must close their doors to abate the sound at any time, unless such
business has an outdoor services permit or meets the limitations specified in
this subchapter at all times.
   (Q)   Loud and excessive noise. The sound made from or resulting from the
repair or rebuilding of any motor vehicle within any residential area is
permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.
   (R)   Loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subchapter or code, and in addition, hereto, it shall be
unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued,
any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of
any neighborhood, or which cause discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivities.
   (S)   Outdoor music or amplified noise. The making or continuing to make any
outdoor music or amplified noise between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday, and 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday,
when the person making or causing to make such music or noise knows or
reasonably should know the music or noise would disturb the peace of a
reasonable person.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.030 EXCEPTIONS TO THIS SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to the following.
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency. This is to include the public address systems.
      (2)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
      (3)   Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation
vehicles.
      (4)   The emission of sound in the performance of military operations,
exclusive of travel by individuals to or from military duty.
      (5)   The emission of sound from activities in the discharge of weapons,
fireworks display, or parades permitted by the City Council.
      (6)   The emission of sound from activities where the state or federal
agency has adopted a different standard or rules than that prescribed within
this subchapter.
      (7)   The emission of sound during nonprofessional athletic and school
events or practices.
      (8)   (a)   The emission of sound from on-site stationary trash
compactors, municipal owned and operated or municipally contracted compacter
trucks loading or unloading yard waste, recyclable material, and/or trash/
garbage.
         (b)   In cases where the sound originates within 300 feet of a land
zoned residential under the city code, this exemption shall only apply between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      (9)   The emission of sound during the operation, maintenance, repair,
and cleaning of public streets and facilities.
      (10)   The emission of sound during work performed by or for public
utilities.
      (11)   Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the
ownership or possession of animals or birds.
      (12)   The emission of sound by church carillons, bells, or chimes, be it
electronic or mechanical.
      (13)   The emission of sound by snow removal equipment on public and
private property.
      (14)   (a)   Reasonable sounds emanating from sanctioned sporting events
conducted on the grounds of a city public or parochial school, or college or
university campuses, within a sports stadium between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday
and Saturday.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, SANCTIONED SPORTING EVENTS are
described as competitive matches between teams from different institutions.
         (c)   Sanctioned sporting events includes one hour prior to the event
and one-half hour after the event. Sports team practices and intramurals are
not considered sanctioned sporting events under this division (A)(14).
   (B)   Although exempt from the maximum permissible sound levels of this
subchapter, an outdoor services permit is required in all cases where sound
equipment and sound amplifying equipment will be used outside of any premises;
11:00 p.m. is the time limit.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
§ 90.031 NOISE VARIANCE PERMITS.
   (A)   Issuance. Variance permits may be issued, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, by the City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s
designee, from the noise prohibitions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Temporary variance permit. A temporary variance permit may be issued
upon request; provided, that the work producing such noise is necessary to
promote the public health and/or welfare, and reasonable steps are taken to
keep such noise at the lowest possible practical level.
   (C)   Special events. A temporary variance permit may be issued for special
events, such as circuses, Fourth of July celebrations, and similar community
events that are limited in duration and are generally acceptable to the people
of the community; provided, that precautions are taken to maintain the noises
produced at the lowest practical level.
   (D)   Application for permit. Applications for temporary variance permits
shall be made in writing to the City Administrator, or the City Administrator’s
designee, and shall contain such information as requested by the City
Administrator, or the City Administrator designee, including, but not limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Dates requested;
      (2)   Time and place of operation;
      (3)   Equipment and operation involved; and
      (4)   Necessity for such permit.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
§ 90.032 OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
   No provisions of this subchapter should be construed to legalize or permit
sounds, devices or activities made unlawful by other ordinances of the city or
state or federal statutes.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed - -2022)
OUTDOOR FURNACES
§ 90.045 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that smoke, odors, and emissions caused by the use of
outdoor furnaces can be detrimental to the public health and deprive residents
of the enjoyment of their property. The purpose of this subchapter is to ban
the installation and construction of outdoor furnaces and establish regulations
and restrictions regarding the existing outdoor furnaces within the city, and
to promote the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 6-19-1)
§ 90.046 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   EXISTING OUTDOOR FURNACES. Any outdoor furnace in existence as of May 14,
2019.
   OUTDOOR FURNACE. Any equipment, device, or apparatus which is installed,
affixed, or situated outdoors or within another structure for the primary
purpose of burning fuel to produce heat or energy used in whole or in part as a
heating system to provide heat and/or hot water to any structure.
   STACK or CHIMNEY. Any vertical structure enclosing a flue or flues that
carry off smoke, exhaust, and other emissions from an outdoor furnace.
(Prior Code, § 6-19-2)
§ 90.047 EXISTING OUTDOOR FURNACES.
   Any outdoor furnace in existence on May 14, 2019 shall be permitted to
remain, subject to the §
90.048, “General Requirements.”
(Prior Code, § 6-19-3)
§ 90.048 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner of any outdoor furnace in existence as of May 14, 2019 shall
apply for and receive an outdoor furnace permit from the City Clerk.
   (B)   Outdoor furnaces may not be operated between April 1 and October 15 of
each year.
   (C)   All outdoor furnaces shall be installed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications and instructions.
   (D)   All outdoor furnaces shall be laboratory tested and listed to
appropriate safety standards, such as UL (Underwriter’s Laboratories), ANSI
(American National Standards Institute), or other applicable safety standards.
Outdoor furnaces shall not be located less than 30 feet from the nearest lot
line. Outdoor furnaces shall not be located within 100 feet from any residence
not being served by the furnace.
   (E)   Only natural, untreated wood or the manufacturer’s listed fuels may be
burned in any outdoor furnace. Burning any other materials in the furnace is
prohibited. Trash, plastics, gasoline, rubber, naphtha, household garbage,
particle board, railroad ties, pressure treated wood, or other materials
treated with petroleum products, leaves, paper products, and cardboard are
prohibited.
   (F)   Petroleum products or chemicals shall not be used to start an outdoor
furnace.
   (G)   Every outdoor furnace shall be equipped with a stack or chimney. All
stacks and chimneys must be constructed as to withstand high winds and other
weather elements. In no event shall a stack or chimney extend less than 25 feet
above the ground.
   (H)   (1)   In order to obtain a permit for an existing outdoor furnace, the
furnace must be in compliance with all of the provisions of this subchapter and
any other applicable county, state, or federal regulations.
      (2)   All provisions shall continue to apply to an outdoor furnace after
a permit has been issued. No existing outdoor furnace may be moved or replaced
by a new outdoor furnace.
   (I)   All existing outdoor furnaces shall be inspected each year prior to
operation.
(Prior Code, § 6-19-4)
§ 90.049 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for an outdoor furnace permit shall be made to the City
Clerk on a form provided by the city, and shall contain and/or have attached
thereto the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, and daytime and evening telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   Address of the lot upon which the outdoor furnace is located;
      (3)   A site plan indicating the location of the outdoor furnace in
relation to all lot lines;
      (4)   The name of the manufacturer and model number of the outdoor
furnace, together with a copy of the manufacturer’s installation, operation,
and maintenance instructions;
      (5)   A description of the stack or chimney proposed to be used in
connection with the outdoor furnace, including its height and a description of
any guy wires or other devices to be used to support or stabilize the stack;
and
      (6)   Such other information as the City Clerk shall require to show full
compliance with this subchapter and other ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The applicant shall pay an application fee for the administration and
inspection of the outdoor furnace, which shall be deposited in the city’s
General Fund. The application fee shall be set by the City Council resolution.
The applicant for an outdoor furnace permit shall, in all cases, be the owner
of the lot on which the outdoor furnace is to be located.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall issue an outdoor furnace permit or deny an
outdoor furnace permit application within 30 days of the receipt of a fully
completed application. The City Clerk shall deny any application which is not
filed in conformity with this section or which proposes an outdoor furnace
which would be contrary to any provisions of the ordinances of the city. Any
denial of an application shall provide, in writing, the reasons for such
denial. If an application is denied, the permit fee shall be refunded to the
applicant. A denial of an outdoor furnace permit application may be appealed,
by the applicant, to the City Council. The appeal must be in writing and filed
in the office of the City Clerk within 20 calendar days after the date of the
denial of the permit. The City Council will hold a hearing on the appeal within
45 days of the date that the appeal is filed with the City Clerk’s office.
(Prior Code, § 6-19-5)
§ 90.050 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or any of
the terms and conditions of any permit, regulation, or lawful order of the city
made under the authority of this subchapter shall be guilty of a simple
misdemeanor and a municipal infraction. Each day that a violation exists or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. If any outdoor furnace regulated
under this subchapter is installed, constructed, moved, maintained, or used in
violation of this subchapter or in violation of the terms and conditions issued
or made under the authority of this subchapter, a simple misdemeanor citation
and/or a municipal infraction citation may be issued to remedy and/or abate the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-19-6)
JUNK, ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 90.065 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens and safety of property of the city by providing for removal of
abandoned motor vehicles and the elimination of the open storage of abandoned
and junk motor vehicles and machinery, except in authorized places.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-1)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.1
§ 90.066 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates, or two or more wheels or
other parts which render the vehicle totally inoperable;
      (2)   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours;
      (3)   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked on private property or
has been placed on private property without the consent of the owner or person
in control of the property for more than 24 hours;
      (4)   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
officer and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten days; or
      (5)   Any vehicle parked on the street determined by a police officer to
create a hazard to other vehicular traffic (per Iowa Code § 321.89(1)(b)).
   JUNK VEHICLE. Any unlicensed vehicle stored within the corporate limits of
the city, or any vehicle which has any one of the following characteristics.
      (1)   Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, or window or
headlight, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      (2)   Any vehicle with a broken or loose fender, door, or bumper, or hood
or door handle, or window handle or steering wheel, trunk top, or trunk handle
or tail pipe.
      (3)   Any vehicle which has become the habitat of rats, mice, or snakes,
or any other vermin or insects.
      (4)   Any motor vehicle if it lacks an engine or two or more wheels, or
other structural parts which render said motor vehicle totally inoperable.
      (5)   Any other vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete
condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health and
safety (Cedar Falls v. Flett 330 N.W. 2nd 251, 253, Iowa 1983).
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is not PUBLIC
PROPERTY, as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public right-of-way open for the purposes of vehicular
travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and shall
include, without limitation, a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-2) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
§ 90.067 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Police Department may, without prior notice or hearing, remove and
impound any abandoned vehicle as defined in §
90.066. The police officer may hire other personnel, equipment, and facilities
for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned
vehicles.
   (B)   The impoundment and storage of all vehicles pursuant to this
subchapter shall be in such areas or places designated by the City Council.
   (C)   (1)   When a vehicle is taken into custody and impounded under the
provisions of this chapter, the police officer shall maintain a record of the
vehicle, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
body style, vehicle identification number, and license plate and year displayed
on the vehicle.
      (2)   The records shall include the date and hour of tow, location towed
from, location towed to, person or firm doing the towing, reason for towing,
and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall govern the procedures of any police
officer in taking into custody and impounding any vehicle to be used or
proposed to be used as evidence in a criminal case involving crimes other than
violations of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-3) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.89(2)
§ 90.068 NOTIFICATION OF OWNERS AND LIENHOLDERS.
   (A)   When a vehicle is taken into custody under the provisions of this
subchapter or under any provisions of state law, the police officer shall
notify, within three days by certified mail, with five-days’ return receipt,
the last known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and
any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the
vehicle, addressed to his or her last known addresses of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed. The notice shall:
      (1)   Describe the year, make, model, and serial number of the vehicle;
      (2)   Describe the personal property found in the vehicle;
      (3)   Describe the location of the facility where the vehicle is being
held;
      (4)   Inform the persons receiving notice:
         (a)   Of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property
within ten days after the effective date of the notice;
         (b)   The right can be exercised upon payment of all towing,
preservation, notice, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in
custody;
         (c)   Failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle within the reclaiming period shall be deemed a waiver by
the owner and all lienholders of all right, title, claim, and interest in the
vehicle; and
         (d)   Failure to reclaim the vehicle is deemed consent to the sale of
the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher.
      (5)   State that any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle
or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or
personal property by the police officer, or the assessment of fees and charges
provided by this subchapter, may request a hearing to contest these matters in
accordance with the provisions of §
90.070;
      (6)   State that a request for a hearing must be in writing and received
by the department prior to the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period; and
      (7)   State that in the event a hearing is requested, immediate release
of the vehicle may be obtained by posting a cash bond as required by §
90.069.
   (B)   The owner or any person receiving notice may, by written request
received by the police officer prior to the expiration of the ten-day
reclaiming period, obtain an additional 14 days within which the vehicle may be
reclaimed.
   (C)   (1)   Notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to
meet the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   The published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned
vehicles, but shall be published within the same time requirements and shall
contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in this section.
Published notice shall be used if:
         (a)   The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined;
         (b)   The registration contains no address for the owner; or
         (c)   It is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identity and address of all lienholders.
   (D)   If the persons receiving notice do not request a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the reclaiming
period, the owner of the vehicle or owners of the personal property shall no
longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle.
   (E)   No court in any case in law or equity shall recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner and lienholders after the ten-day
reclaiming period.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-4) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.89(3), (3)(a), (3)(b), (3)(c)
§ 90.069 IMPOUNDMENT FEES AND BONDS.
   (A)   Before the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of
any vehicle that has been impounded under the provisions of this subchapter or
any other provision of law may recover such vehicle, such person shall present
to the police officer evidence of such person’s identity and right to
possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, and shall pay
the costs of:
      (1)   An impoundment fee;
      (2)   Towing charges;
      (3)   Preservation charges;
      (4)   Storage charges; and
      (5)   Notice charges.
   (B)   The amount of the charges specified in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
above shall be set by the City Council. The notice charges shall be limited to
the actual cost.
   (C)   If a hearing is requested under §
90.068(A)(5), the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of the
vehicle shall be permitted to secure the immediate release of the vehicle upon
posting a cash bond in an amount equal to the sum of:
      (1)   The fees required by division (A) above; and
      (2)   The amount of the fine or penalty for each violation for which
there is an outstanding or otherwise unsettled traffic violation notice or
warrant.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-5)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.89(3)(a)
§ 90.070 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   The registered owner, any lienholder of record, or duly authorized agents
thereof, may object to the legality of the impoundment or the assessment of
fees and request a hearing thereon. No person shall be entitled to more than
one hearing on each impoundment. Upon receipt of a timely objection to the
impoundment, the objector shall be informed of the reason for the impoundment
and a hearing shall be held, without unnecessary delay, before the City Council
pursuant to §
30.15.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-6)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.89(3)
§ 90.071 AUCTION OR DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   The police officer shall follow the procedures in state law for the auction
or disposal of abandoned vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-7) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 321.89(4)
§ 90.072 JUNK VEHICLES DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it is hereby declared that the parking,
leaving, or storage of a junk vehicle upon either public or private property
within the corporate limits of the city constitutes a threat to the health and
safety of the citizens, and is a nuisance within the meaning of Iowa Code §
657.1. If any junk vehicle is stored upon private property or public property
in violation thereof, the owner of the property shall be liable for said
violation.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-8)
§ 90.073 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer shall find a junk vehicle placed or stored
on private property within the city in violation of §
90.072, the police officer shall notify, by certified mail with five days’
return receipt, the following persons:
      (1)   The owner of the property; and
      (2)   The occupant of the property.
   (B)   The notice to abate shall:
      (1)   Describe, to the extent possible, the year, make, model, and color
of the vehicle;
      (2)   Describe the location of the vehicle;
      (3)   State that the vehicle constitutes a nuisance under the provisions
of this subchapter; and
      (4)   State that the owner of the property shall remove or repair the
said junk vehicle within ten days.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-9)
§ 90.074 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or fails to
abate as directed, the city may perform the required action to abate, keeping
an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall
be filed with the City Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
municipality.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-10)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.075 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT.
   The Clerk shall mail a statement of the total expense incurred to the
property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate, and if the
amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk
shall certify the costs to the County Auditor and the costs shall then be
collected with, and in the same manner, as general property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-11)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h)
§ 90.076 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   A vehicle in an enclosed building;
   (B)   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
district properly zoned therefor, as authorized under the zoning ordinance or
restricted residence district of the city, when necessary to the operation of
said business enterprise; and/or
   (C)   A vehicle in an appropriate storage space or depository maintained in
a lawful place and lawful manner by the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-12)
§ 90.077 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   No person shall interfere in any way with the enforcement provision of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-10-13)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   [Reserved]
   
91.03   [Reserved]
   
91.04   At large prohibited
   
91.05   Animal nuisances
   
91.06   Impounding
   
91.07   Dangerous animals
   
91.08   Keeping a vicious animal
   
91.09   Kennel dogs
   
91.10   Livestock animals
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Any licensed or unlicensed animal found off the premises of the
owner and not under the control of a competent person, restrained within a
motor vehicle, housed in a veterinary hospital, or kennel, on a leash, or “at
heel” beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s command.
   DOGS. Animals of the canine species whether altered or not.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an animal.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-1) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
§ 91.02 [RESERVED].
§ 91.03 [RESERVED].
§ 91.04 AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   No owner or person having custody of an animal shall permit such animal to
run at large.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-4) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 351.41
§ 91.05 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit an animal under such person’s
control or within such person’s custody to commit a nuisance. An animal shall
be considered a nuisance if it:
   (A)   Damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property other than
the owner’s, or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner;
   (B)   Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; and
   (C)   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking or
chases vehicles, or molests, attacks, or interferes with persons or other
domestic animals.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-5) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 657.1
§ 91.06 IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Any unlicensed or unvaccinated dog found at large, or any licensed dog
found at large in violation of §
91.04 shall be seized and impounded, or, at the discretion of the Mayor, the
owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges
made thereunder.
   (B)   Owners of licensed dogs shall be notified within two days that, upon
payment of impounding fees plus cost of food and care in a reasonable amounts,
the dog will be returned. If the impounded licensed dogs are not recovered by
their owners within seven days after notice, the dogs shall be disposed of as
provided in Iowa Code § 717B.4.
   (C)   Impounded unlicensed dogs may be recovered by the owner, upon proper
identification, by payment of the license fee, impounding and administrative
fee, boarding costs, and the costs of vaccination if vaccination is required.
Animals unclaimed are handled per the humane society policy.
   (D)   Any animal found to have bitten a person or other animal shall be
confined as directed by the Mayor.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to a law enforcement dog or horse used by
the law enforcement agency that is acting in the performance of its duties
which has bitten a person.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-6) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2024-03, passed 4-9-
2024)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code §§ 351.37 and 351.39
§ 91.07 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Dangerous animals prohibited. No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor
for any purpose within the city limits a dangerous animal.
   (B)   Definition. A DANGEROUS ANIMAL is:
      (1)   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals, and
having known tendencies as a species to do so.
      (2)   The following are animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous
animals per se:
         (a)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, and bobcats;
         (b)   Wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
         (c)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks, and mink;
         (d)   Raccoons;
         (e)   Bears;
         (f)   Monkeys, chimpanzees, and apes;
         (g)   Alligators and crocodiles;
         (h)   Scorpions, and gila monsters;
         (i)   Snakes that are venomous or constrictors; and
         (j)   Any animals declared to be dangerous by the City Council.
   (C)   Dangerous animals exceptions. The keeping of dangerous animals shall
not be prohibited in the following circumstances: The keeping of dangerous
animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational or medical institution, humane
society, or museum where they are kept as live specimens for the public to
view, or for the purpose of instruction, research, or study, and has obtained
the written approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-7) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2008-01, passed 1-22-
2008)
§ 91.08 KEEPING A VICIOUS ANIMAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to harbor or keep a vicious
animal within the city.
   (A)   Vicious animal defined. A potentially VICIOUS ANIMAL is an animal
that:
      (1)   When unprovoked, on two separate occasions, has engaged in any
behavior that has required a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily
injury when the person and animal were off of the property of the owner or
keeper of the animal;
      (2)   When unprovoked, has attacked or bitten a person;
      (3)   When unprovoked, has inflicted a serious injury or caused the death
of a domestic animal, either on public or private property other than the
property of the owner or keeper; or
      (4)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person or domestic animal
upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property other than the
property of the owner or keeper, in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of
attack.
   (B)   Procedure for declaration of potentially vicious animal.
      (1)   The Police Chief, City Clerk, or designee may find and declare an
animal potentially vicious based upon the following:
         (a)   The written complaint of a citizen that the animal has acted in
a manner set forth in division (A) above;
         (b)   Animal bite reports filed with the Health Services Department;
         (c)   Actions of the animal witnessed by any animal control officer or
law enforcement officer; or
         (d)   Other substantial evidence.
      (2)   The declaration of a potentially vicious animal shall be in writing
and shall be served on the owner or keeper in one of the following methods:
personally, by certified mail to the owner at the owner’s or keeper’s last
known address, or if the owner or keeper cannot be served personally or by
mail, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
      (3)   (a)   The declaration shall state:
            1.   The description of the animal;
            2.   The name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal, if
known;
            3.   The whereabouts of the animal, if not in the custody of the
owner or keeper;
            4.   The facts upon which the declaration of potentially vicious
animal is based;
            5.   The owner’s or keeper’s right to a hearing if the person
objects to the declaration;
            6.   The restrictions placed upon the animal as a result of the
declaration of potentially vicious animal; and
            7.   The penalties for a violation of such restrictions.
         (b)   If the Police Chief, City Clerk, or other designee so determines
that the owner or keeper be required to have microchip identification implanted
in the animal.
      (4)   The owner or keeper may object to the declaration of potentially
vicious animal by requesting a hearing before the City Council by submitting a
written request to the City Clerk within four days per service, seven days of
the date of mailing of the declaration via certified mail, or within 10 days of
the publication of the declaration.
         (a)   If the City Council finds that there is insufficient evidence to
support the declaration, it shall be rescinded, and the restrictions imposed
thereby annulled.
         (b)   If the City Council finds sufficient evidence to support the
declaration, the City Council shall provide the owner with written notice of
such determination within ten working days after the hearing.
         (c)   Prior to the hearing, the owner or keeper shall confine the
animal in a fenced enclosure on the owner’s or keeper’s premises. It shall be
unlawful for the owner or keeper of the potentially vicious animal to allow or
permit such animal to go beyond the premises of the owner or keeper unless such
animal is securely leashed and humanely muzzled, or otherwise securely
restrained.
         (d)   If it is determined by the animal control officer or law
enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe the dog in question
poses an immediate threat to public safety, then the animal control officer or
law enforcement officer may seize and impound the animal pending the hearing to
be held pursuant to this section. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be
liable to the city or county where the animal is impounded for the costs and
expenses of keeping the animal if the animal is later determined to be
potentially vicious. When an animal has been impounded and it is not contrary
to public safety, the animal control officer shall permit the animal to be
confined at the owner’s expense in a health services department approved kennel
or veterinary facility.
   (C)   Notification of status of potentially vicious animal.
      (1)   The owner or keeper shall immediately notify the Health Services
Department when an animal has been classified as potentially vicious, and the
following occurs:
         (a)   Is loose or unconfined;
         (b)   Has bitten a human being or attacked another animal;
         (c)   Is sold, given away, or dies; or
         (d)   Is moved to another address.
      (2)   Prior to a potentially vicious animal being sold or given away, the
owner or keeper shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of the
new owner or keeper to the Health Services Department. The new owner or keeper
shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Exceptions to classification.
      (1)   No animal may be declared potentially vicious if:
         (a)   Any injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time
of the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or
other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime;
         (b)   The animal was protecting or defending a person within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault; or
         (c)   The injury or damage was sustained by a person or a domestic
animal which, at the time of the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing,
tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal.
      (2)   No animal may be declared potentially vicious if the injury or
damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the animal was working as a
hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under
the control of, its owner or keeper, and the damage or injury was to a species
or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the animal.
   (E)   Disposition of potentially vicious animal pending compliance with this
chapter.
      (1)   (a)   A potentially vicious animal shall be properly licensed and
vaccinated, as required by city ordinances. The potentially vicious designation
shall be included in the registration records of the animal.
         (b)   The city may charge a potentially vicious animal fee in addition
to the regular licensing fee to provide for the increased costs of maintaining
the records of the animal.
      (2)   A potentially vicious animal, while on the owner’s or keeper’s
property, shall at all times be kept indoors or in a securely fenced yard from
which the animal cannot escape, and into which children cannot trespass. A
potentially vicious animal may be off the owner’s or keeper’s premises only if
restrained by a substantial leash of appropriate length, and if the animal is
under the control of a responsible adult and is humanely muzzled.
      (3)   If a potentially vicious animal dies, is sold, is transferred, or
permanently removed from the city, the owner or keeper of the animal shall
notify the Health Services Department of the changed condition and new location
of the animal in writing within two working days.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-8) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.09 KENNEL DOGS.
   Dogs that are kept or raised in a kennel licensed by the state solely for
the bona fide purpose of sale or breeding, and which are kept under constant
restraint, are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-1-9) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2012-02, passed 3-13-
2012)
§ 91.10 LIVESTOCK ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep any livestock animal belonging to the bovine, caprine,
equine, ovine, or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, emu, farm deer, poultry,
or bees at any place or upon any premises within the city.
(Ord. 2022-11, passed 8-9-2022)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   Hours of operation
   
92.02   Removal of unattended vehicles
§ 92.01 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall enter or remain in the Peosta City Park other than
during the hours designated in this section.
   (B)   The Peosta City Park shall be open for use by the public from 6:00
a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily.
   (C)   The Mayor, or authorized representative, shall have the authority to
open or close the Peosta City Park and recreation facilities whenever it is
deemed necessary in the interest and safety of the public.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-1)
§ 92.02 REMOVAL OF UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle left unattended in the Peosta City Park after closing
thereof shall be deemed abandoned, and the Mayor, or authorized representative,
may cause the same to be towed from the park, and the same shall not be
redeemed by the owner or the person responsible therefor until the reasonable
towing and storage charges are paid.
(Prior Code, § 4-2-2) (Ord. 90-02, passed 8-7-1990)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
111.   ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
      
112.   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
      
113.   LICENSING JUNK DEALERS
      
114.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
115.   GAS, ELECTRIC FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Required obedience to provisions of this chapter and state law
   
110.03   Action by Council
   
110.04   Transfers
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for administration of licenses and
permits, and for local regulations and procedures for the conduct of the sale
and consumption of beer, wine, and liquor, for the protection of the safety,
health, and general welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-1)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.1
§ 110.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER AND STATE LAW.
   The following sections of the Iowa Code are hereby adopted by reference.
   (A)   Sections 123.2 and 123.3, “General Prohibition and Definitions.”
   (B)   Section 123.15, “Favors From Licensee or Permittee.”
   (C)   Section 123.22, “State Monopoly.”
   (D)   Section 123.30, “Retail Alcohol Licenses - Classes.”
   (E)   Section 123.31, “Retail Alcohol Licenses - Application.”
   (F)   Section 123.33, “Records.”
   (G)   Section 123.35, “Expiration of Licenses, Permits, and Certificates of
Compliance - Automatic Renewals.”
   (H)   Section 123.150, “Liquor Fees - Sunday Sales.”
   (I)   Section 123.38, “Nature of Permit or License - Surrender - Transfer.”
   (J)   Section 123.39, “Suspension or Revocation of License or Permit - Civil
Penalty.”
   (K)   Section 123.40, “Effect of Revocation.”
   (L)   Section 123.44, “Gifts Prohibited.”
   (M)   Section 123.46, “Consumption or Intoxication in Public Places -
Notifications - Chemical Test - Expungement.”
   (N)   Section 123.47, “Persons under Eighteen Years of Age, Person Eighteen,
Nineteen, or Twenty Years of Age, and Persons Twenty-one Years of Age and
Older.”
   (O)   Section 123.49, “Miscellaneous Prohibitions.”
   (P)   Section 123.50, “Criminal and Civil Penalties.”
   (Q)   Section 123.51, “Advertisements for Alcoholic Liquor, Wine, or Beer.”
   (R)   Section 123.52, “Prohibited Sale.”
   (S)   Section 123.90, “Penalties Generally.”
   (T)   Section 123.95, “Premises Must Be Licensed - Exception as to
Conventions and Social Gatherings.”
   (U)   Sections 123.122 through 123.145, “Subchapter II.”
   (V)   Sections 123.171 through 123.182, “Subchapter V Wine Provisions -
Charity Beer, Spirits, and Wine Special Events.”
   (W)   Section 321.284, “Open Containers in Motor Vehicles - Drivers.”
   (X)   Section 321.284A, “Open Containers in Motor Vehicles - Passengers.”
(Prior Code, § 3-9-2) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2024-07, passed 5-14-
2024)
§ 110.03 ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall approve or disapprove the application when
applicable. Action taken by the City Council shall be endorsed on the
application. The application fee, penal bond, and certificate of dram shop
liability insurance (if applicable) shall be forwarded to the State Alcoholic
Beverages Division for further action as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-3) (Ord. 2024-07, passed 5-14-2024)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 123.32(2)
§ 110.04 TRANSFERS.
   The City Council may, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or permittee
to transfer the license or permit from one location to another within the city,
provided that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would have been
eligible for a license or permit in the first instance, and the transfer will
not result in the violation of any law or ordinance. An applicant for a
transfer shall file with the application for transfer proof of dram shop
liability insurance and penal bond covering the premises to which the license
is to be transferred.
(Prior Code, § 3-9-4)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 123.38
CHAPTER 111: ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Regulations governing the location and spatial separation of adult-
oriented establishments
   
111.04   Development design standards
   
111.05   Responsibilities of the operator
   
111.06   Minors
   
111.07   Hours of operation
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   The city finds:
   (A)   Adult-oriented establishments require special consideration in order
to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such
establishments as well as the citizens of the city;
   (B)   Adult-oriented establishments, because of their very nature, have a
detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and surrounding
residential areas adjacent to them;
   (C)   The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases is a legitimate health
concern of the city that demands reasonable regulation of adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the health and well-being of the community;
   (D)   Adult-oriented establishments, due to their very nature, have serious
objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area;
   (E)   The city wants to minimize these adverse effects and thereby protect
the health, safety, and welfare of its residents; protect residents from
increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property values and
character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of blight; and
   (F)   It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact content neutral regulations that
address the secondary effects of adult-oriented establishments, as well as the
health problems associated with such establishments.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-1)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment that has a facility or facilities,
including, but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls for the
presentation of adult entertainment, including adult-oriented films, movies, or
live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an establishment
having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade for sale,
rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books, films, video cassettes,
magazines, or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined below.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition of any motion picture, live performance,
display, or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme, or is
distinguished or characterized by, an emphasis on any actual or simulated
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, as defined below.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting
material having as its dominant theme, or distinguished or characterized by, an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL
ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, as defined below for observation by
patrons of the building.
   ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises including, without limitation,
adult bookstores or adult motion picture theaters. It further means any
premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted, and which
are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments,
or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, where
such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT further includes,
without limitation, any premises physically arranged and used as such, whether
advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, exotic dance
studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or any other term of like import.
   OPERATORS. Any person, partnership, or corporation operating, conducting,
maintaining, or owning any adult-oriented establishment.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, buttocks, female breasts below the areola, or male genitalia.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Simulated or actual:
      (1)   Showing of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;
      (2)   Acts of sexual activity, sodomy, or sado-masochism; or
      (3)   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks, or female
breasts.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-2)
§ 111.03 REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE LOCATION AND SPATIAL SEPARATION OF ADULT-
ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Adult-oriented establishments, as herein defined, are declared to be
regulated by the following rules:
   (A)   Prohibited locations. No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk
or employee, either alone or for any other person, or as an officer of any
corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own, or operate any adult-
oriented establishments in the following locations:
      (1)   Within 2,000 feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or
other place of religious worship;
      (2)   Within 2,000 feet of any public or private school offering general
education for students between the years of kindergarten and twelfth grade;
      (3)   Within 2,000 feet of any daycare home or daycare business;
      (4)   Within 2,000 feet of any public park or playground. For purposes of
this section, bike paths, trails, waterways, and boat launches shall not be
deemed a public park;
      (5)   Within 2,000 feet of any other adult entertainment business; or
      (6)   Within 2,000 feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic
beverages for consumption on premises.
   (B)   Measurement of distance. The distance between any two adult-oriented
establishments shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any adult-oriented establishment and any
religious institution, school, daycare business, public park or playground, or
establishment selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard for intervening structures, from
the closest property line of each.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult-oriented
establishment:
      (1)   To allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be
visible from any point outside the establishment;
      (2)   To allow the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment
to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or
      (3)   To allow exterior portions of the establishment to be painted other
than a single color.
   (B)   Signage. The display surfaces of the sign shall not contain any
flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings,
or pictorial representations of any manner depicting specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities, except for the name of the enterprise.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-4)
§ 111.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR.
   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to
supervise the employee’s conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-5)
§ 111.06 MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age
to enter or be on the premises of an adult-oriented establishment at any time
that the establishment is open for business. The operator must ensure that an
attendant is stationed at each public entrance at all times during regular
business hours. The attendant shall prohibit any person under the age of 18
from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a
person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was
furnished a valid driver’s license issued by a state reflecting that person’s
age.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.07 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   An adult-oriented establishment may remain open for business no longer than
the hours from between 12:00 p.m. (noon) to 2:00 a.m., seven days a week.
(Prior Code, § 6-14-7) (Ord. 2008-02, passed 5-27-2008)
CHAPTER 112: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Mobile food unit permit required
   
112.03   Mobile food unit licensing application
   
112.04   Mobile food vendor location
   
112.05   Property owner/lessee responsibility
   
112.06   Permit fees
   
112.07   Compliance with the law
   
112.08   Suspension or revocation of permit
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. A person engaged in the business of selling food or
beverages from a mobile food unit (self-contained motorized vehicle, trailer,
or pushcart).
   PUSHCART. A non-motorized vehicle with dimensions not exceeding four feet in
width and eight feet in length and eight feet in height and being capable of
being moved and kept under control by one person traveling on foot.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-1)
§ 112.02 MOBILE FOOD UNIT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of food or
beverages from a mobile food unit without first obtaining a mobile food unit
permit. A mobile food unit permit issued by the City Clerk, or the City Clerk’s
designee, shall be subject to the following.
   (A)   A mobile food unit permit is good for 12 months and expires on year
from the date of issue.
   (B)   Each mobile food unit shall be permitted separately. No permit
transfer is allowed.
   (C)   Each mobile food unit shall comply with state inspection requirements
and display its state permit in full view of the public in or on the unit.
   (D)   Each mobile food unit shall have working fire suppression
capabilities.
   (E)   Vendors that are permitted through State Economic Development
Corporation or other non-profit, community organization in conjunction with
community special events shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-2) (Ord. 2023-16, passed 9-12-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 MOBILE FOOD UNIT LICENSING APPLICATION.
   (A)   Filing. Application requests shall be filed with City Hall. No
application request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it
conforms to the requirements of this chapter. This would include a complete and
true application, all of the required materials and information prescribed, and
is accompanied by the required fees.
   (B)   Timely submittal. Unless otherwise provided herein, applications must
be submitted not less than seven calendar days prior to the proposed start date
of the mobile food unit activities. The city reserves the right to reject any
applications that have not been timely submitted to the city.
   (C)   Application contents. Application shall be made on a form provided by
the city and shall include:
      (1)   Full name of the applicant;
      (2)   Applicant’s contact information, including mailing address, phone
numbers, photo identification, and e-mail address;
      (3)   Photographs of the mobile food unit from the front, side, and back;
      (4)   Make, model, and year of the vehicle to be used and the permit
plate number (if required);
      (5)   Proof of food service permit, safety certificate, and inspection
reports;
      (6)   Liability insurance certificate; and
      (7)   Sales tax permit.
   (D)   Right to appeal. Any applicant whose application for permit was
disapproved may appeal to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled
meeting by filing with the City Clerk, or the City Clerk’s designee, a written
request for an appeal to the City Council at least seven days prior to the
meeting. As a result of this appeal, the City Council may affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the Clerk not to issue the permit. If the application
for permit is denied, the applicant is not eligible for the issuance of a
permit under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
notification that the permit application was disapproved.
   (E)   Applications deemed withdrawn. Any application received shall be
deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has
not communicated in writing with the city and made reasonable progress within
30 days from the last notification from the city to the applicant. The
application fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed withdrawn shall
require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and
approval process.
   (F)   Issuance of permit. Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the City Clerk, or
the City Clerk’s designee, will issue a mobile food unit permit.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-3)
§ 112.04 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LOCATION.
   (A)   A mobile food unit (non-pushcart) may be parked on public property or
street (on a non-residential side) as approved in the licensing application.
Mobile food units may not park within a city park or property without written
consent from the city. Mobile units also are prohibited from parking within 100
feet of any facade or outdoor seating of a ground level establishment that
sells prepared food or beverages (this only applies from one hour before the
establishment’s opening to an hour after closing) without approval from the
food establishment owner.
   (B)   Pushcarts are permitted to operate within city parks as well as
private property (with property owner approval). Request for authorization to
vend within a city park shall be submitted no less than five days and no more
than 15 days prior to the requested day of vending.
   (C)   (1)   No mobile food unit shall be left unattended or stored on any
site overnight, unless that property is under the ownership or control of (by
way of a lease or other contractual agreement) the operator of the unit and is
being done so in compliance with all other city code requirements, or the
mobile food unit is a participant in a multiple (contiguous) day, city
permitted, public property special event.
      (2)   Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be considered in
violation of these regulations and subject to permit revocation, towing, or any
other action legally allowed.
   (D)   The use of music or sound making devices as a part of a mobile food
unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly allowed as part of an approved
event.
   (E)   Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit must do so in
compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the
property owner or lessee to use the property on which they propose to operate
or from the city if a pushcart on public property. The written consent must be
kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on the property. Written consent
does not excuse or permit the violation of any other imposable regulations.
      (2)   The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their city
permit in full view of the public in or on the unit.
      (3)   Mobile food units that are within 300 feet of a residential use or
residentially zoned property shall be limited to hours of operation between 7:
00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      (4)   Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no
drive-up service to the unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
      (5)   The mobile food unit (non-pushcart) must be located on a paved or
rocked surface.
      (6)   (a)   No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or
lot with a vacant building. Exceptions to this rule may be granted by the city
after a review of the particular property and the vendor has been able to make
arrangements to ensure safe and sanitary conditions.
         (b)   This would include, but is not limited to: employee access to
restrooms, adequate access for fire and police personnel/vehicles, and that the
site in general is free from hazards or dangerous conditions.
      (7)   All mobile food units shall maintain a minimum separation from
buildings of ten feet as measured to the closest building element, including
awnings or canopies, tents, or membrane structures. Location of the food unit
shall not impede pedestrians entering or exiting a building.
      (8)   The window or area where a patron orders and receives their
purchase shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a
line that may cause pedestrians to be in the public right-of-way, vehicle
travel lane, including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may
create a potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for
their order must be available on the property where the mobile food unit is
located.
      (9)   (1)   Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior
of the mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit, and not projected
more than six inches from the exterior of the unit.
         (b)   No freestanding signs, banners, flags, or similar items are
allowed. Off premises signs directing patrons to the mobile food unit are
prohibited unless expressly approved through the permitting process.
      (10)   During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a
trash receptacle for use by customers, and shall keep the area around the
mobile food unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
      (11)   All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not
create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the
site, obstructing access to fire hydrants, impeding entering and exiting from a
building, and creating a visual impediment for the motoring public at drive
entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, or similar movement and access.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-4)
§ 112.05 PROPERTY OWNER/LESSEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   By allowing the mobile food unit on their property, the property owner
or lessee, jointly and severally with the vendor, are responsible for
compliance with this chapter and to ensure the safety of pedestrians and access
of emergency vehicles to and around the site.
   (B)   Failure to do so could result in the property owner or lessee being a
party to any enforcement actions or penalties allowed by law.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-5)
§ 112.06 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   At the time of the submittal of a permit application, the applicant
shall pay to the city the applicable permit fee in addition to any applicable
inspection fee(s). The fee schedule will bet set by resolution and may be
modified from time to time with approval by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Any vendor who surrenders their permit prior to the date of expiration
shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-6)
§ 112.07 COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW.
   Each mobile food unit vendor shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws, regulations, and rules.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-7)
§ 112.08 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the city as follows:
   (A)   Grounds. The City Administrator, or the city’s designee, may suspend
or revoke any permit issued under this chapter for any of, but not limited to,
the following reasons.
      (1)   The vendor has made fraudulent statements in his/her application
for the permit, or in the conduct of his or her business.
      (2)   The vendor has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this
code, or has otherwise conducted his or her business in an unlawful manner.
      (3)   The vendor has conducted his or her business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
      (4)   The City Administrator, or the city’s designee, has received and
investigated three or more found complaints during the vendor period related to
the manner in which the vendor is conducting business.
   (B)   Notice of suspension or revocation; right to appeal. The city shall
cause notice of the permit revocation to be served in person by a city official
or by mail to the vendor’s local address, which notice shall specify the reason
(s) for such action, at which time operations of the vendor must cease within
the corporate limits of the city. The vendor may appeal the revocation of the
permit to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting by filing
with the City Clerk, or the City Clerk’s designee, a written request for an
appeal to the City Council at least seven days prior to the meeting. The City
Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the City Administrator,
or the city’s designee, to revoke such permit. If a permit is revoked, no
refund of any permit fee paid shall be made. Upon the revocation of a permit,
the vendor is not eligible for the issuance of a new permit under this chapter
for a period of one year from the date of the permit revocation.
(Prior Code, § 3-8-8) (Ord. 2020-06, passed 11-24-2020)
CHAPTER 113: LICENSING JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   License required
   
113.04   Application for license
   
113.05   Fee payment
   
113.06   Issuance of a license
   
113.07   Fees and duration of license
   
113.08   Power to inspect and investigate
   
113.09   Revocation of license
   
113.10   Appeal
   
113.11   Effect of revocation
   
113.12   Transfer of license prohibited
   
113.13   Display of license
   
113.14   Special requirements
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to assure that in the conduct of the
activities, vocations, and professions licensed and regulated by this chapter,
the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected and maintained.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-1)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person engaged in collecting, storing, buying, or selling
junk. JUNK means articles or materials that, because of age, deterioration, or
use, have lost their original utility or desirability, but that by alteration,
restoration, or salvage may furnish an item or items of value.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, or association of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-2)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity, vocation, or
profession regulated by this chapter without a valid license from the city.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing on
forms furnished by the City Clerk. One application shall be filed with the City
Clerk and shall include:
   (A)   The applicant’s full name and address, the address of the local
business establishment, and the nature of the business;
   (B)   If the applicant is not the owner of the place in which the business
is to be conducted, the name and address of the owner;
   (C)   If the applicant is a corporation or other association, it shall also
list the names and addresses of its principal officers; and
   (D)   The attachment of a receipt from the city, showing payment of all
fees.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-4)
§ 113.05 FEE PAYMENT.
   All fees required by this chapter shall be paid to the City Clerk, who shall
give the applicant a written receipt showing the sum received and the time of
receipt.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-5)
§ 113.06 ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE.
   (A)   If the City Clerk finds that all of the prescribed conditions for the
issuance of a license have been satisfied, that no grounds for revocation under
§
113.09 exists, and that the special requirements of §
113.14 have been complied with, the license shall be issued immediately to the
applicant.
   (B)   The Clerk must make a determination whether to issue the license
within ten days from the date a completed application is submitted.
   (C)   If the Clerk refuses to act within this ten-day period, the applicant
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting
on whether the license should be issued.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-6)
§ 113.07 FEES AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any applicant may apply for an annual license. The annual license
shall be valid for one year after the date on which it is issued.
   (B)   The fees for license shall be $10.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-7)
§ 113.08 POWER TO INSPECT AND INVESTIGATE.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall forward
it immediately to the Mayor, who shall conduct an investigation and submit a
written report concerning the truth of the facts stated in the application and
a recommendation concerning whether or not a license should be issued. No
license shall be issued until the report has been submitted to the City Clerk,
and such reports shall be submitted within seven days after the City Clerk
receives the application.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-8)
§ 113.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   After giving a licensee 30 days notice and after a hearing, the Clerk
may revoke any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
      (1)   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for
the license or in the conduct of the business;
      (2)   The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted
the business in an unlawful manner; and
      (3)   The licensee has conducted the business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, health, safety, order, or morals.
   (B)   The notice shall be in writing and shall be served personally or as
required for personal service by the Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing, and the reasons for the intended
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-9)
§ 113.10 APPEAL.
   If the City Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall
endorse the reasons upon the application. The applicant shall have a right to a
hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting, provided the applicant
files a written notice of appeal to the Council within 14 calendar days of the
decision of the Clerk. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision
of the City Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present, if a
quorum and the City Clerk shall carry out the Council’s decision.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-10) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
§ 113.11 EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Revocation of a license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-11)
§ 113.12 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   In no case shall a license issued under this chapter be transferred to
another person.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-12)
§ 113.13 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of this chapter
shall display the license in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the
business is being conducted.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-13)
§ 113.14 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person who is granted a license under the terms of this chapter shall
comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   A junk dealer shall not purchase or receive junk from a minor unless
the dealer first receives the written consent of the parents or guardian of the
minor. Such consent shall be attached to the record book as a part of the
permanent record.
   (B)   In order to discover stolen property, peace officers shall be
permitted to inspect the junk dealer’s yard, store, or establishment at all
reasonable hours.
   (C)   The County Health Officer shall be permitted at all reasonable times
to inspect the junk dealer’s premises for the existence of materials or
conditions dangerous to the public health.
   (D)   All junkyards shall be enclosed within a solid fence at least eight
feet in height, which fence shall be painted white. Materials within the yard
shall not be stacked higher than the surrounding fence. Any gates in said fence
shall be of solid material and of equal height.
   (E)   The burning of materials on the license holder’s premises is
prohibited.
   (F)   The business of junk dealer shall be located within territory not
included in a restricted residence district as described in Chapter 6-10.
(Prior Code, § 3-11-14) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
CHAPTER 114: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Exemptions
   
114.03   Permits
   
114.04   Requirements
   
114.05   Hours of solicitation
   
114.06   Consumer protection law
   
114.07   Bond required
   
114.08   Obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
   
114.09   Display of permit
   
114.10   Permit not transferable
   
114.11   Revocation of permit
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person carrying or transporting goods or merchandise who sells
or offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house
to house or upon the public street.
   SOLICITOR.
      (1)   Any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house
or upon public streets orders for commercial goods, wares, subscriptions,
publications, periodicals, merchandise, or services to be delivered or
fulfilled at a future date.
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, SOLICITOR does not include a
person who contacts another person at such person’s residence without prior
invitation to enlist support for or against, or solicit funds for, patriotic,
philanthropic, charitable, political, or religious purposes, whether or not
there is an incidental purpose involving the sale of some goods or service.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
      (1)   Every merchant, whether an individual person, a firm, corporation,
partnership, or association, who brings or causes to be brought within the
municipality any goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind, nature, or
description, with the intention of temporarily or intermittently selling or
offering to sell at retail such goods, wares, or merchandise.
      (2)   Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or
auctioneer, for conducting such transient business in connection with, as part
of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, does
not exempt any such person, firm, or corporation from being considered a
TRANSIENT MERCHANT.
      (3)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to
persons selling at wholesale to merchants, nor to persons running a huckster
wagon, or selling or distributing livestock feeds, fresh meats, fish, fruit, or
vegetables, nor to persons selling their own work or production either by
themselves or their employees.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to non-profit civic,
charitable, religious, or educational groups engaged in retail sale for the
purposes of fundraising.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.03 PERMITS.
   (A)   Before any person or organization engages in any of the practices
defined herein, they must comply with all applicable ordinances, and must also
obtain from the City Clerk a permit in accordance with the provisions of §§
114.04 and
114.05.
   (B)   This permit will not be extended. A fee of $1,000 shall be paid at the
time of registration to cover the administration cost and cost of investigation
and issuance.
   (C)   The groups listed in §
114.02 need to apply for a permit, but are exempt from the permit fee.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-22-2024)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 9C.2
§ 114.04 REQUIREMENTS.
   Any applicant engaged in any activity described in §
114.01 must file with the City Clerk an application in writing that gives the
following information:
   (A)   Name and Social Security number;
   (B)   Permanent and local addresses and, in case of transient merchants, the
local address from which proposed sales will be made;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the sales method;
   (D)   Name and address of the firm for or on whose behalf the orders are
solicited, or the supplier of the goods offered for sale;
   (E)   Length of time for which the permit is desired;
   (F)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, and if so, the date, the nature of the offense, and the name of the
court imposing the penalty;
   (G)   Motor vehicle(s) make, model, year, color, and registration number, if
a vehicle is to be used in the proposed solicitation;
   (H)   (1)   The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to
the issuance of any license.
         (a)   Solicitors or peddlers:
            1.   For one day, $250;
            2.   For more than one day but less than seven days, $500;
            3.   For up to six months, $2,000; and
            4.   For more than six months but less than 12 consecutive months,
$4,000.
         (b)   Transient merchants:
            1.   For each period of one to seven days, $250;
            2.   For each additional period of one to seven days, $500;
            3.   For up to six consecutive months, $2,000; and
            4.   For more than six months but less than 12 consecutive months,
$4,000.
      (2)   Days shall be accrued during the course of the calendar year,
commencing on January 1 of each year, and fees shall be based upon the sum of
accrued days and desired additional days of permitted sales/solicitation.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 2024-09, passed 10-22-2024)
§ 114.05 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   No person may conduct those activities described in §
114.01 except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on each day, and no
solicitation shall be done on Sundays or legal holidays.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.06 CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW.
   All solicitors and peddlers shall be informed of, agree to comply with, and
comply with the state law, Iowa Code § 555A.3, requiring a notice of
cancellation to be given in duplicate, properly filled out, to each buyer to
whom such person sells a product or service, and comply with the other
requirements of the law.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.07 BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a permit under this chapter is issued, each person subject to this
chapter shall post with the Clerk a bond, by a surety company authorized to
ensure the fidelity of others in the state, in the amount of $1,000 to the
effect that the registrant and the surety consent to the forfeiture of the
principal sum of the bond, or such part thereof as may be necessary:
   (A)   To indemnify the city for any penalties or costs occasioned by the
enforcement of this chapter; and
   (B)   To make payment of any judgment rendered against the registrant as a
result of a claim or litigation arising out of or in connection with the
registrant’s peddling or solicitation. The bond shall not be retired until one
year from the expiration of the permit.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.08 OBSTRUCTION OF PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   No person, while engaged in any of the practices described in §
114.01, shall block or obstruct the path of any pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or block or obstruct any way of ingress or egress to roads, buildings,
or other enclosures or conveyances, including, but not limited to, vehicles,
elevators, and escalators.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.09 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall at all times while doing business in the
city keep in his or her possession the permit provided for in §
114.03 and shall exhibit the permit as evidence that he or she has complied
with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display
publicly the license in his or her place of business.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022; Ord. 2024-09,
passed 10-22-2024)
§ 114.10 PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
§ 114.11 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Council, after notice and hearing, may revoke any permit issued
under this chapter where the permitee in the application for the permit or in
the course of conducting his or her business has made fraudulent or incorrect
statements, or has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted his or her
business in an unlawful manner.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2022-05, passed 6-14-2022)
CHAPTER 115: GAS, ELECTRIC FRANCHISES
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Exempt from other fees
   
115.03   Payments
   
115.04   Franchise fee
   
115.05   Map
   
115.06   Copies of annexation ordinances
   
115.07   Payment errors
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   The city (hereinafter referred to as the “municipality”) hereby establishes
a franchise fee on every natural gas or electric company, and every other
person, firm, or corporation, their successors and assigns, owning, operating,
controlling, leasing, or managing a natural gas or electric plant or system,
and/or generating, manufacturing, selling, distributing, or transporting
natural gas or electric (hereinafter referred to, collectively, as “energy
providers,” each, individually, an “energy provider”). Energy providers shall
collect from their customers located within the corporate limits of the
municipality as depicted on the map (as defined in § 115.05) including the
city, and pay to the city an amount equal to 1% of gross receipts energy
providers derive from the sale, distribution, or transportation of natural gas
or electric delivered within the present limits of the municipality. Gross
receipts as used herein are revenues received from the sale, distribution, or
transportation of natural gas or electric, after adjustment for the net write-
off of uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-1)
§ 115.02 EXEMPT FROM OTHER FEES.
   The amount paid by energy providers shall be in lieu of, and energy
providers shall be exempt from, all other fees, charges, taxes, or assessments
which the municipality may impose for the privilege of doing business within
the municipality, including, without limitation, excise taxes, occupation
taxes, licensing fees, or right-of-way permit fees, and in the event the
municipality imposes any such fee, charge, tax, or assessment, the payment to
be made by energy providers in accordance with this chapter shall be reduced in
an amount equal to any such fee, charge, tax, or assessment imposed upon the
energy providers. Ad valorem property taxes imposed generally upon all real and
personal property within the municipality shall not be deemed to affect energy
providers’ obligations under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-2)
§ 115.03 PAYMENTS.
   Energy providers shall report and pay any amount payable under this chapter
on a monthly basis. Such payment shall be made no more than 30 days following
the close of the period for which payment is due. Initial and final payments
shall be prorated for the portions of the periods at the beginning and end of
any franchise granted by the city to an energy provider.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-3)
§ 115.04 FRANCHISE FEE.
   Energy providers shall list the franchise fee collected from customers as a
separate item on bills for utility service issued to their customers. If at any
time the State Utilities Board or other authority having proper jurisdiction
prohibits such recovery, energy providers will no longer be obligated to
collect and pay the franchise fee until an alternate lawful franchise fee can
be negotiated and implemented. In addition, with prior approval of the city,
energy providers may reduce the franchise fee payable for natural gas or
electric delivered to a specific customer when such reduction is required to
attract or retain the business of that customer.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-4)
§ 115.05 MAP.
   (A)   Within ten days of the date of this chapter, the municipality shall
provide the energy providers with a map of its corporate limits (the “map”).
The map shall be of sufficient detail to assist energy providers in determining
whether their customers reside within the municipality’s corporate limits. The
map, along with energy provider’s geographic information system (“GIS”) mapping
information, shall serve as the sole basis for determining the energy
provider’s obligation hereunder to collect and pay the franchise fee from
customers; provided, however, that if the municipality’s corporate limits are
changed by annexation or otherwise, it shall be the municipality’s sole
responsibility to:
      (1)   Update the map so that such changes are included therein; and
      (2)   Provide the updated map to the energy providers.
   (B)   An energy provider’s obligation to collect and pay the franchise fee
from customers within an annexed area shall not commence until the later:
      (1)   Of 60 days after such energy provider’s receipt from the
municipality of an updated map, including such annexed area; or
      (2)   Such time after such energy provider’s receipt from the
municipality of an updated map, including such annexed area as is reasonably
necessary for such energy provider to identify the customers in the annexed
area obligated to pay the franchise fee.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-5)
§ 115.06 COPIES OF ANNEXATION ORDINANCES.
   The city shall provide copies of annexation ordinances to energy providers
on a timely basis to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from customers
within the corporate limits of the city, as set forth in §
115.04.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-6)
§ 115.07 PAYMENT ERRORS.
   The municipality shall have access to and the right to examine, during
normal business hours, the energy provider’s books, receipts, files, records,
and documents as is reasonably necessary to verify the accuracy of payments due
hereunder; provided, that the municipality shall not exercise such right more
than twice per calendar year. If it is determined that a mistake was made in
the payment of any franchise fee required hereunder, such mistake shall be
corrected promptly upon discovery such that any under-payment by an energy
provider shall be paid within 30 days of recalculation of the amount due, and
any over-payment by an energy provider shall be deducted from the next payment
of such franchise fee due by such energy provider to the municipality;
provided, that neither party shall have the obligation to correct a mistake
that is discovered more than one year after the occurrence thereof.
(Prior Code, § 7-7-7) (Ordinance 2016-06, passed 10-25-2016)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS; PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
130.01   Preamble
   
130.02   Findings and purpose
   
130.03   Definitions
   
130.04   Offenses
   
130.05   Defenses
§ 130.01 PREAMBLE.
   The city recognizes that all citizens, including minors, have certain
inalienable rights, and that among them are the rights of liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. Further, all citizens, including minors, have the right
to freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, and of
association. This section should be interpreted to avoid any construction that
would result in the appearance of interference with the free exercise of
religious worship and political association, and this chapter shall not be
construed to mean that the city intends to interfere with a minor’s freedom of
association for political, economic, religious, or cultural matters or
association for purposes such as marches, demonstrations, picketing, or prayer
vigils which are otherwise lawful and peaceful assemblies.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.1
§ 130.02 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council has determined that there has been an increase in
juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 17 in the city.
   (B)   Persons under the age of 17 are particularly susceptible by their lack
of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related
activities, and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime.
   (C)   The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors
from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control
over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public,
and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-2)
§ 130.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS. From 12:01 a.m. until 5:00 a.m.
   EMERGENCY. An unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is:
      (1)   A biological parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
   REMAIN.
      (1)   Linger or stay; or
      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-3)
§ 130.04 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if they knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
   (C)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if they knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-4)
§ 130.05 DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a nextdoor neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police
Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.04(C) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Prior Code, § 3-6-5)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS; PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Violations of chapter
Public Morals, Peace
   
131.15   Public peace
   
131.16   Public morals
Public Safety, Health; Property
   
131.30   Public safety and health
   
131.31   Public property
   
131.32   Smoking
Fireworks
   
131.45   Definitions
   
131.46   Prohibitions
   
131.47   Sale of consumer fireworks
   
131.48   Restrictions on the use of consumer fireworks
   
131.49   Permits required
   
131.50   Seizure of fireworks
   
131.51   Emergency
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 VIOLATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   Commission of any of the acts named in the following sections by any person
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)
PUBLIC MORALS, PEACE
§ 131.15 PUBLIC PEACE.
   (A)   Engage in fighting or violent behavior, or invite or defy another
person to fight, provided that participants in athletic contests may engage in
such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport (per Iowa Code § 723.4
(1)).
   (B)   Make unusually loud or excessive noise which results in the
disturbance of the peace and the public quiet of a neighborhood (per Iowa Code
§ 723.4(2)).
   (C)   Willfully permit upon any premises owned, occupied, possessed, or
controlled by such person any unusually loud or excessive noise in such a
manner calculated to provoke a breach of the peace of others, or the public
quiet of the neighborhood (per Iowa Code § 723.4(2)).
   (D)   Direct abusive language or make any threatening gesture which the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another (per Iowa Code § 723.4(3)).
   (E)   Without lawful authority or order of authority, disturb any lawful
assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the meeting or
assembly (per Iowa Code § 723.4(4)).
   (F)   Without authority, obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway, or other
public way (per Iowa Code § 723.4(2)).
   (G)   Without authority, solicit contributions, distribute literature, or
otherwise peddle or sell goods and services within the traveled portion of any
roadway (per Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(a)).
(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)
§ 131.16 PUBLIC MORALS.
   (A)   Indecent exposure. It shall be unlawful for any person to expose such
person’s genitals, pubes, female nipples, or buttocks to a person other than
the person’s spouse, or who commits a sex act in the presence or view of a
third person, if the person does so to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of
either party and the person knows, or reasonably should know, that the act is
offensive to the viewer (per Iowa Code § 709.9).
   (B)   Public urination/defecation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
urinate or defecate in a public place, other than a structure equipped with a
toilet and/or urinal, in the presence of or in view of another person if the
person knows, or reasonably should know, that such behavior would be offensive
to a reasonable person.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
131.99
PUBLIC SAFETY, HEALTH; PROPERTY
§ 131.30 PUBLIC SAFETY AND HEALTH.
   (A)   Expectorating. No person shall expectorate on the ground or on the
floor of any structure within the city limits (per Iowa Code § 364.1).
   (B)   Putting glass, and the like, on streets and sidewalks. No person shall
throw or deposit on any street or sidewalk any glass bottle, glass, nails,
tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris,
or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle (per
Iowa Code § 321.369).
   (C)   Carrying a concealed weapon. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry under such person’s clothes or concealed about their person or to be
found in possession of any slingshot, knuckles of metal or other material, air
gun or any other weapon other than a knife unless licensed by the State
Department of Public Safety or having in possession a permit from the County
Sheriff (per Iowa Code § 724.4).
   (D)   False alarms. No person shall give or cause to be given any false
alarm of a fire, nor set fire to any combustible material, or cry or sound an
alarm or by any other means without cause.
   (E)   Stench bombs.
      (1)   No person shall throw, drop, pour, explode, deposit, release,
discharge, or expose any stench bomb or tear bomb, or any liquid, gaseous, or
solid substance or matter of any kind that is injurious to persons or property,
or that is nauseous, sickening, irritating, or offensive to any of the senses
in, on or about a theater, restaurant, car, structure, place of business, or
amusement, or any place of public assemblage, or attempt to do any of these
acts, or prepare or possess such devices or materials with intent to do any of
these acts.
      (2)   This provision shall not apply to duly constituted police, military
authorities, or peace officers in the discharge of their duties, or to licensed
physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other similar persons licensed under the
laws of this state; nor to any established place of business or home having
tear gas installed as a protection against burglary, robbery, or holdup, nor to
any bank or other messenger carrying funds or other valuables.
   (F)   Discharging firearms, fireworks, and missiles. Per Iowa Code § 727.2:
      (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or fire any cannon,
gun, bomb, pistol, air gun, revolver, or firearm of any description, without
first having obtained permission in writing from the Mayor, unless the person
doing the same is an officer acting within the duties of his or her office. No
person, firm, or corporation shall set off or burn firecrackers, torpedoes, sky
rockets, roman candles, or other fireworks of like construction, or any
fireworks containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or other device
containing any explosive.
      (2)   The City Council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit
for the display and use of fireworks by any organization or groups of
individuals when such fireworks display will be handled by a competent
operator.
      (3)   The City Council may, upon application in writing, grant a permit
for the operation of a firing range in which the discharge of firearms for
training, recreational, or competitive events would be allowed upon showing
that the range would be under the direction of a competent organization, group,
or individual.
      (4)   In the interest of public health and safety and at such times as
approved by a police officer, the police, or their designee, may use firearms
to control rodent or animal problems when it is evident that conventional
control methods have not resolved the problem.
      (5)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly, or
negligently, throw any stick, stone, or other missile, whereby any person may
or shall be injured or struck, or any window glass broken, or other property
damaged, injured, or destroyed.
      (6)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or throw any missile of
any character from or by the use of any air gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or
from or by the use of any other thing or device.
      (7)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of blank
cartridges for a show or the theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic sports
or by railroads, or trucks, for signal purposes, or by a recognized military
organization, and provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to
any substance or composition prepared and used for medicinal or fumigation
purposes.
   (G)   Possession of fireworks.
      (1)   The term FIREWORKS includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosives, substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, or detonation
and includes blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman
candles, or other fireworks of like construction and fireworks containing any
explosive or flammable compound, or other device containing any explosive
substance. The term FIREWORKS does not include gold star-producing sparklers on
wires that contain no magnesium or chlorate or perchlorate, flitter sparklers
in paper tubes that do not exceed one-eighth inch in diameter, toy snakes that
contain no mercury, or caps used in cap pistols.
      (2)   The use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or for
signal purposes in athletic events, or by railroads or trucks for signal
purposes, or by recognized military organizations is exempt from this division
(G).
      (3)   No person shall possess fireworks except as provided in §§
131.45 through
131.51.
   (H)   Abandoned refrigerators.
      (1)   No person shall place, or allow to be placed, any discarded,
abandoned, unattended, or unused refrigerator, ice box, or similar container
equipped with an air-tight door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device
which cannot be released from the inside, in a location accessible to children,
outside any building, dwelling, or within an unoccupied or abandoned building
or dwelling, or other structure, under such person’s control without first
removing the door, lid, snap lock, or other locking device from said icebox,
refrigerator, or similar container.
      (2)   This provision applies equally to the owner of any such
refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, and to the owner or occupant of the
premises where the hazard is permitted to remain (per Iowa Code § 727.3).
   (I)   Impersonating an officer. No person shall falsely represent themself
or falsely assume to be any law enforcement officer, judge or magistrate. It
shall be unlawful to wear or adopt the uniform or insignia of any law
enforcement officer on any street or public place (per Iowa Code § 718.2).
   (J)   Harassment of city employees.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any reason to willfully prevent, resist,
or obstruct, or attempt to prevent, resist, or obstruct any city employee from
the performance of any official duty.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate by any means,
any threat of bodily or property harm to any city employee or to any member of
the employee’s family during the course of, or as a result of, the performance
of any official duty by said city employee.
   (K)   Antenna and radio wires. No person shall allow, locate, or maintain
any antenna wires, antenna supports, radio wires, or television wires to exist
over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or public property (per Iowa Code §
364.12(2)).
   (L)   Barbed wire. No person shall install, allow to be installed, or use
barbed wire without the consent of the City Council (per Iowa Code § 364.1).
   (M)   Playing in streets. No person shall coast, sled, or play games on
streets or highways except in areas blocked off by the City Council for such
purposes (per Iowa Code § 364.12).
   (N)   Littering prohibited.
      (1)   As used in this section, DISCARD means to place, cause to be
placed, throw, deposit, or drop, and LITTER means any garbage, rubbish, trash,
refuse, waste material, and yard waste.
      (2)   No person shall discard any litter within the city, except as
provided and approved by the city, by collecting and discarding such litter in
approved areas or approved receptacles.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or place any garbage,
rubbish, trash, refuse, waste material or yard waste in any street, alley,
lane, public place, private property, or body of water within the city.
      (4)   It is unlawful to place garbage, refuse, or yard waste on the
private property of another, or into another garbage, refuse, or yard waste
containers for the purpose of being hauled away.
      (5)   It is unlawful to permit garbage, yard waste, or refuse to remain
for more than ten days on private property that is under one’s ownership,
possession, or control. Yard waste may be retained more than ten days if
composting is being completed.
      (6)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, garbage, refuse, or yard
waste may be placed on the untraveled portions of streets, alleys, lanes,
public places, or on private property to be hauled away, provided the garbage,
refuse, or yard waste is kept in place in the manner prescribed in this
division (N).
(Prior Code, § 3-1-5) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.31 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Defacing public grounds. No person shall cut, break, or deface any
tree or shrub in a public park or on any avenue thereto by willfully defacing,
cutting, breaking, or injuring, except by the authority of the Mayor (per Iowa
Code § 364.12(2)).
   (B)   Injuring new pavement. No person shall injure new pavement in any
street, alley, or sidewalk by willfully driving, walking, or making marks on
such pavement before it is ready for use (per Iowa Code § 364.12(2)).
   (C)   Destroying park equipment. No person shall destroy or injure any
property or equipment in public swimming pools, playgrounds, or parks by
willfully defacing, breaking, damaging, mutilating, or cutting (per Iowa Code §
364.12(2)).
   (D)   Injury to public library books or property. No person shall willfully,
maliciously, or wantonly tear, deface, mutilate, injure, or destroy, in whole
or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or
other property belonging to any public library or reading room.
   (E)   Defacing or destroying proclamations or notices. No person shall
intentionally deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part any
transcript or extract from or of any law of the United States or of this state,
or any proclamation, advertisement, or notification, set up at any place within
the city by authority of law or by order of any court, during the time for
which the same is to remain set up (per Iowa Code § 716.1).
   (F)   Injury to gravestones or property in cemetery. No person shall
willfully and maliciously destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove any
tomb, vault, monument, gravestone, or other structure placed in any public or
private cemetery, or any fences, railing, or other work for the protection,
ornamentation of said cemetery, or of any tomb, vault, monument, or gravestone,
or other structure aforesaid, on any cemetery lot within such cemetery, or
willfully and maliciously destroy, cut, break, or injure any tree, shrub,
plant, or lawn within the limits of said cemetery, or drive outside of said
avenues and roads, and over the grass or graves of said cemetery (per Iowa Code
§ 716.1).
   (G)   Injury to fire apparatus. No person shall willfully destroy or injure
any engines, hose carriage, hose, hook and ladder carriage, or other things
used and kept for extinguishment of fires (per Iowa Code § 716.1).
   (H)   Obstructing or defacing roads. No person shall obstruct, deface, or
injure any public road by breaking up, plowing or digging within the boundary
lines thereof, except by written authorization of the Mayor (per Iowa Code §
716.1).
   (I)   Injury to roads, railways, and other utilities. No person shall
maliciously injure, remove, or destroy any electric railway or apparatus
belonging thereto, or any bridge, rail, or plank road; or place or cause to be
placed any obstruction on any electric railway, or on any such bridge, rail, or
plank road; or willfully obstruct or injure any public road or highway; or
maliciously cut, burn, or in any way break down, injure, or destroy any post or
pole used in connection with any system of electric lighting, electric railway,
or telephone or telegraph system; or break down and destroy, or injure and
deface, any electric light, telegraph or telephone instrument; or in any way
cut, break, or injure the wires of any apparatus belonging thereto; or
willfully without proper authorization tap, cut, injure, break, disconnect,
connect, make any connection with, or destroy any of the wires, mains, pipes,
conduits, meters or other apparatus belonging to, or attached to, the power
plant or distributing system of any electric light plant, electric motor, gas
plant, or water plant; or aid or abet any other person in so doing (per Iowa
Code § 716.1).
   (J)   Tapping into utility transmission cables. No person shall connect to
any transmission cable without first obtaining permission from the owner of the
cable (per Iowa Code § 727.8).
   (K)   Obstructing ditches and breaking levees. No person shall divert,
obstruct, impede, or fill up, without legal authority, any ditch, drain, or
watercourse, or break down any levee established, constructed, or maintained
under any provision of law (per Iowa Code § 716.1).
(Prior Code, § 3-1-6) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.32 SMOKING.
   (A)   Any person who shall fail to abide by the provisions of this chapter
and the applicable provisions of the following state statutory laws is in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   These sections of the Iowa Code are adopted by reference and are as
follows.
Iowa Code Section Description
Iowa Code Section Description
142D.9            Smoking in prohibited area (civil penalty)
453A.2(1)         Employee providing tobacco to minor
                 (First Offense)
                 (Second Offense)
                 (Third Offense)
453A.2(2)         Minor using tobacco (civil penalty)
                 (First Offense)
                 (Second Offense)
                 (Third Offense)
 
(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)
FIREWORKS
§ 131.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Includes FIRST-CLASS CONSUMER FIREWORKS and SECOND-CLASS
CONSUMER FIREWORKS, as those terms are defined in Iowa Code § 100.19 and
Chapter 727. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not include novelties enumerated in Chapter
3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association’s Standard 87-1 or display fireworks
enumerated in Chapter 4 of the American Pyrotechnics Association’s Standard 87-
1.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS.
      (1)   Includes any explosive composition, or combination of explosive
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of providing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and
includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or other
device containing any explosive substance.
      (2)   DISPLAY FIREWORKS does not include novelties or consumer fireworks
enumerated in Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association’s Standard 87-
1.
   FIREWORKS. Includes CONSUMER FIREWORKS and DISPLAY FIREWORKS as defined in
this section. FIREWORKS does not include novelties as defined in American
Pyrotechnics Association’s Standard 87-1, Chapter 3, and that comply with the
labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Products Safety
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-1)
§ 131.46 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to manufacture fireworks within the city limits.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell display fireworks within the city limits.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to possess, use, or explode display
fireworks, except in possession of and in compliance with all requirements of a
permit issued by the city under §§
131.45 through
131.51.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-3) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.47 SALE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to offer for sale, expose for sale,
or sell consumer fireworks, unless the person is a retailer or community group
as defined in Iowa Code Chapter 100, and possesses and complies with all
requirements of a consumer fireworks seller license issued by the State Fire
Marshal.
   (B)   Consumer fireworks may only be sold during the dates and times as
established by the Iowa Code.
   (C)   Consumer fireworks may only be sold in zoning districts within the
city that permit retail sales. Fireworks may not be sold on public property or
within a residential zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-4) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.48 RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks on days other
than June 1 through July 8 and December 10 through January 3 of each year, all
dates inclusive.
   (B)   A person shall not use or explode consumer fireworks at times other
than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (C)   A person shall not use consumer fireworks on real property other than
that person’s real property, or on the real property of a person who has
consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that property.
   (D)   Persons using or exploding consumer fireworks must be at least 18
years of age or older.
   (E)   Persons using or exploding consumer fireworks are prohibited from
being under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, or a combination of such
substances, while having a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more or while
having any amount of a controlled substance in the person’s body.
   (F)   Any use or explosion of consumer fireworks must be more than 400 feet
from an assisted living facility, nursing home, hospital, retirement home, or
hospice.
   (G)   Any use or explosion of display fireworks must be more than 800 feet
from an assisted living facility, nursing home, hospital, retirement home, or
hospice.
   (H)   No use or explosion of consumer fireworks is allowed on any public
property, including parks, cemeteries, public rights-of-way, public parking
lots, or sidewalks.
   (I)   A person who violates this section commits a simple misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-5) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.49 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit must be obtained from the city in order to use or explode
display fireworks. In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must comply with
city permitting and insurance requirements.
   (B)   Application for a permit must be made, in writing, and filed at the
office of the City Clerk, at least 60 days in advance of the proposed display.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-6)
§ 131.50 SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS.
   The Police Chief may seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the
expense of the owner, all consumer fireworks or display fireworks, offered or
exposed for sale, used, stored, possessed, or held in violation of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-7)
§ 131.51 EMERGENCY.
   When, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, weather and soil conditions create a
safety emergency so that the use of consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks
creates a danger to the public or property, the Fire Chief may suspend, cancel,
or prohibit the use of consumer fireworks and/or display fireworks.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-8)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, for which no
specific penalty is prescribed, shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who fails to perform an act required by the
provisions of §§
131.45 through
131.51, or who commits an act prohibited by the provisions of §§
131.45 through
131.51, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine or
punishable as a municipal infraction civil penalty as set forth in this code.
      (2)   A person may be prosecuted under the public nuisance provisions set
forth in this code and/or any other remedy available at law, to address any
failure to perform an act required by the provisions of §§
131.45 through
131.51, or any action prohibited by the provisions of this code of ordinances
or Iowa Code.
         (a)   A person who sells consumer fireworks to a person who is less
than 18 years of age commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
less than $250.
         (b)   A person who is less than 18 years of age who purchases consumer
fireworks commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
$250.
         (c)   A person who uses or explodes consumer fireworks in violation of
§§
131.45 through
131.51 commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $250.
         (d)   A person who uses or explodes display fireworks while the use of
such device is in violation of §§
131.45 through
131.51 commits a simple misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
$250.
         (e)   A person who is less than 18 years of age who uses or explodes
consumer fireworks or display fireworks commits a simple misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not less than $250.
(Prior Code, § 3-13-2)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
152.   SIGN REGULATIONS
      
153.   TREES
      
154.   MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS
      
155.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
156.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
157.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
158.   ZONING REGULATIONS
      
159.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Building Official; Building Code Committee
   
150.002   Limitations on administrative authority
   
150.003   Violations
   
150.004   Duties owed to public only
   
150.005   Expenses to enable investigations
Building Code
   
150.020   Building code adopted
   
150.021   Permit issuance during rezoning
   
150.022   Waiting period for demolition permits
Electrical Code
   
150.035   Electrical code adopted
   
150.036   Definitions
   
150.037   Conflicting provisions
   
150.038   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
150.039   Modifications
   
150.040   Tests
   
150.041   Enforcement
   
150.042   Unsafe electrical systems or equipment
   
150.043   Violations
   
150.044   Permits and inspections
   
150.045   Application for permit
   
150.046   Permit issuance and expiration
   
150.047   Fees
   
150.048   Licensing
   
150.049   Inspections
   
150.050   Connection approval
Mechanical Code
   
150.065   Mechanical code adopted
   
150.066   Violations
   
150.067   Permits
   
150.068   Certificate of competency required to perform work
   
150.069   Fees
   
150.070   Licensing
   
150.071   Inspections
Plumbing Code
   
150.085   Plumbing code adopted
   
150.086   Administrative authority
   
150.087   Duties, power of administrative authority
   
150.088   Violations
   
150.089   Permits
   
150.090   Fees
   
150.091   Licensing
   
150.092   Damage to drainage system or public sewer
   
150.093   Damage to public sewer or private sewage disposal system
   
150.094   Size of building sewers
Dangerous Buildings
   
150.110   Purpose and scope
   
150.111   Definition
   
150.112   Enforcement
   
150.113   Notices, order of Building Official
   
150.114   Repair, vacation, demolition
   
150.115   Appeal
   
150.116   Enforcement of order of Building Official
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 BUILDING OFFICIAL; BUILDING CODE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Building Official and Building Code Committee.
      (1)   Creation. There is hereby established a Building Code Committee
under the supervision and control of the Building Official who is appointed by
and serves at the discretion of the City Council.
      (2)   General authority. In addition to any other authority expressly
granted in this chapter, the Building Official shall have authority to do or
delegate all things necessary or proper, consistent with this chapter and all
inspectors, administrative, personnel, accounting, budgetary, and procedural
policies of the city, to carry out and to enforce the codes adopted pursuant to
this chapter and the acts and decisions of the Building Code Committee. In
accordance with any prescribed procedures and with the approval of the City
Council, the Building Official may appoint technical officers and inspectors,
and other employees, as authorized representatives of the Building Official to
assist in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of
the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Building Official, or his or
her authorized representative, have reasonable cause to believe that there
exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or Building Code
violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous,
the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall have the
rights of entry set forth in §
31.01.
      (4)   Interpretations. The Building Official shall have the power to
render interpretations of the codes adopted by this chapter, and to adopt and
enforce rules and regulations supplemental thereto as deemed necessary in order
to clarify the application of the provisions, provided that such
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent
and purpose of this code. Code interpretations will be rendered through
consultation with appointed inspectors, ICC code interpretation consultants, or
as outlined in ICC code commentaries.
      (5)   Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any
persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such
persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building
Official to proceed with the work.
      (6)   Cooperation of other officials and officers. The Building Official
may request, and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city and or
contracted inspection personnel.
      (7)   Written orders. The decisions, orders, and notices of the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representative, shall be in writing and a
duplicate or copy thereof filed in the City Hall for public inspection. Where
immediate action and response is proper, orders may be made orally and later
reduced to writing.
      (8)   Maintenance of records. The Building Services Department shall
maintain adequate records of its acts, investigations, decisions, orders, and
notices.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-1)
   (B)   Building Code Committee.
      (1)   Creation. A Building Code Committee is hereby created, consisting
of three members qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to this division (B). Members shall be appointed by the City Council
and shall serve for three year terms; provided, that upon completion of the
term of office, members of the Building Code Committee shall continue to serve
in their full capacity until their successors have been duly appointed.
      (2)   General authority.
         (a)   In addition to specific authority granted in this chapter, the
Building Code Committee shall have authority to:
            1.   Elect officers and establish rules and regulations for
conducting its business and for conducting hearings consistent with this
chapter, and maintain records of its meetings, acts, investigations, hearings,
and decisions;
            2.   Hear and decide appeals from the acts, decisions, or orders of
the Building Official, as provided herein; and
            3.   Conduct studies and investigations for which necessary funds
have been approved by the City Council, and advise the City Council on all
building construction regulations and procedures.
         (b)   All inspection, administrative, personnel, accounting,
budgetary, and procedural policies of the city shall govern in all of its
operations.
      (3)   Meetings. Two members shall constitute a quorum. The concurring
vote of two members of the Board shall be necessary to pass any motion or
render any decision. The attendance of all members shall be entered on the
minutes by the secretary. All meetings shall be held in conformance with
provisions of the State Open Meetings Law being Title I, Chapter 21. A copy of
the minutes of each meeting shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten
working days after such meeting.
      (4)   Appeals. Except where a different procedure is expressly provided
in this division (B), any person who is aggrieved by any act, decision, or
order of the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, may
appeal to the Building Code Committee by giving written notice of such appeal
to the Building Official within five working days of receipt of decision from
which the appeal is taken. The notice of appeal shall contain:
         (a)   A copy of any written notice, order, or decision;
         (b)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of the
appellant in the building or the land involved or the rights of the appellant
affected by the notice, order, or decision;
         (c)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the
specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to
support the contentions of the appellant;
         (d)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;
         (e)   The signature of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses; and
         (f)   The verification of the appellant as to the truth of the matters
stated in the appeal.
      (5)   Hearing.
         (a)   1.   Except when the interests of justice require otherwise, the
Building Code Committee shall hold a hearing within ten working days after
receiving such notice of appeal and render a decision within five working days
thereafter. Any interested party, including the Building Official, shall have
the right to present evidence and argument.
            2.   The decision of the Building Code Committee shall be final.
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with this section shall
constitute a waiver of such person’s right to an administrative hearing and
adjudication of the notice, order, or decision, or any portion thereof. Only
those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be
considered in the hearing of the appeal.
         (b)   The decisions of the Building Code Committee shall be made in
writing and supported by substantial evidence in the record presented at the
hearing. It may reverse or modify a decision of the Building Official, or his
or her appointed representatives, only on finding that:
            1.   The Building Official, or his or her appointed
representatives, incorrectly interpreted or applied a provision of, or acted
beyond, the Building Official’s authority under this division (B); or
            2.   The decision of the Building Official creates undue hardship
upon the appellant. If the decision concerns alternate materials or methods of
construction, such materials or methods must be satisfactory for the use
intended, and at least equivalent to that prescribed by this chapter in
suitability, strength, effectiveness, durability, fire protection, and safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-2)
§ 150.002 LIMITATIONS ON ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   Neither the Building Official nor the Building Code Committee, or its
authorized representatives, may waive requirements of this chapter except as
expressly authorized herein.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-3)
§ 150.003 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unless there is in effect a stay or injunction to the contrary, it is
unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Commit any act prohibited by or omit any act required by any code
adopted by this chapter;
      (2)   Commit any act prohibited by or omit any act required by the
Building Official or the Building Code Committee in the exercise of their
respective discretions granted under this chapter; or
      (3)   Interfere with, obstruct, refuse, disregard, or frustrate any act,
notice, order, or decision of the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, or the Building Code Committee, engaged in the enforcement of
this chapter.
   (B)   Unlawful acts or omissions shall be deemed a separate offense for each
and every day or portion thereof during which they are continued or permitted,
and shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99 in addition to any revocation, cancellation, or forfeiture of any license
or permit, and in addition to any other remedies authorized in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.004 DUTIES OWED TO PUBLIC ONLY.
   The duties of the Building Official, the Building Services Department, and
the Building Code Committee are owed to the city. Nothing herein shall be
construed to create any legal or contractual duty owed to any special class of
citizen or to authorize them to assume any such duty in the performance of any
function under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-5)
§ 150.005 EXPENSES TO ENABLE INVESTIGATIONS.
   All expenses incurred by any person to enable inspections in relation to new
construction, repairs, remodeling, or reconstruction, or in relation to
buildings or structures moved into or within the city, are not the
responsibility of the city or its contracted inspection firm.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-6)
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.020 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference as the “Peosta Commercial
Building Code,” that certain building code known as the 2015 International
Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., exclusive
of any appendix not specifically adopted by the city, notwithstanding any
reference thereto in the provisions of said International Building Code, and
subject to the amendments and other provisions of this section. The provisions
of the Peosta Commercial Building Code as adopted shall be controlling in the
construction of buildings and other structures and in all matters covered by
such building code within the corporate limits of the city. A copy of said
International Building Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk
for public inspection.
   (B)   Said International Building Code is hereby amended as follows:
      (1)   Historic buildings. Repairs, alterations, and additions necessary
for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation, continued use, or change of
use of a historic building may be made in compliance with the State Historic
Preservation Office requirements. Where, in any specific case, different
sections of this building code specify different materials, methods of
construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where
there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement,
the specific requirement shall be applicable.
      (2)   Fees. Is hereby amended by repealing subsections “Permit Fees,” and
replacing such subsection with new subsections in lieu thereof, as follows:
         a.   Permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth by
Resolution of the City Council. The payment of fees under this section of the
Building Code shall not relieve the applicant, permit holder or other persons
from the payment of any other fee or fees that may be prescribed by this
Building Code, by law or by ordinance. No fee shall be required for buildings
owned and used exclusively by the City.
         b.   Plan review fees. When a plan or other data is required to be
submitted, a plan review fee shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of
a permit. Such plan review fee shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City
Council.
            The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees
from the permit fees specified in Section 2(a) and are in addition to the
permit fees.
            When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional
plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged as set forth by
Resolution of the City Council.
      (3)   Section R309.5 “Fire sprinklers” is hereby repealed by deleting
such section.
      (4)   Section R310 “Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings” is hereby
amended by adding to the section:
      R310.7 A platform capable of supporting a live load of 300 pounds shall
be permanently affixed at the interior of the window. This platform shall be no
higher than 20 inches and constructed so that the distance from the platform to
the finished sill height shall not exceed 44 inches. The platform shall extend
outward from the wall a minimum of 20 inches and shall be at least as wide as
the clear openable width of the window.
      (5)   Section R404 “Foundations and retaining walls” is hereby amended by
adding the following reinforcement alternatives for concrete walls:
   In homes constructed with this code the following reinforcement requirements
for 8” minimum thick concrete foundation walls between 96 and 120 inches in
height: footing imbedded #4 bars 20 inches on center vertically and #4 bars 24
inches on center horizontally. Walls less than 96 inches in height required no
less than 4 #4 bars installed horizontally spaced equally. Subwalls required 2
#4 bars. All footings require 2 #4 bars. Anything outside of the scope of these
wall heights require a stamped engineered reinforcement schedule.”
      (6)   Section R501.3 “Fire protection of floors” is hereby amended to
allow the use of FX-LumberGuard approved equal spray fire barrier protection as
an equivalent.
      (7)   Section R602.3 “Design and construction” is hereby amended by
adding:
      “All roof trusses and rafters, at all bearing locations, shall be secured
to top plates with labeled and listed approved screws, H-clips or other system
tested and designed for such use.”
      (8)   Chapter 11 “Energy Efficiency”, Section N1103.3.5 is hereby amended
to allow the use of joist spaces and stud spaces (when not located in exterior
walls) as ducts or plenums.
      (9)   Chapter 42 “Swimming Pools” is hereby repealed by deleting such
section.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-7) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 2016-05, passed
6-15-2016; Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.021 PERMIT ISSUANCE DURING REZONING.
   The Building Official of the city is hereby prohibited from issuing a
building permit to the owner or owners of real property for which action has
been initiated for the purpose of securing a zoning reclassification. The
period of such prohibition shall extend from the date of the official act of
the Planning and Zoning Commission calling for a public hearing on such zoning
reclassification up to and including the date of final action of the City
Council upon such zoning reclassification.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-8)
§ 150.022 WAITING PERIOD FOR DEMOLITION PERMITS.
   (A)   Application of section. The provisions of this section shall apply to
all buildings located in whole or in part within the following described
neighborhood areas: None designated.
   (B)   Discretionary waiting period.
      (1)   Upon receiving an application for a demolition permit for any
building located in whole or in part within the areas described in division (A)
above, the Building Official shall immediately notify the City Council of such
application.
      (2)   At its next regular meeting the Council must then take formal
action to either approve or withhold the demolition permit for a specified
period not to exceed 90 days. If the Council fails to take action to approve or
withhold the demolition permit at its next regular meeting, the Building
Official shall issue the permit forthwith.
      (3)   The Council may in its discretion withhold the demolition permit
whenever it determines that the building for which the permit is sought may be
of historical or architectural significance to the city.
      (4)   The purpose of this waiting period is to enable the Council to have
time to investigate the historical or architectural value of the building to
the community and to take such action(s) as may be appropriate to ensure or
encourage its preservation. However, nothing in this section shall authorize
the withholding by the Building Official of a demolition permit for more than
90 days following notification of the Council of application for such permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-9)
ELECTRICAL CODE
Publisher's Note: This Subchapter is UNDER REVISION. The text of the amendment
will be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
§ 150.035 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by reference as the “Peosta Electrical Code” that
certain electrical code known as the 2020 National Electrical Code subject to
the amendments and other provisions of this subchapter. The provisions of the
Peosta Electrical Code shall be controlling in the supply of electricity and in
the installation, maintenance, and use of all electrical conductors and
equipment in one- and two-family detached units as described in the 2020
National Electrical Code.
   (A)   All electrical installation must comply with state adopted codes as
amended.
   (B)   Electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of
the adoption of this code may have their use, maintenance, or repair continued
if the use, maintenance, or repair is in accordance with the original design
and no hazard to life, health, or property has been created by such electrical
system and equipment.
   (C)   All electrical systems and equipment, both existing and new, and all
parts thereof shall be maintained in a proper operating condition in accordance
with the original design and in a safe and hazard-free condition. The owner or
designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the electrical
system. To determine compliance with this subsection, the Building Official, or
his or her authorized representatives, may cause any electrical system to be
reinspected.
   (D)   Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of buildings or
structures moved into or within this city shall comply with the provisions of
this code for new installations.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-17) (Ord. 2010-06, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2013-04, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   APPROVED. As to materials, equipment, and method of construction, refers to
approval by the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, as
the result of investigation and tests conducted, or by reason of accepted
principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical, or scientific
organizations.
   APPROVED AGENCY or APPROVED TESTING AGENCY. An established and recognized
agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services,
when such agency has been approved by the Building Official.
   BUILDING CODE. The building code as adopted and amended by the city.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. An authorized person who is responsible for checking
buildings in the course of construction and completed buildings to ensure that
they have been constructed in accordance with the adopted building code.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer appointed pursuant to Section R104 of the
2006 IRC, or any duly authorized representatives.
   CHIEF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR. The Building Official, or any person designated
by the Building Official, to provide inspection services in the area of
electrical regulations.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The Building Code Committee which is under the
administration and operational control of the Building Official.
   LISTED AND LISTING. Referring to equipment and materials which are shown in
a list published by an approved testing agency, qualified and equipped for
experimental testing, and maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of
current productions, and whose listing states that the equipment complies with
nationally recognized safety standards.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-18)
§ 150.037 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-19)
§ 150.038 ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representatives.
   (B)   The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, may
approve any alternate, provided it is found that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this code, and that the
material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety.
   (C)   The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall
require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any
claims regarding the use of alternates. The details of any action granting
approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the
Building Code Committee.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-20)
§ 150.039 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code, the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, may grant modifications for individual cases, provided it is
found that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose
of this code, and that such modification does not fail to meet minimum health,
life, and fire safety requirements.
   (B)   The details of actions granting modifications shall be recorded and
entered in the files of the Building Code Committee.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-21)
§ 150.040 TESTS.
   (A)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of the
provisions of this code, or evidence that materials or construction do not
conform to the requirements of this code, the Building Official, or his or her
authorized representatives, may require tests as evidence of compliance to be
made at no expense to the city.
   (B)   Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized
test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods for the
proposed alternate, the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, shall determine test procedures.
   (C)   All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests
shall be retained by the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, for the period required for the retention of public records.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-22)
§ 150.041 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies. The Building
Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall have the authority to
disconnect any electric power or energy service supplied to the building,
structure, or building service equipment therein regulated by this code in case
of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or
property. The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives,
shall whenever practicable notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant
of the building, structure, or electrical system or equipment of the decision
to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify such serving
utility, owner, and occupant of the building, structure, or building service
equipment, in writing, of such disconnection immediately thereafter.
   (B)   Authority to condemn electrical system and equipment.
      (1)   Whenever the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, ascertain that any electrical system or equipment regulated in
this code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall order in writing that
such electrical system or equipment either be removed or restored to a safe
condition, whichever is appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix a time
limit for compliance with such order. No person shall use or maintain defective
electrical systems or equipment after receiving such notice.
      (2)   When such equipment or installation is to be disconnected, a
written notice of such disconnection and causes therefor shall be given within
24 hours of the order to disconnect to the serving utility, the owner and
occupant of such building, structure, or premises.
      (3)   When any electrical system or equipment is maintained in violation
of this code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions
of this section, the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.
   (C)   Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections
from any energy or power supply nor supply power to any electrical system or
equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the
Building Official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by
the Building Official until the Building Inspector authorizes the reconnection
and use of such electrical system or equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-23)
§ 150.042 UNSAFE ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS OR EQUIPMENT.
   All electrical systems or equipment regulated by this code which constitute
a fire hazard, or are otherwise a hazard to safety, health, property, or public
welfare, are unsafe. All such unsafe electrical systems or equipment are hereby
declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures for repair. As an
alternative, the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives,
may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate the violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-24)
§ 150.043 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish,
equip, use, or maintain any electrical system or equipment, or cause or permit
the same to be done in violation of this code.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.044 PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Permits required. Except as specified in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3)
below, no electrical system regulated by this code shall be installed, altered,
repaired, replaced, or remodeled unless a separate electrical permit for each
building or structure has first been obtained from the Building Official, or
his or her authorized representatives.
   (B)   Exempt work.
      (1)   An electrical permit shall not be required for the following.
         (a)   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means
of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an approved
receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by this code.
         (b)   Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, or fixed
approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.
         (c)   Temporary decorative lighting.
         (d)   Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch,
contractor, or control device.
         (e)   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the
outlets therefor.
         (f)   Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required
capacity in the same location.
         (g)   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same
size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
         (h)   Taping joints.
         (i)   Removal of electrical wiring.
         (j)   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable
experimental laboratories.
         (k)   The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture, or television
stage sets.
      (2)   However, any such exempted work that is to be performed in other
than a single-family home by the home owner shall be performed or directly
supervised by a state licensed electrician.
      (3)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this code, or any other laws or ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-26)
§ 150.045 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the Building Code
Committee for that purpose. Every such application shall:
      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is made;
      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify
and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations, and
specifications, and other data as required in division (A)(2) above;
      (5)   Be signed by the permittee, or an authorized agent; and
      (6)   Give such other data and information as may be required by the
Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives.
   (B)   Plans and specifications. Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams,
and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for
a permit. The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, may
require plans, computations, and specifications to be prepared and designed by
an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such. (Exception:
The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, may waive the
submission of plans, calculations, and the like, if it is found that the nature
of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.)
   (C)   Information on plans and specifications. Plans and specifications
shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth, and shall be of
sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work
proposed, and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this
code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. Two sets of
plans must be submitted at the time of permit application.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-27)
§ 150.046 PERMIT ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Issuance.
      (1)   The application, plans, and specifications, and other data, filed
by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official, or his
or her authorized representatives. Such plans may be reviewed by other
departments of the city to verify compliance with any applicable laws under
their jurisdiction. If the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, find that the work described in an application for a permit
and the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the
fees specified in §
150.047 have been paid, a permit shall be issued therefor to the applicant.
      (2)   When the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, issue the permit where plans are required, the plans and
specifications shall be endorsed in writing or stamped “APPROVED.” Such
approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered
without authorization from the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved
plans.
      (3)   The Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives,
may issue a permit for the construction of part of an electrical system before
the entire plans and specifications for the whole system have been submitted or
approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed
complying with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such
permit shall proceed at personal risk without assurance that the permit for the
entire building, structure, or building service will be granted.
   (B)   Retention of plans. One set of approved plans and specifications shall
be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building work
at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. One set
of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the
Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, for purposes of
public record until final approval of the work.
   (C)   Validity of permit.
      (1)   The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of
any of the provisions of this code, or of any other ordinance of the city. No
permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of these
codes shall be valid.
      (2)   The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications and other
data shall not prevent the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said
plans, specifications, and other data, or from preventing building operations
being carried on thereunder when in violation of these codes, or of any other
ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Expiration.
      (1)   Every permit issued by the Building Official, or his or her
authorized representatives, under the provisions of this code shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the
work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180
days following the last inspection of said work. Before such work can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee
therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work,
provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications for such work; and provided further, that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit
after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
      (2)   Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an
extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when
unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and
satisfactory reasons. The Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period
not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from
being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.
   (E)   Suspension or revocation. The Building Official may, in writing,
suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information
supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-28)
§ 150.047 FEES.
   (A)   Permit fees. The fee for each electrical permit shall be as set forth
by resolution of the Council and may be modified at any time without readopting
this subchapter.
   (B)   Plan review fees. When a plan or other data are required to be
submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid as set forth by resolution of the
Council. Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate set by
resolution of the Council.
   (C)   Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no permit is issued
within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation,
and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the
applicant or destroyed by the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the
applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon request by the applicant
showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented
action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In
order to renew action, on an application after expiration, the applicant shall
resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.
   (D)   Investigation fees; work without a permit.
      (1)   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has
been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation
shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
      (2)   An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be
required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of either this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
   (E)   Fee refunds. The Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which
was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize the
refunding of not more than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been
done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
      (1)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than
80% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a
plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan
reviewing is done.
      (2)   The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee
paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-29)
§ 150.048 LICENSING.
   All trades persons must be in compliance with state licensure requirements.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-30)
§ 150.049 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General. All electrical systems and equipment for which a permit is
required by this code shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector.
No portion of any electrical system intended to be concealed shall be concealed
until inspected and approved. Neither the Building Inspector nor the city shall
be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material
required to allow inspection. When the installation of an electrical system and
equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection shall be made.
Electrical systems and equipment regulated by this code shall not be connected
to the energy source until authorized by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Inspection requests.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a
permit to notify the Building Inspector that such work is ready for inspection.
The Building Inspector may require that every request for inspection be filed
at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be
in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Inspector.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required
by this code to provide access to and means for proper inspection of such work.
   (C)   Emergency repairs of electrical equipment.
      (1)   The requirements of this section shall not be construed to prohibit
the operation of any electrical system or equipment installed to replace
existing equipment.
      (2)   The request for inspection of such equipment must have been filed
with the Building Inspector not more than 48 hours after such replacement work
is completed and before any portion of such electrical system is concealed by
any permanent portion of the building.
   (D)   Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections required by
this code, the Building Inspector may make or require other inspections of any
work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws
which are enforced by the Building Code Committee.
   (E)   Reinspections.
      (1)   A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or
reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made.
      (2)   This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection
fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the
requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for
inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection.
      (3)   Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the
approval of the Building Inspector.
      (4)   To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application
therefor in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and pay the
reinspection fee as set by resolution of the Council.
      (5)   In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no
additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees
have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-31)
§ 150.050 CONNECTION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Energy connections. An electrical system or equipment regulated by
this code for which a permit is required shall not be connected to a source of
energy or power until approved by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Temporary connections. The Building Inspector may authorize the
temporary connection of the electrical system or equipment to the source of
energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for use under a
temporary certificate of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-32)
MECHANICAL CODE
Publisher's Note: This Subchapter is UNDER REVISION. The text of the amendment
will be incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
§ 150.065 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference as the “Peosta Mechanical Code”
that certain mechanical code known as the 2021 International Mechanical Code,
as prepared and edited by the International Code Council, subject to the
amendment and other provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of the mechanical code shall be controlling for the
installation, maintenance, and use of heating, ventilating, cooling,
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other miscellaneous heat-producing
appliances within the corporate limits of the city. A copy of said mechanical
code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-33) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 2022-17, passed
9-27-2022; Ord. 2023- 10, passed 6-27-2023)
§ 150.066 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the
jurisdictional limits of the city to erect, cause, or continue any attractive,
common, or public nuisance declared by any provision of this code or
ordinances, or any code or ordinance herein adopted by reference; or to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish,
equip, use, or maintain any mechanical systems or equipment, or any portion or
combination thereof, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of this code or any code or ordinance herein
adopted by reference; or ordinance or any code or ordinance herein adopted by
reference.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.067 PERMITS.
   (A)   Exempt work. A mechanical permit will not be required for the
following:
      (1)   Any portable heating appliance, portable ventilating equipment,
portable cooling unit or portable evaporative cooler.
      (2)   Any closed system of steam, hot or chilled water piping within
heating and cooling equipment regulated by this code.
      (3)   Replacement of any component part or assembly of an appliance which
does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable
requirements of this code.
      (4)   Any refrigeration equipment which is part of the equipment for
which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this code.
      (5)   Any unit refrigerating system.
      (6)   Replacement of any existing domestic gas range or domestic gas
clothes dryer as regulated by this subchapter.
      (7)   Any domestic ventilation fan connected to a single duct.
      (8)   For the installation of each domestic hood which is served by
mechanical exhausts, including the ducts for such hood.
   (B)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-35) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.068 CERTIFICATE OF COMPETENCY REQUIRED TO PERFORM WORK.
   (A)   Certificate required. It shall be unlawful, except as hereinafter
provided, for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or any
combination thereof, and also for any accomplice, to perform or assist in
performing any act concerning, affecting or relating to the installing or
servicing of any matter covered under the provisions of this code unless said
person or a member of said firm, partnership, corporation, association, or any
combination thereof shall first have been certified by the State of Iowa as
being competent to perform such act, or unless such person, firm, corporation,
partnership, association, or any combination thereof shall have regularly and
steadily in such person’s, firm’s, corporation’s, partnership’s or
association’s employ a person or persons so certified by such board as being
competent to perform the act or acts governed by the provisions of this code
and who will perform all work within the corporate limits of the City. The
holder or holders of certificates of competency shall be the authorized
representative or representatives of said firm, partnership, person,
corporation, association, or combination thereof in matters concerning,
affecting, or related to conformance with the provisions of this code. Final
responsibility, however, for compliance with the provisions of this code shall
be with the owner or owners of the firm, partnership, corporation, association,
or any combination thereof, who agree to undertake the performance of such act
or acts; and said owner or owners shall be responsible for obtaining from the
State of Iowa the necessary permit or permits, approvals, certificates, etc.,
before any such act is started at the site of the installing or servicing.
   (B)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or any
combination thereof, shall be granted permission to perform any act other than
that which is specified in the certificate or certificates of competency
possessed by said person, or member, or employee, or employees of said firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or any combination thereof, and such act
or acts shall be performed under the direct supervision of such certificate of
competency holder or holders. The provisions of this code shall not prohibit
any person from assisting in the act or acts of installing or servicing of
matter covered by this code when such act or acts are performed under the
direct supervision or a person or persons so certified to be competent to
perform such act or acts.”
(Prior Code, § 6-13-36) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.069 FEES.
   The “Tables Mechanical Permit Fees and Mechanical Exam Fees, Registration
and Certificate of Competency Fees” as set forth by resolution of the Council,
may be modified at any time without readopting this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-37) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.070 LICENSING.
   All trades persons must be in compliance with state licensure requirements.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-38)
§ 150.071 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Upon completion of installation, alteration, or repair of gas
piping, and prior to the use thereof, the Building Inspector shall be notified
that gas piping is ready for inspection.
      (2)   Excavations required for the installation of underground piping
shall be kept open until such time as the piping has been inspected and
approved. If piping is covered or concealed before approval, it shall be
exposed upon the direction of the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Required inspections. The Building Inspector shall make the following
inspections, and shall either approve that portion of the work as completed, or
shall notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this
subchapter.
      (1)   Rough piping inspection. This inspection shall be made after gas
piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping
has been covered or concealed, or any fixture or appliance has been attached
thereto. This inspection shall include a determination that the gas piping
size, material, and installation meet the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Final piping inspection.
         (a)   This inspection shall be made after piping authorized by the
permit has been installed, and after all portions thereof which are to be
covered or concealed are so concealed and before fixtures, appliances, or
shutoff valves have been attached thereto.
         (b)   This inspection shall include an air-pressure test, at which
time the gas piping shall stand a pressure of not less than ten pounds per
square inch gage, or, at the discretion of the Building Inspector, the piping
and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six inches mercury, measured
with a manometer or slope gage. Test pressures shall be held for a length of
time satisfactory to the Building Inspector but not less than 15 minutes, with
no perceptible drop in pressure. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas
at pressures in excess of 14 inches water column pressure, the test pressure
shall be not less than 60 pounds per square inch and shall be continued for a
length of time satisfactory to the Building Inspector, but not less than 30
minutes. Tests shall be made using air pressure only and shall be made in the
presence of the Building Inspector. Necessary apparatus for conducting tests
shall be furnished by the permit holder.
   (C)   Other inspections. In cases where the work authorized by the permit
consists of a minor installation of additional piping to piping already
connected to a gas meter, the foregoing inspections may be waived at the
discretion of the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall make such
inspection as the Building Official deems advisable in order to assure that the
work has been performed in accordance with the intent of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-39)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.085 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted by reference as the “Peosta Plumbing Code” that
certain plumbing code known as the 2021 Uniform Plumbing Code, as prepared and
edited by the IAPMO, subject to the amendment and other provisions of this
subchapter. The provisions of the plumbing code shall be controlling for the
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, and use
or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems in all matters covered by such
plumbing code within the corporate limits of the city, except otherwise
provided in §§
51.01 through
51.15,
51.30 through
51.33,
52.01 through
52.08, and
52.99 in respect to sewer and water distribution systems to be located within
the city streets. A copy of said 2021 Uniform Plumbing Code shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-40) (Ord. 2013-04, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 2022-17, passed
9-27-2022; Ord. 2023-10, passed 6-27-2023)
§ 150.086 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   “Administrative Authority” within the plumbing code is hereby amended by
repealing such section.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-41)
§ 150.087 DUTIES, POWER OF ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   “Duties and Powers of the Administrative Authority,” within the plumbing
code is hereby amended by repealing such section and enacting a new section to
read as follows:
      “1.   Duties and Powers of the Building Official.
         a.   Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies. The Building
Official or its authorized representatives shall have the authority to
disconnect plumbing to a building, structure or equipment regulated by this
code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to
life or property.
         b.   Authority to order disconnection of utilities. The Building
Official or its authorized representatives shall have the authority to order
disconnection of any plumbing supplied to a building, structure or equipment
regulated by this code when the Building Official or its authorized
representatives ascertain that the equipment or any portion thereof has become
hazardous or insanitary. Written notice of such order to disconnect service and
the causes therefor shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours to the owner
and occupant of such building, structure or premises, provided, however, that
in cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection may be
made immediately without such notice. The Building Official or its authorized
representatives shall immediately notify the serving utility in writing of such
order to disconnect.
         c.   Authority to condemn equipment. Whenever the Building Official or
its authorized representatives ascertain that any plumbing, or portion thereof,
regulated by this code has become hazardous to life, health, property, or has
become insanitary, the Building Official or its authorized representatives
shall order in writing that such plumbing either be removed or restored to a
safe or sanitary condition, as appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix
a time limit for compliance with such order. No person shall use or maintain
defective plumbing after receiving such notice.
         When such plumbing is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed
in Section 3a (2) shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or
property, such disconnection may be made immediately without such notice.
         d.   Reconnection or reuse. No person shall make connections from any
energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system nor supply energy, fuel
or water to any equipment regulated by this code which has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the Building Official or its authorized
representatives or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the
Building Official or its authorized representatives until the Building Official
or its authorized representatives authorize the reconnection and use of such
equipment.
         When any plumbing is maintained in violation of this code, and in
violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
Building Official or its authorized representatives may institute any
appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.”
(Prior Code, § 6-13-42)
§ 150.088 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation within the
jurisdictional limits of the city to erect, cause or continue any attractive,
common or public nuisance declared by any provision of this code or ordinance
or any code or ordinance herein adopted by reference; or to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
or maintain any mechanical systems or equipment, or any portion or combination
thereof, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any of the provisions of this code or any code or ordinance herein adopted by
reference; or ordinance or any code or ordinance herein adopted by reference.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-43) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.089 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to make any installation, alteration, repair, replacement or
remodel any plumbing system regulated by this code except as permitted in
subsection (b) of this section, or cause the same to be done without first
obtaining a separate plumbing permit for each separate building or structure.
   (B)   Exempt work. A plumbing permit shall not be required for the
following:
      (1)   The clearing of stoppages or repairing of leaks in drains, soil,
waste or vent pipes; provided, however, that should any concealed trap,
drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe be removed and replaced with new material,
the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be procured and
inspection made.
      (2)   The clearing of stoppages or repairing of leaks in piping and/or
valves when such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of piping and/or valves.
      (3)   The replacement of inoperable, broken or damaged fixtures, faucets
or tanks; provided, however, that replacement items meet the requirements of
the Peosta Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-44) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.090 FEES.
   (A)   Permit fees. The fees for each permit shall be as set forth by
Resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Plan review fees. When a plan or other data are required to be
submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. The plan review fees for plumbing
work shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City Council. The plan review
fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the permit fees and
are in addition to the permit fees.
   (C)   Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no permit is issued
within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall
expire by limitation and plans and other data submitted for review may
thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official
or its authorized representatives. The Building Official may extend the time
for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180)
days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application
shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application
after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review
fee.
   (D)   Investigation fees; Work without a permit.
      (1)      Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required
by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special
investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
      (2)   Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be
required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
   (E)   Inspection fees. A fee shall be paid for inspections made outside of
normal business hours and for inspections for which no fees are specifically
indicated. Inspection fees shall be as set forth by Resolution of the City
Council.
   (F)   Fee refunds.
      (1)   The Building Official or its authorized representatives may
authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or
collected.
      (2)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than
eighty (80) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a
permit issued in accordance with this code.
      (3)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than
eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a
permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled
before any plan review effort has been expended.
      (4)   The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee
paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-45) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.091 LICENSING.
   All trades persons must be in compliance with state licensure requirements.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-46)
§ 150.092 DAMAGE TO DRAINAGE SYSTEM OR PUBLIC SEWER.
   (A)   Roofs, inner courts, vent shafts, light wells or similar areas having
rain water drain, shall discharge to the outside of the building, to the gutter
or to a storm drainage system.
   (B)   The installation of sump pumps, sump pump connections or gravity
connections which discharge or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, interior and exterior
foundation drains or floor drains used for collecting stormwater to any
sanitary sewer is specifically prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-47) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.093 DAMAGE TO PUBLIC SEWER OR PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, by any means
whatsoever, into any plumbing fixture, floor drain, interceptor, sump,
receptacle or device which is connected to any drainage system, public sewer or
private sewer any ashes, cinders, solids, rags, flammable, poisonous or
explosive liquids or gases, oils, grease and any other thing whatsoever which
would, or could cause damage to the public sewer or private sewer.
   (B)   No stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, interior or exterior foundation drains or floor drains used for
collecting stormwater shall be connected to or discharged into any drainage
system connected to a public or private sanitary sewer.
   (C)   An approved type watertight sewage or waste water holding tank, the
contents of which, due to their character, must be periodically removed and
disposed of at some approved off-site location, shall be installed only when
required by the Building Official or the Health Officer to prevent anticipated
surface or subsurface contamination or pollution, damage to the public sewer,
or other hazardous or nuisance condition.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-48) (Ord. 2022-17, passed 9-27-2022)
§ 150.094 SIZE OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   The minimum size of any building sewer shall be determined on the basis of
the total number of fixture units drained by such sewers. No building sewer
shall have a smaller diameter than four inches or the size of the building
drain; whichever is larger.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-49) (Ord. 2010-04, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 2022-17, passed
9-27-2022)
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 150.110 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide a just, equitable, and
practicable method to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy
provided by the building code or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings
or structures which, from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals,
property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be
required to be repaired, vacated, or demolished.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all dangerous
buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter
become dangerous in the city.
   (C)   All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under
the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to the provisions of the
building code.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-10)
§ 150.111 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure which endangers the life,
health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants by reason of any or
all of the following conditions or defects:
      (1)   Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit of
insufficient width, size or arrangement to provide safe and adequate means of
exit in case of fire or panic.
      (2)   The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other
means of exit is warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe and inadequate
as means of exit in case of fire or panic.
      (3)   The stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof due to all
dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or
stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings or structures of
similar structure, purpose, or location.
      (4)   Any portion has been damaged by any cause to such an extent that
the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe, and is less than the minimum requirements of the
building code for new buildings or structures of similar structure, purpose, or
location.
      (5)   Any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fail, or to
become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and potentially injure persons or
damage property.
      (6)   Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the
building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings or structures.
      (7)   Any portion has racked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an
extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance
to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction.
      (8)   The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is likely to
collapse partially or completely because of:
         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
         (b)   Faulty construction;
         (c)   The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
         (d)   The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or
         (e)   Any other cause.
      (9)   For any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
      (10)   The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.
      (11)   The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33%
or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50%
damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosings, or outside
walls or coverings.
      (12)   The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become:
         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children;
         (b)   A harbor for vagrants or criminals; or
         (c)   Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing
unlawful acts.
      (13)   Any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition of the
building code, or any law or ordinance relating to the condition, location, or
structure of such building or structure.
      (14)   Any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member, or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member, or
portion less than 66% of the:
         (a)   Strength;
         (b)   Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
         (c)   Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law
in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy
in the same location.
      (15)   Any building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, is determined by the Health Officer to be unsanitary, unfit
for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness
or disease because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation
facilities, or otherwise.
      (16)   Any building or structure is determined by the Fire Marshal to be
a fire hazard because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration,
damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction,
faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause.
      (17)   Any building or structure is in such condition as to constitute a
public nuisance.
      (18)   Any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure.
      (19)   Any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of
six months.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-11)
§ 150.112 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish,
equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit
the same to be done in violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   All buildings or structures within the scope of this subchapter, and
all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives,
in accordance with and in the manner provided by this subchapter and the
building code.
   (C)   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after
inspection by the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives,
to be dangerous as defined in this subchapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal
in accordance with the procedure specified in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.113 NOTICES, ORDER OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, has inspected or caused to be inspected any building, and has
found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the Building
Official may, at the recommendation of his or her building inspector(s),
commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation, or demolition of the
building.
   (B)   The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the
record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
      (1)   The street address, description sufficient for identification of
the building or structure, and a legal description of the premises;
      (2)   A statement that the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, have found the building to be dangerous with a brief and
concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous
under the provisions of this subchapter;
      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
Building Official:
         (a)   If the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, has determined that the building or structure must be
repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor
and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from
the date of the order) and completed within such time as the Building Official,
or his or her authorized representatives, shall determine is reasonable under
all of the circumstances.
         (b)   If the Building Official, and his or her authorized
representatives, have determined that the building or structure must be
vacated, the order shall require that the building or structures shall be
vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the
Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, to be reasonable.
         (c)   If the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, has determined that the building or structure must be
demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such
time as the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall
determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order);
that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of
the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the
Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall determine is
reasonable.
      (4)   Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work
(without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time
specified, the Building Official, or his or her authorized representatives:
         (a)   Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further
occupancy until the work is completed; and
         (b)   May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs
thereof against the property or its owner.
      (5)   Statements advising:
         (a)   Any person having any record title or legal interest in the
building may appeal to the Building Code Committee as provided in this
subchapter; and
         (b)   Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an
administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
   (C)   The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and
order, shall be posted on the property and a copy served upon the record owner.
In addition, reasonable effort shall be made to serve a copy upon each of the
following if known to the Building Official, or disclosed from official public
records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the
holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or
the land on which it is located.
   (D)   Service of the notice and order may be made by any method provided by
law for service of original notices in civil lawsuits. The Building Official,
or his or her authorized representatives, including the Police Chief, may serve
the notice personally. Service by certified mail shall be effective on the date
of mailing. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section.
   (E)   (1)   Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to
at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury
executed by the persons affecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner
in which service was made.
      (2)   The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in
acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, or affidavit of publication, shall
be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representatives.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-13)
§ 150.114 REPAIR, VACATION, DEMOLITION.
   (A)   The following standards shall be followed by the Building Official, or
his or her authorized representatives (and by the Building Code Committee if an
appeal is taken), in ordering the repair, vacation, or demolition of any
dangerous building or structure:
      (1)   Any building declared a dangerous building under this subchapter
either shall be repaired in accordance with the current Building Code or shall
be demolished at the option of the building owner.
      (2)   If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or
its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
   (B)   (1)   Every order and notice to vacate shall recite the emergency and
specify the conditions which necessitate vacating, and the notice shall contain
the following:
 
   DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.
It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
______________________________________
Building Official.
 
      (2)   No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so
posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish, or remove such
building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after
it is posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal have been
completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of
the Building Code.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to
the order and an agreement by such person that said person will comply with the
order if allowed additional time, the Building Official may, in his or her
discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days,
within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, if the
Building Official determines that such an extension of time will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The Building
Official’s authority to extend time is limited to physical repair,
rehabilitation, or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect
the time to appeal the Building Official’s notice and order.
   (D)   Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30
days after any order issued under this chapter becomes effective, or if
applicable any extension of time:
      (1)   (a)   The Building Official shall cause the building or structure
described in such order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a
notice reading:
 
   DANGEROUS BUILDING DO NOT OCCUPY.
It is unlawful to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.
______________________________________
Building Official.
 
         (b)   No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as
specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so
posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building
Official have been completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to
the provisions of the Building Code.
      (2)   The Building Official may, in addition to any other remedy, cause
the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions
which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or,
if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be
demolished and the materials, rubble, and debris therefrom, removed and the lot
cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost
thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this
subchapter. Any surplus realized from the demolition thereof, over and above
the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the
person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.
      (3)   When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to
this provision, the work shall be accomplished by city personnel or by private
contract under the direction of the Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by the
Building Official, or the Building Official may employ such architectural and
engineering assistance on a contract basis as deemed reasonably necessary. If
any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard public
works contractual procedures shall be followed.
      (4)   The cost of such work shall be made a special assessment against
the property involved. The Building Official, or his or her authorized
representatives, shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred in the
repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter. Upon completion of the work of repair or demolition, the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representatives, shall prepare and certify
the actual cost to the City Clerk who, in turn, shall certify such cost to the
County Treasurer, and it shall then constitute a lien against said property and
be collected in the same manner as general property taxes on said property.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-14)
§ 150.115 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person entitled to service of a notice and order under this
subchapter may appeal from any action, decision, or order of the Building
Official under this subchapter by filing at the office of the Building
Official, or his or her authorized representative, a written appeal to the
Building Code Committee containing:
      (1)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of the appellant
in the building or the land involved in the notice and order;
      (2)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support
the contentions of the appellant;
      (3)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;
      (4)   The signature of all parties named as appellants and their official
mailing addresses; and
      (5)   The verification of the appellant as to the truth of the matters
stated in the appeal.
   (B)   The appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of service of
such order or action of the Building Official.
   (C)   Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the
Building Official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of
the Building Code Committee.
   (D)   (1)   As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the
Building Code Committee shall fix a date, time, and place for the hearing of
the appeal. Such date shall be not less than ten days nor more than 30 days
from the date the appeal was filed with the Building Official, or his or her
authorized representatives.
      (2)   Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given
at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the
secretary of the Building Code Committee either by causing a copy of such
notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed
to the appellant at the appellant’s address shown on the appeal.
   (E)   Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with this
section shall constitute a waiver of such person’s right to an administrative
hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof.
   (F)   Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant
shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (G)   Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and order of the
Building Official issued under this subchapter shall be stayed during the
pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-15)
§ 150.116 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   If any person to whom an order is directed shall fail, neglect, or
refuse to obey such order, the Building Official may:
      (1)   Cause such person to be prosecuted; or
      (2)   Institute any appropriate action to abate such building or
structure as a public nuisance.
   (B)   No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with any officer,
employee, contractor, or authorized representative of the city, or with any
person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building or structure
which has been ordered repaired, vacated, or demolished under the provisions of
this subchapter, whenever such officer, employee, contractor, or authorized
representative of the city, or person having an interest or estate in such
building or structure, acts pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, or
performs any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or
authorized or directed pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-13-16)
CHAPTER 151: STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Damage, defacing city streets
Street Cuts and Excavations
   
151.15   Application for permit
   
151.16   Permit fees
   
151.17   Safety measures
   
151.18   Backfilling and restoration
   
151.19   Rules and regulations
Sidewalks
   
151.40   Purpose
   
151.41   Definitions
   
151.42   Cleaning, snow, ice accumulations
   
151.43   Maintenance responsibility
   
151.44   Liability of abutting owner
   
151.45   Ordering sidewalk improvements
   
151.46   Repairing defective sidewalks
   
151.47   Notice of inability to repair or barricade
   
151.48   Standard sidewalk specifications
   
151.49   Permits for construction or removal
   
151.50   Failure to obtain permit; remedies
   
151.51   Inspection and approval
   
151.52   Barricades and warning lights
   
151.53   Interference with sidewalk improvements
   
151.54   Special assessments for construction and repair
   
151.55   Notice of assessment for repair or cleaning costs
   
151.56   Hearing and assessment
   
151.57   Billing and certifying to county
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 DAMAGE, DEFACING CITY STREETS.
   (A)   Removal of safeguards or danger signals. No person shall willfully
remove, tear down, destroy, or carry away from any highway, street, alley,
avenue, or bridge any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or
extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose
of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said highway, street,
alley, avenue, or bridge without the consent of the person in control thereof
(per Iowa Code § 716.5).
   (B)   Obstructing or defacing streets. No person shall obstruct, deface, or
injure any public road in any manner by breaking up, plowing, or digging within
the boundary lines thereof, without permission from the Mayor (per Iowa Code §
716.1).
   (C)   Allowing water, snow, ice, and accumulations on sidewalk. No abutting
property owner shall allow water from an improperly located eave or drain, or
from any roof, to fall onto a public sidewalk, or fail to remove snow, ice, and
accumulations from the sidewalks promptly (per Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(b and e)).
   (D)   Removal of hydrant caps, sewer caps, or manhole covers. No person
shall remove or carry away hydrant caps, sewer caps, or manhole covers without
the consent of the person in control thereof.
   (E)   Placing debris on streets. It is unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit on any street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire,
cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass, or any other
debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or
any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 05-02, passed 6-14-
2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
STREET CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS
§ 151.15 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall commence excavation in any public street or public
ground until that person has applied to the City Clerk for an excavation
permit. Such application shall indicate the location of the excavation, the
name and address of the applicant who is to do the work, whether public
liability insurance is in force, and that the applicant has checked the
underground map of all utilities, and other owners of underground facilities,
and that the applicant has notified those persons or companies of the time that
excavation will commence. The making of an application shall be deemed notice
to the city of the plan to cut the street surfacing or pavements, and to
obstruct the public way. Such permits shall not be valid until six hours after
receipt, unless the Clerk waives this requirement.
   (B)   In an emergency, authorized persons or companies may commence
excavations, provided that they shall have made a reasonable effort to inform
the city and the utilities whose underground utilities might be involved in any
way, and those involved in the excavation shall make written application at the
earliest practicable moment. The Clerk may provide on the form for the
certification that the applicant has notified all utilities and other parties
required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)
§ 151.16 PERMIT FEES.
   The permit fee shall be $15 for the cost of each inspection. A single
excavation shall be deemed to constitute all the digging necessary for a single
connection, or a cut for installing a main not exceeding 100 feet in length. An
additional fee of $15 shall be required for every additional 100 feet, or major
fraction thereof, of main excavation.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-2)
§ 151.17 SAFETY MEASURES.
   Any person, firm, or corporation cutting a pavement or surfacing or
excavating in the streets shall erect suitable barricades, maintain warning
lights from sunset to sunrise each night, and take such other precautions as
necessary for the safety of the public, whether vehicles or pedestrians.
Vehicles, equipment, materials, excavated material, and similar items shall
likewise be protected by lights and warning devices, such as traffic cones,
flags, and the like. Where traffic conditions warrant, the party excavating may
be required to provide flagmen if, in the judgment of the City Council, the
public safety requires it. Compliance with city ordinances and regulations
shall not be deemed to waive the requirements that the party excavating shall
comply with all the requirements of the labor safety laws and the rules of the
State Department of Labor, nor shall any failure be deemed a responsibility of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-3)
§ 151.18 BACKFILLING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Any person excavating in the streets shall be responsible for the
backfilling of the excavation in accordance with city specifications and the
restoration of the pavement or surfacing to as good a condition as that
existing prior to the excavation.
   (B)   If any excavator fails to backfill or restore the pavement or
surfacing properly within 48 hours of the completion of the underground work,
the city reserves the right to backfill and resurface or install new paving,
and charge the cost thereof to the party excavating. If any backfilling or
pavement or surfacing restoration is not in accordance with the city
specifications, the City Council is authorized to remove such material as is
necessary and to backfill and restore the pavement or surfacing properly.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-4)
§ 151.19 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council may by resolution establish such rules and regulations for
the manner of making cuts and related matters involving excavations.
(Prior Code, § 6-6-5)
SIDEWALKS
§ 151.40 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to improve and maintain sidewalks in a
safe condition, and to require owners of abutting property to maintain, repair,
replace, construct, or reconstruct sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-1)
§ 151.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK. Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more;
      (2)   Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths inch or more;
      (3)   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter;
      (4)   Spalling over 50% of the surface of a single square of the sidewalk
with one or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more;
      (5)   Spalling over less than 50% of a single square of the sidewalk with
one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more;
      (6)   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot;
      (7)   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth; and
      (8)   A change from design or construction grade equal to or greater than
three-fourths inch per foot.
   OWNER. The person owning the fee title or the contract purchaser for
purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes, OWNER shall
include the lessee, or person in possession.
   SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. The construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-2)
§ 151.42 CLEANING, SNOW, ICE ACCUMULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner to keep sidewalks abutting the owner’s
property clear of the natural accumulations of snow or ice. If the owner fails
to do so within 24 hours after deposit of accumulation, the Mayor may have the
natural accumulations of snow or ice removed without notice to the property
owner. The Mayor shall give the Council an itemized and verified statement of
the removal costs and a legal description of the property at the next regular
Council meeting. The costs shall be reviewed by the Council and, if found
correct, shall be assessed against the property as taxes. The City Clerk shall
be directed to certify the costs to the County Auditor for collection as
provided in Iowa Code § 364.12.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-3)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(2b) and (2e)
§ 151.43 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The abutting property owner or owners shall be responsible for the repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of all broken or defective sidewalks to a safe
condition, and to maintain in a safe condition all sidewalks in the abutting
street right-of-way (per Iowa Code § 364.12(2c)).
(Prior Code, § 6-8-4)
§ 151.44 LIABILITY OF ABUTTING OWNER.
   (A)   As provided in Iowa Code § 364.14, in the event the owner of property
abutting any public sidewalk fails or refuses to perform any act required of
them by this subchapter, and in the event an action is brought against the city
for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by a defect in or the
condition of said sidewalk, the city may notify in writing the said abutting
owner that it claims the injury was caused by their negligence and/or their
failure to repair the defect or eliminate the condition complained of. The
notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the
name and location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement
of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city believes that
the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the city,
and asking the person to appear and defend.
   (B)   A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any action by the
city against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or
condition or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the
city to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the
damage or injury. The city may maintain an action against the person notified
to recover the amount of the judgment, together with all the expenses incurred
by the city in the suit (per Iowa Code § 364.14).
(Prior Code, § 6-8-5)
§ 151.45 ORDERING SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may order the construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of permanent sidewalks upon any street or court. Notice of this
order shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. The notice shall include
the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the Council within 15 days of
receipt of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-6)
§ 151.46 REPAIRING DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be the duty of the abutting property owner at any time, or upon
receipt of 30 days’ notice from the city, to repair, replace, or reconstruct
all broken or defective sidewalks in the abutting street right-of-way. If,
after the expiration of the 30 days as provided in the notice, the required
work has not been done or is not in the process of completion, the Mayor shall
order the work to proceed to repair, replace, or reconstruct the sidewalk. Upon
completion of the work, the Mayor shall submit to the Council an itemized and
verified statement of expenditures for material and labor, and the legal
description of the property abutting the sidewalk on which work has been
performed. These costs shall be assessed to the property as taxes. The City
Clerk shall be directed to certify the costs to the County Auditor for
collection as provided in Iowa Code § 364.12.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-7)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(e)
§ 151.47 NOTICE OF INABILITY TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the property abutting the
sidewalk, or of the contractor or agent of the owner, to notify the city
immediately in the event the owner is unable to make necessary sidewalk
improvements or to install or erect warnings and barricades as required by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-8)
   (B)   Installation, repair, and/or replacement of the sidewalk shall be done
in accordance with §
151.49 at the owner’s expense. The owner is eligible for the reimbursement of
certain expenses by the city, not to exceed 50% of the cost of rebar and
concrete used in the repair or replacement project to a maximum reimbursement
of $500 per calendar year. The owner shall submit a request for reimbursement
from the city within 30 days of project completion to be considered eligible
for reimbursement. The request for reimbursement shall include proof of project
completion, a summary of the work performed, and invoices clearly showing the
expense associated with the rebar and concrete used on the project. The written
request shall be submitted to the City Clerk and the request will be considered
by the City Council for approval. Reimbursement will be mailed to the owner via
USPS.
(Ord. 2022-08, passed 7-26-2022)
§ 151.48 STANDARD SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
   Sidewalks constructed, repaired, or replaced under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards.
   (A)   Portland cement concrete shall be the only material used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council.
   (B)   Sidewalks shall be on one-course construction.
   (C)   Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil.
Where soil is not well drained, a four inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse
gravel, sand, or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage is to
be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (D)   The sidewalk bed shall be graded to the established grade.
   (E)   Residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide, or match
existing sidewalks, and four inches thick, and each section shall be no more
than four feet in length. In the 177 central business districts, sidewalks
shall extend from the property line to the curb unless the Council shall
establish a different distance due to the circumstances. Each section shall be
four inches thick and no more than six feet in length and width. All driveway
areas shall not be less than six inches in thickness.
   (F)   Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge
nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the Council
shall establish a different distance due to the circumstances.
   (G)   All elevations of sidewalks are to be established by the City Council
with assistance from the Superintendent of Public Works on a case-by-case
basis.
   (H)   All sidewalks shall slope at least one-quarter inch per foot toward
the curb, but in no event more than one-half inch per foot toward the curb.
   (I)   All sidewalks shall have a steel trowel finish followed by a “broom”
or a “wood float” finish.
   (J)   There shall not be less than two curb cuts or ramps per lineal block
which shall be located on or near the cross-walks at intersections. Each curb
cut or ramp shall be at last 30 inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater
than one inch of rise per 12 inches lineal distance, except that a slope no
greater than one inch of rise per eight inches lineal distance may be used
where necessary, shall have a nonskid surface, and shall otherwise be so
constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically
disabled persons using the sidewalk. All new sidewalks shall comply with the
Americans With Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. (per Iowa
Code § 216C.9).
   (K)   All sidewalk improvements on public property, whether performed by the
owner of the abutting property or by the city, shall be performed under the
supervision and inspection of the City Superintendent of Public Works, and in
accordance with the standard sidewalk specifications set forth in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-9) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003; Ord. 2022-16, passed 9-27-
2022)
§ 151.49 PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL.
   No person shall make any sidewalk improvements unless such person shall
obtain a permit from the City Clerk. The permit shall state that the person
will comply with the ordinances of the city and with the specifications for
sidewalks adopted by the city. The permit also shall state that the work will
be done under the direction and approval of the City Superintendent of Public
Works. All such permits shall be issued without charge and a copy thereof, with
the application, shall be filed and preserved in the office of the City Clerk.
The permit shall state when the work is to be commenced and when the work is to
be completed. The time of completion for the sidewalk improvements may be
extended by the City Council. All permits for sidewalk improvements not ordered
by resolution of the City Council shall be issued in compliance with this
subchapter. The City Council may withhold the issuance of any permit for any
sidewalk improvements for a sufficient period to determine the necessity for
the proposed improvements, or when weather conditions will adversely affect the
sidewalk improvements.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-10)
§ 151.50 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES.
   Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the
provisions of this subchapter and with the specifications, or when any sidewalk
improvements are made without a permit, the Mayor shall serve notice to obtain
a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor doing the work. If the
sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the work to
stop until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the
specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain
a permit immediately and perform any needed corrections within five days from
receipt of the permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the Mayor
shall have the work completed and the costs assessed to the property owner as
provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-11)
§ 151.51 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   Upon final completion, the Superintendent of Public Works shall inspect the
work and may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When
the work does meet all requirements of this subchapter, the specifications, and
the permit, the Superintendent of Public Works shall indicate this on both
copies of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-12)
§ 151.52 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Proper warning lights and barricades shall be placed to protect persons from
materials, equipment, and dangerous conditions. Placement and maintenance of
adequate warnings is the responsibility of the constructor, the owner, and the
lessee of the property.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-13)
§ 151.53 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while it is in the process of being improved,
or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall
remove, destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar,
remove, or deface any notice or warning device provided by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-14)
§ 151.54 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
   The City Council may assess the cost of initial construction, improvements,
and/or repair of sidewalks in the city according to the special assessment
procedures established in Iowa Code Chapter 384, division IV.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-15)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 384.38
§ 151.55 NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT FOR REPAIR OR CLEANING COSTS.
   When the Mayor submits a bill for sidewalk improvements or for removal of
accumulations as provided in this subchapter, the City Clerk shall send a
notice of such facts to the owner of the abutting property. The notice may be
given either by personal service or by certified mail to the last known address
of the owner. The notice shall contain a statement of the work performed, the
cost of the work that is being assessed, a description of the property
affected, and the fact that the person may pay the amount assessed within 30
days without interest or penalty. The notice also shall indicate that the
person may object to such assessment and given the place and time at which
Council will hear such objections. The time set for hearing shall be at least
15 days after the service or mailing of the notice (per Iowa Code § 384.50).
(Prior Code, § 6-8-16)
§ 151.56 HEARING AND ASSESSMENT.
   At the time and place designated in the notice, the Council shall consider
all objections to the assessment, correct all errors or omissions, and adopt a
corrected list as the amounts to be assessed against the property (per Iowa
Code § 384.51).
(Prior Code, § 6-8-17)
§ 151.57 BILLING AND CERTIFYING TO COUNTY.
   Thirty days after the Council’s decision, the City Clerk shall certify any
unpaid amounts to the County Treasurer. The unpaid assessments shall constitute
a lien against the property and shall be collected by the County Treasurer in
the same manner as other taxes. Any assessment that exceeds $100 may be paid in
installments as set by Council, not exceeding ten, in the same manner and at
the same interest rates as for special assessments under Iowa Code Chapter 384,
division IV. No interest shall be charged for assessments, or parts thereof,
paid within 30 days of the time the Council determined the final amounts.
(Prior Code, § 6-8-18)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 384.60
CHAPTER 152: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
   
152.01   General
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Exempt signs
   
152.04   Prohibited signs and elements
   
152.05   Measurements and illustration
   
152.06   General sign regulations
   
152.07   Permitted sign types by district
   
152.08   Permanent permitted signs; design regulations
   
152.09   Portable and temporary signs
   
152.10   Sign maintenance and repair
   
152.11   Sign permit
   
152.12   Sign master plan
   
152.13   Non-conforming signs
   
152.14   Liability for damages
§ 152.01 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to
safeguard life, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, location,
electrification, and maintenance of all signs and sign structures not located
within a building. The sign regulations in this chapter are not intended to
censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to address
the secondary effects that may adversely impact aesthetics and traffic and
pedestrian safety. The sign regulations are designed to serve substantial
government interest and, in some cases, compelling government interests such as
traffic safety and warning signs of threats to bodily injury or death. This
chapter is intended to create content-neutral sign regulations which balance
the legitimate needs of individuals, entities, and organizations to convey
messages with the legitimate objectives of the city to promote public safety,
enhance community character, and enhance private property values. This chapter
is not intended to extend its regulatory regime to objects that are not
traditionally considered signs for purpose of government regulation.
      (2)   This chapter establishes sign regulations, including provisions to
control the type, design, size, location, and maintenance of signs, to achieve
the following purposes:
         (a)   To enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities
without difficulty or confusion;
         (b)   To protect property values, public investment, and overall
neighborhood character by
preventing conditions that have undesirable impacts on surrounding properties;
         (c)   To promote the development of attractive and harmonious
residential districts, and viable retail and commercial districts;
         (d)   To ensure signs are designed and located to reduce distraction
and confusion that may be contributing factors to traffic congestion or
accidents and maintain a safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment;
and
         (e)   To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations and to provide standards regarding the non-communicative aspects of
signs.
   (B)   Application. Signs shall be designed, erected, altered, moved,
displayed, and maintained in accordance with the regulations set forth in this
chapter.
      (1)   The provisions in this chapter shall not amend or in any way
interfere with other codes, rules, or regulations governing traffic signs
within the city.
      (2)   The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to signs
outside of the public right-of-way, except when specifically stated otherwise.
      (3)   The owner of any sign, which is otherwise permitted by this
chapter, may substitute noncommercial copy or message in lieu of any other
commercial or noncommercial sign copy of message.
   (C)   Conflicts. This chapter is not meant to repeal or interfere with the
enforcement of other chapters or sections of this code of ordinances. In cases
of conflicts between local, state, or federal regulations, the more restrictive
regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SIGN. Any device (including, but not limited to, letters, words, numerals,
figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination) used for visual
communication intended to attract the attention of the public and visible to
the public right-of-way or other properties. The term SIGN shall not include
any governmental unit.
      SIGN, ABANDONED. A sign, including the sign face and supporting
structure, which refers to a discontinued business, profession, commodity,
service, or other activity or use formerly occupying the site; or which
contains no sign copy on all sign faces for a continuous period of six months.
      SIGN, A-FRAME. An advertising or business ground sign constructed to form
an “A” or tent-like shape, that may be hinged or not hinged at the top.
      SIGN, ANIMATION. A sign with a sign face that moves in whole or in part
and includes a flashing or a rotating sign, but does not include a clock, a
time, date, or temperature display or an electronic message display.
      SIGN AREA. The area of the surface of a sign, bounded by the top, bottom,
and sides.
      SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign that is structurally connected to a building or
depends on that building for support.
      SIGN, AWNING. A sign printed on such temporary or movable shelter
supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-
rigid materials except for supporting framework.
      SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign made of flexible material with a printed
message or graphic secured or mounted from a structure in such a way as to
allow wind movement.
      SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than
the premises on which the sign is located.
      SIGN, BUILDING IDENTIFICATION. A sign identifying a specific business,
service, activity, or profession, including, but not limited to, logo,
trademark, name, address, and contact information, located on the premises.
      SIGN, CANOPY. A sign that is attached or made an integral part of a
canopy.
      SIGN, DEVELOPMENT. A sign which, by means of symbol and/or name,
identifies a development of residential, office, and/or commercial development.
      SIGN, DETACHED. A sign anchored directly to the ground or supported by
one or more posts, columns, or other vertical structures or supports, and not
attached to or dependent for support from any building.
      SIGN, DRIVEWAY. A sign that includes information in directing the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as enter, exit, parking, and the like.
      SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED. A sign consisting of no more than two parallel or
near parallel faces supported by a single structure.
      SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE. A sign which uses an array of electronic
illuminated lights, generally controlled by a computer or other electronic
programming device, to display information or supporting graphics.
      SIGN, FEATHER. An advertising or business ground sign constructed to form
a feather-like shape.
      SIGN, FLAG. A sign that is emblazoned on a flag and is intended to be
displayed in a free-flowing manner.
      SIGN, FUEL ISLAND. A sign affixed to or mounted on a fuel island.
      SIGN, GROUND. A detached on-premises sign built on a freestanding frame,
mast, or pole(s) with a clearance no greater than three feet. This includes
monument signs.
      SIGN, GOVERNMENT. A sign, posting, notice, or similar elements placed,
installed, or required by law by a city, county, state, or federal governmental
agency in carrying out its responsibility to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, or for civic or recreational purposes.
      SIGN, HAZARDOUS. Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe,
is not kept in good repair, or can cause electrical shock to persons likely to
come into contact.
      SIGN, H-FRAME. An advertising or business ground sign constructed to form
an “H” shape.
      SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally (directly or indirectly) for the purpose of
illuminating the sign.
      SIGN, L-FRAME. An advertising or business ground sign constructed to form
an “L” shape.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. An on-premises freestanding sign with the appearance of a
solid base; see the definition of “ground sign”.
      SIGN, MOVING. A sign that conveys its message through rotating, changing,
or animated elements by mechanical means or by action of wind currents.
      SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign that was legally erected prior to the
adoption of this chapter, but which now violates the regulations of this
chapter.
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISE. A sign identifying or advertising a business,
profession, activity, service, or product that is not located, sold, or
produced on the same premises as the sign.
      SIGN, ON-PREMISE. A sign identifying or advertising a business,
profession, activity, service, or product that is located, sold, or produced on
the same premises as the sign.
      SIGN, POLE. An on-premise sign built on a freestanding frame, mast, or
pole(s) with a clearance greater than three feet.
      SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to
bases not permanently attached to the ground or a building and capable of being
moved from place to place, and constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light
fabric, cardboard, plywood, light plastic, or other similar materials.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to and
projects from a building face.
      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL. A small detached or attached sign located on a
residential premise, conveying a message communicated by the owner or resident
of the property.
      SIGN, ROOF. A sign or part of sign erected upon, against, or directly
above a roof or on top of or above the parapet or cornice of a building.
      SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign designed or fabricated of materials that
advertise or communicate messages that change frequently or that become
outdated, are made of materials of relatively low durability, or are intended
to be removed or replaced within a period of six months or less. Also known as
a “portable sign”.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to and parallel with the side of a building
that does not project more than two feet from the building wall.
      SIGN, WINDOW. A sign painted on or installed inside a window for the
purpose of viewing from outside the premises.
      SIGN, YARD. A temporary portable sign that is supported by a frame, pole,
or other structure placed directly in or upon the ground, wall, or window.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.03 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Building identification signs not exceeding one square foot in area
for residential buildings and two square feet in area for nonresidential
buildings, and including such signs displayed on an entry door;
   (B)   Commemorative signs;
   (C)   Governmental signs, being any sign, posting, notice, or similar signs,
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Emergency and warning signs necessary for public safety or civil
defense;
      (2)   Traffic signs erected and maintained by an authorized public
agency;
      (3)   Signs required to be displayed by law;
      (4)   Signs directing the public to points of interest;
      (5)   Signs showing the location of public facilities; and
      (6)   Signs located on or within city civic, park, and recreation
facilities.
   (D)   Historic and architectural features, including historical plaques
erected and maintained by non-profit organizations, building cornerstones, and
date-constructed stones not exceeding four square feet in area;
   (E)   Holiday or special event signs;
   (F)   Residential sign that are under four square feet in size, not
including portable signs;
   (G)   Signs posted on a community bulletin board not exceeding 11 by 17
inches;
   (H)   Signs not readable from the public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Signs or displays located entirely inside of a building and not
visible from the building’s exterior; and
      (2)   Signs intended to be readable from within a parking lot or loading
area, but not readable beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which
they are located or from any public right-of-way.
   (I)   Non-illuminated window signs; and
   (J)   Official flags of nations, states, or political subdivisions thereof.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.04 PROHIBITED SIGNS AND ELEMENTS.
   The following sign types and elements are not allowed on a temporary or
permanent basis anywhere in the city because of their potential to create
distractions to the traveling public and create visual clutter that impacts the
natural and architectural aesthetics of the city:
   (A)   Abandoned signs;
   (B)   Animated signs;
   (C)   Balloon signs;
   (D)   Blinking or flashing signs;
   (E)   Flag signs;
   (F)   Inflatable signs;
   (G)   Intermittent signs;
   (H)   Hazardous signs;
   (I)   Moving signs;
   (J)   Off-premise signs, including billboards;
   (K)   Roof signs;
   (L)   Signs emitting sound, smoke, or odors;
   (M)   Signs attached to or painted on trees, rocks, fences, or natural
features;
   (N)   Signs in the right-of-way except those placed by a public entity,
approved banners on utility or light poles, projecting signs as allowed in this
section, or other signs approved by the city;
   (O)   Signs or sign support structures that obstruct means of egress,
including any fire escape, window, door, opening, stairway, exit, walkway,
utility access or Fire Department connection;
   (P)   Signs that interfere with any required opening for ventilation;
   (Q)   Sign or sign structures which resemble, imitate, simulate, or conflict
with traffic control signs, or devices included in the federal Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), which otherwise mislead or confuse
persons traveling on public streets, or which create a traffic hazard;
   (R)   Signs displayed on motor vehicles and portable storage units, unless:
      (1)   The vehicle or storage units are functional and used for their
primary purpose;
      (2)   The display is incidental to the use; or
      (3)   The motor vehicle is parked in a designated parking or loading
space, and the storage unit is in a location that complies with all standards
of Chapter 158.
   (S)   Signs not expressly allowed by this section;
   (T)   Signs unlawfully placed, installed, erected, or maintained in
violation of this chapter;
   (U)   Spotlights and strobe lights, whether stationary or moving, intended
to draw attention to a location and not primarily intended to accent the
signage or building form, except as permitted by the City Council; and
   (V)   Video message boards.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.05 MEASUREMENTS AND ILLUSTRATION.
   For regulating signs as described in this chapter the following shall apply.
   (A)   Sign area. Computation of sign area shall include the combination of
the writing, emblem, illustrations, or other display, together with any
background material or color forming an integral part of the display, but not
including the supporting framework. On a multi-face sign the area is computed
only from one face. Where the frame or cabinet is not in the shape of a
rectangle, square, triangle or circle, the sign face area shall be determined
by calculating the area of an imaginary rectangle drawn around the frame or
cabinet.
   (B)   Height. Height shall be measured from the average ground level
exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavat ing solely for locating
the sign, to the highest point of the sign, or support structure, whichever is
taller.
   (C)   Projection. Any building sign extending more than six inches from the
wall to which it is attached shall allow a minimu m of ten feet of clearance
from the average ground level, as measur ed in division (B) above.
   (D)   Setback. The setback of a sign is measured from the propert y line to
the line projected to the ground plane of the nearest portion of the sign.
   (E)    Number of faces. No sign shall have more than two faces. Sign faces
shall be parallel, unless determined by the city to be consistent with the
architectural character of the building.
(Ord. 2023- 13, passed 7-25- 2023)
§ 152.06 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The guidelines set out in this section address issues related to sign
compatibility, legibility, placement, color, and illumination. They are
intended to complement the standards of this section and to guide quality
visual environments.
   (A)    Illumination of signs. Lighted signs facing and on property adjacent
to or across a street from a residential district shall not be backlit and
shall be no closer than 20 feet from the nearest residential district boundary.
All signs shall not exceed 0.3-foot candles over ambient light conditions.
   (B)   Electric signs.
      (1)   All electric signs shall be manufactured to meet UL specifications
and be approved by the Building Official in accordance with the city’s
Electrical Code. An equivalent alternative may be accepted as approved by the
Building Official.
      (2)   Electrical transformer boxes and raceways should be concealed from
public view. If a raceway cannot be mounted internally behind the finished
exterior wall, the exposed metal surfaces of the raceway should be finished to
match the background wall or integrated into the overall sign design.
      (3)   Electric signs shall be watertight, with service holes to provide
access to each component fitted with waterproof covers.
      (4)   Any electrical equipment or apparatus of a sign which causes
interference with radio and television reception shall not be allowed.
   (C)   Wall signs.
      (1)   A wall sign shall not extend more than 18 inches from the wall to
which it is
attached.
      (2)   A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to which
it is attached, except where it is attached to another wall sign, it may extend
to provide for the attachment.
      (3)   A wall sign shall not extend beyond its building’s roof line.
   (D)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure, including
guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other similar external support
structure.
      (2)   A projecting sign may not extend more than four feet from the wall
to which it is attached and shall provide clearance of at least eight feet
above pedestrian walkways and at least 15 feet above driveways.
   (E)   Pole signs. Permitted pole signs may revolve at a rate not to exceed
six revolutions per minute to not be classified as a moving sign which is
prohibited in this chapter.
   (F)   Driveway signs. Driveway signs for directional use are only allowed in
office and commercial zoning districts. Detached signs regulations to direct
internal traffic, identify parking areas, or supply other information, given
that the driveway signs are:
      (1)   No larger than three square feet per face;
      (2)   If building mounted, no higher than eight feet from grade;
      (3)   If free standing, no higher than three feet from grade; and
      (4)   A maximum of one at each driveway or drive through lane.
   (G)   Fuel island signs.
      (1)   The sign area shall be no more than 15 square feet of fuel island
sign area shall be permitted per pump located within the fuel island. For
example, a fuel island with six pumps would be allowed 90 square feet of sign
area within the fuel island.
      (2)   The total sign area shall be the actual square footage of one sign
face. Sign area installed in excess of 15 square feet per pump shall be counted
toward the total allowed sign area for building mounted or ground mounted signs
based on the installation type.
      (3)   Location. Fuel island signs shall be located internal to the site
and oriented toward a fuel island.
      (4)   Height. Fuel island signs shall be installed to a height not
exceeding eight feet.
   (H)   Clearance from electric lines. A clearance of not less than ten feet
horizontally and vertically shall be maintained between any sign and any
overhead electrical transmission line.
   (I)   Electronic message signs.
      (1)   Electronic message signs are permitted as part of a sign if they
are enclosed on all sides with a finish of brick, stone, stucco, powder-coated
metal, or anodized aluminum.
      (2)   Square footage of electronic message signs shall not exceed the
maximum sign area permitted for that sign type within the zoning district where
the proposed sign is to be located. The balance of the sign area shall utilize
permanent letters or symbols.
      (3)   Electronic message signs shall be:
         (a)   Located no closer than 100 feet to a residential dwelling unit;
         (b)   Prohibited in the A-1 Agricultural and Rural Residential
Districts;
         (c)   Permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residential Districts for a
non-residential use with a conditional use permit with approval by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment subject to the standards in this chapter;
         (d)   Permitted in the Office and Commercial Districts; and
         (e)   Limited to one such sign per lot.
      (4)   Electronic message signs shall not:
         (a)   Blink, rotate, move, chase, flash, glare, strobe, scintillate,
or in any fashion be distracting to the traveling public or the public in
general;
         (b)   Include audio, pyrotechnic, or bluecasting (Bluetooth
advertising) components;
         (c)   Be programmed in a way that suggests or resembles a traffic
control device, such as a traffic signal; and
         (d)   Be included on or used as a portable or temporary sign.
      (5)   Electronic message centers shall:
         (a)   Not be limited by color;
         (b)   Contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one
position with no more illumination than 0.3-foot candles above ambient light if
a malfunction occurs; and
         (c)   Include an automatic dimmer that dims the sign at dusk or during
low-light conditions.
   (J)   Sign bases and surround.
      (1)   All sign bases and surrounds shall be designed and constructed of
materials that are like those used on the principal building.
      (2)   Sign bases and surrounds shall be dominated with materials of
permanency and strength such as brick stone, block, other masonry or concrete
materials, or architectural paneling and shall be compatible with other
structures and signs in the development.
      (3)   No exposed sign cabinetry shall be visible from either side of the
sign.
      (4)   Metal skirting around a supporting pole shall not be considered an
acceptable sign base and surround material.
      (5)   All sign bases shall be at least 12 inches in height, while all
sign surrounds shall be at least six inches in thickness.
      (6)   Signs without a continuous surround may be approved by the city
when incorporating architectural elements or substantial materials meeting the
intent of high-quality sign design on all sides, bottom and top to frame the
sign area.
      (7)   (a)   The area around the base of the sign shall be maintained in
clean condition by the sign owner or property owner.
         (b)   A radius of five feet around the base of the sign shall be
landscaped with natural materials acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.07 PERMITTED SIGN TYPES BY DISTRICT.
   Permitted Signs below indicates the permitted sign types by each zoning
district. Other sign types may be allowed by the Zoning Administrator subject
to the regulations of this section unless listed as a prohibited sign. The
letter indicates the following:
   (A)   “P” means the sign type is permitted for all uses in the district.
   (B) “P(L)” means that the sign type is permitted but limited to the
principal non-residential and multi-family uses, listed in.
   (C)   “PC(L)” means that the sign type may be allowed as a conditional use,
but is limited to the principal non-residential and multi-family uses.
   (D)   “N” means that the sign type is not permitted in the district.
Sign Type A-1 R-1, R-2, R-3 C-1, C- 2 I-1 M-1, M-2 *PUD
Sign Type                      A-1 R-1, R-2, R-3 C-1, C- 2 I-1 M-1, M-2 *PUD
Attached
 Awning sign                  N   N             P         P   P
 Banner sign                  N   N             P         P   P
 Canopy sign                  N   N             P         P   P
 Marquee sign                 N   N             P         P   P
 Projecting sign              N   N             P         P   P
 Wall sign                    P   P             P         P   P
 Window sign                  P   P             P         P   P
Detached
 Ground sign                  P   P(L)          P         P   P
 Pole sign                    N   N             P         P   P
 Residential sign             P   P             P         P   P
Miscellaneous
 Electric message sign        N   PC(L)         P         P   P
 Portable and temporary signs P   P             P         P   P
Note:
* PUD, see zoning requirements set forth in Chapter 158
 
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.08 PERMANENT PERMITTED SIGNS; DESIGN REGULATIONS.
   This section sets forth the required design regulations for permanent signs
in each zoning district. Design regulations are described separately for
detached and attached sign types.
   (A)   Detached sign regulations; Agricultural and Residential Districts.
Detached Signs A-1 R-1, R-2, R-3
Detached Signs           A-1                     R-1, R-2, R-3
                                                 Permitted as a conditional
Electronic message sign  Not permitted           use for non-residential and
                                                 multi-family uses
                                                 Indirect and internal
Illumination             Ambient only            permitted for non-
                                                 residential and multifamily
                                                 principal uses
                         32 square feet for non- 32 square feet for non-
                         residential uses        residential and multi-
Maximum area per sign                            family uses
                         6 square feet for       6 square feet for
                         residential uses        residential uses
Maximum height2
 Flag pole              25 feet                 25 feet
 Ground sign            10 feet                 10 feet
 Pole sign              25 feet                 25 feet
 Residential sign       6 feet                  4 feet
Maximum number
 Ground sign            2                       1 per frontage1
 Pole sign              2                       1 per frontage
 Residential sign       2                       1
Minimum setback
 Front and street side  25 feet                 25 feet
  yards
 Side and rear yards    10 feet                 5 feet
                         32 square feet for non- 32 square feet for non-
Total size allocation on residential uses        residential and multi-
premises                                         family uses
                         6 square feet for       6 square feet for
                         residential uses        residential uses
 
   (B)   Attached sign regulations; Agricultural and Residential Districts.
Attached Signs1 A-1 R-1, R-2, R-3
Attached Signs1           A-1                     R-1, R-2, R-3
                                                  Permitted as a conditional
Electronic message sign   Not permitted           use for non-residential and
                                                  multi- family uses
                                                  Indirect and internal
Illumination              Ambient only            permitted for non-
                                                  residential and multi-
                                                  family principal uses
                          32 square feet for non- 32 square feet for non-
Maximum area per sign for residential and multi-  residential and multi-family
wall and window signs2    family uses             uses
                          6 square feet for       6 square feet for
                          residential uses        residential uses
Maximum number            1 per building façade  1 per building façade
                          32 square feet for non- 32 square feet for non-
Total size allocation on  residential and multi-  residential and multi-family
premises                  family uses             uses
                          6 square feet for       6 square feet for
                          residential uses        residential uses
 
   (C)   Detached sign regulations; Commercial Districts.
Detached Signs C-1, C-2
Detached Signs                   C-1, C-2
Electronic Message Sign          Permitted
Illumination                     Indirect and internal permitted for non-
                                 residential and multi-family principal uses
Maximum area per sign            64 square feet
Maximum height of signs2
 Flag pole                      25 feet
 Ground sign                    15 feet
 Pole sign                      25 feet
 Residential sign               6 feet
Maximum number                   1 per 300 feet of frontage, maximum 2
 Ground sign                    1 per frontage
 Pole sign                      1 per frontage
 Residential sign               1 per premise
Minimum setback
 Front and street side yard     5 feet
 Side and rear yard             5 feet
Total size allocation on premise 1 square foot of signage per 1 foot of
                                 frontage; maximum 150 square feet
 
   (D)   Attached sign regulations; Commercial Districts
 
Attached Signs                     C-1, C-2
Electronic message sign            Permitted
                                   Indirect and internal permitted for non-
Illumination                       residential and multi-family principal
                                   uses
Maximum area per sign for wall and 20% of wall surface and 40% of window
window signs2                      area up to 150 square feet per sign
Maximum number                     No limit
Projecting sign3                   Permitted
Total size allocation on premise   300 square feet
 
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.09 PORTABLE AND TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that portable signs do not
create a distraction to the traveling public by eliminating the aesthetic
blight and litter caused by portable and temporary signs.
   (A)   General requirements. The signs described in this section may be
installed or modified without a sign permit and not counted in the total square
footage of permanent signage allowed on any particular property or site,
provided that following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   The signs shall be regulated by the base zoning district and by
number, size, height, location, and duration of signs placed on a property on a
temporary basis;
      (2)   The signs shall be constructed of sufficient weight and durability
to withstand wind gusts, storms, and other natural elements and shall be well
maintained;
      (3)   Lighting for signs shall only be from ambient, external
illumination;
      (4)   The signs shall not be attached to any sign pole, light pole,
public utility pole, or tree on public or private property;
      (5)   The party posting the sign is solely responsible for obtaining the
permission of the property owner before posting their sign;
      (6)   The Zoning Administrator has the authority to remove any sign that
does not meet all the requirements of this section; and
      (7)   The signs shall comply with all applicable regulations of this code
of ordinances.
   (B)   Permitted sign types. The following sign types are permitted as
portable and temporary signs:
      (1)   A-Frame, H-Frame, and L-Frame signs;
      (2)   Banner signs are only permitted in non-residential districts and
may only displayed for 30 days per calendar year and not used as permanent
signage;
      (3)   Feather signs;
      (4)   Freestanding development signs, but only if the development does
not have a permanent freestanding development sign;
      (5)   Window signs;
      (6)   Yard signs; and
      (7)   Other portable or temporary sign types may be allowed, such as fuel
pump toppers and wraps around waste receptacles, provided the sign type is not
prohibited and the maximum area limitation for all portable and temporary signs
is not exceeded.
   (C)   Aggregate size. The total aggregate amount of portable and temporary
signage permitted on any premise shall be the smaller of 5% of the area of all
street façades or 100 square feet, whichever is less.
   (D)   Duration. Portable signs shall be removed no later than ten days after
the date of the event to which they pertain.
   (E)   Design regulations. Portable and temporary permitted signs; design
regulations set forth the design regulations for the portable and temporary
signs permitted by this section.
           A-Frame, H-             Feather Freestanding
Sign Types Frame, L-   Banner Sign Sign    Development  Window Sign3 Yard Sign
           Frame Signs                     Sign
             A-Frame, H-               Feather   Freestanding Window
Sign Types   Frame, L-    Banner Sign  Sign      Development  Sign3      Yard Sign
             Frame Signs                         Sign
Illumination Ambient      Ambient      Ambient   Ambient      Ambient    Ambient
                          32 square
                          feet in
                          Agricultural
                          or                                             6 square
Maximum area 6 square     Residential  24 square 32 square    See note4  feet per
             feet         Districts    feet      feet                    sign
                          64 square
                          feet in C-
                          1 and C-
                          2 Districts
Maximum
cycles per   2            3            4         Not          12         None
calendar                                         applicable
year
Maximum days 180 days     30 days      30 days   See note2    30 days    30 days
(cycle)
                          Attached:
                          Below eave
Maximum                   or parapet                          Not
height       4 feet       wall;        8 feet    8 feet       applicable 4 feet
                          Ground
                          Mounted: 5
                          feet
                                                 1 per lot in            None in
                                                 Agricultural            Agricultur
                          1 per        1 per 50  or                      al or
                          business     feet of   Residential             Residentia
Maximum      1 per        subject to   frontage; Districts    None       l
number       frontage1    separation   maximum 3                         Districts
                          requiremen   per       2 per                   1 every 30
                          ts           frontage  frontage in             feet of
                                                 C-1, and C-             frontage;
                                                 2 Districts             maximum 5
Minimum      None         25 feet from None      5 feet from  None       None
separation                other signs            other signs
Minimum      6 feet; 20
setback      feet from an None         None      10 feet      None       None
             intersection
Notes:
1 Frontage applies to sides of the lot line that face a public street where each
frontage is treated independently of other frontages.
2 Sign shall be removed upon project completion, issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, transfer of ownership of subdivided lots, or after six months of
inactivity on a project or development.
3 Temporary window signs only permitted in non-residential districts and not used
as permanent signage.
4 The total area combined with permanent window signs shall not exceed 40% of the
area of the window.
 
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.10 SIGN MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
   All signs shall be kept in good repair and free from peeling paint, rust,
damaged, or rotted supports, framework, or other material, broken or missing
faces, or missing letters. If the sign is to be repaired, a corrective action
plan shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator, within ten calendar days of
notification that sign is not in compliance. Any signs not maintained may be
ordered to be removed.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.11 SIGN PERMIT.
   (A)   All signs requiring a permit shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator. A sign permit is not required for:
      (1)   A sign on property used exclusively for a single-family or duplex
dwelling;
      (2)   Repainting without changing permanent wording, composition, or
colors;
      (3)   Non-structural repairs; or
      (4)   Normal repair and maintenance for conforming or legal non-
conforming signs.
   (B)   All businesses must obtain approval for their sign permit prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The sign permit ensures compliance with
local zoning, safety, and aesthetic standards and must be fully reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Administrator before any signage is installed or the
premises are occupied. All approved signs must be installed withing 180 days
following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023; Ord. 2025-09, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 152.12 SIGN MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   For projects with an overall size area more than six acres, an
applicant may submit a Sign Master Plan, detailing the size, location, and
design of all signs on the site.
   (B)   The Sign Master Plan may adjust the strict application of these
standards, but must clarify the exact nature of the adjustments.
   (C)   Such a Sign Master Plan shall be approved by the City Council after
review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. This review
follows the same process as review of a PUD District.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.13 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   Except as may be hereinafter specified, no sign shall be erected, placed,
maintained, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered which
does comply with all the regulations established by this section.
   (A)   Maintenance and repair. Signs erected prior to the effective date of
this Zoning Ordinance may be maintained and repaired.
   (B)   Items not considered normal maintenance and repair. Changes made to
the location, size, height, or bulk of the sign or addition of illumination are
not considered normal maintenance and repair and shall require that a
nonconforming sign be brought into conformance with all requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   Continuing non-conformance. Where a sign exists at the effective date
or adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance that could not be built under
the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, use, height,
setback, or other characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot, such
sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity; and
      (2)   Should such a sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of 60% or
more of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Removal. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to revoke
any permit which has been granted when the Zoning Administrator has determined
that the sign authorized by the permit has been constructed or maintained in
violation of the permit. Written notice shall be given to the owner of the
illegal sign and/or the owner of the property on which the sign is located. The
notice shall state the reasons and grounds for removal, specifying the
deficiencies or defects in such sign, and the violations charged; such notice
shall specify what repairs, if any, will make the sign conform to the
requirements of this section, and specify that the sign be removed or made to
conform with the requirements of this section with the notice period provided
below:
      (1)   The notice period for a permanent sign is 30 days; and
      (2)   The notice period for a portable sign is five days.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
§ 152.14 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to relieve or eliminate in
any way the responsibility or liability of any person who erects or owns any
sign, for personal injury or property damage caused by the sign; nor shall the
provisions of this chapter be construed to impose upon the city or the Zoning
Administrator, the city’s officials, or its employees any responsibility or
liability by reason of the approval of any signs under the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 2023-13, passed 7-25-2023)
CHAPTER 153: TREES
Section
   
153.01   Definition
   
153.02   Planting restrictions
   
153.03   Duty to trim trees
   
153.04   Trimming trees to be supervised
   
153.05   Disease control
   
153.06   Inspection and removal
   
153.07   Trees near intersection prohibited
§ 153.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   PARKING. The part of the street in the city not covered by sidewalk and
lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part
of the street lying between the lot line, and that portion of the street
usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-1)
§ 153.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall plant any trees or shrubs within the parking unless
said person agrees to plant and maintain the trees and shrubs according to an
approved site plan, and further agrees to be responsible for any and all
liability arising from the planting of trees and shrubs within the parking.
   (B)   The work must be done by a responsible, insured contractor approved by
the Council. Requests for such approval shall be made to the Council in
writing, and include a site plan showing the varieties and placement of the
trees and shrubs to be planted within the parking and who is to do the work.
   (C)   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
ordered to remove the trees or shrubs, or removal shall be done by the city at
the planter’s cost.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-2)
§ 153.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
   (A)   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on or
overhanging the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the city may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days.
   (B)   If such action is not taken within that time, the city may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-3)
§ 153.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
   Except as allowed in §
153.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.05 DISEASE CONTROL.
   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious insect
or disease pests, or disease injurious to other trees, is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-5)
§ 153.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
   The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in
the city reported or suspected to be dead, diseased, or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following.
   (A)   City property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the city which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
   (B)   Private property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property, or passing motorists or pedestrians, is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-6)
§ 153.07 TREES NEAR INTERSECTION PROHIBITED.
   All owners of corner lots within the city are prohibited from planting or
maintaining trees, shrubs, vines, or other plant life at the corner of such
lots nearest the intersection of streets bounding such lots, which trees,
shrubs, or vines obstruct the view of motorists operating their automobiles at
such intersections so that a clear view of the intersecting street cannot be
had by the approaching motorists for a distance of at least 50 feet along such
intersecting street. In the event any person plants or maintains shrubs, trees,
vines, or other plant life at such corners which obstruct the view of motorists
at such intersections, the same shall be trimmed or removed so that motorists
approaching such intersection on both streets may have a clear view of the
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 6-18-7) (Ord. 2014-02, passed 7-22-2014)
CHAPTER 154: MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Location of mobile homes
   
154.03   Special permits for location of mobile homes outside of mobile home
parks
   
154.04   Emergency and temporary parking
   
154.05   Building requirements
   
154.06   Utility connections
Recreational Vehicle, Travel Trailer Residence
   
154.20   Definition
   
154.21   Occupancy
Cross-reference
   Use of recreational vehicles on city streets, sidewalks, see
Chapter 72
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   FACTORY-BUILT STRUCTURE. Any structure which is, wholly or in substantial
part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for
installation, or assembly and installation, on a building site. FACTORY-BUILT
STRUCTURE includes the terms MOBILE HOME, MANUFACTURED HOME, and MODULAR HOME
(per Iowa Code § 103A.3(8)).
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built structure built under authority of 42
U.S.C. § 5403, that is required by federal law to display a seal from the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and was constructed
on or after June 15, 1976 (per Iowa Code § 435.1(3)).
   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
exceeds eight feet in width and 32 feet in length, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to one or more utilities. A MOBILE HOME is
not built to a mandatory building code, contains no state or federal seals, and
was built before June 15, 1976 (per Iowa Code § 635.1)).
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land under common
ownership upon which two or more occupied mobile homes, manufactured homes,
modular homes, or a combination of the homes are placed on developed spaces and
operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical
services available (per Iowa Code § 435.1(4)).
   MODULAR HOME. A factory-built structure which is manufactured to be used as
a place of human habitation, is constructed to comply with the state building
code for modular factory-built structures (per Iowa Code § 435.1(7)).
(Prior Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
§ 154.02 LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES.
   All mobile homes shall be placed or parked in a mobile home park unless
permitted otherwise by state law. This section shall not apply to mobile homes
parked or placed upon private property as part of a dealer’s or a
manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)
§ 154.03 SPECIAL PERMITS FOR LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES OUTSIDE OF MOBILE HOME
PARKS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Council, upon application of a mobile home owner, may
grant a permit for a mobile home to be located for a limited time on premises
outside mobile home parks.
      (2)   The City Council shall issue such special permits when it appears
that location within a local mobile home park is impracticable or impossible
and public health, safety, and welfare interests will not be seriously affected
by granting the permit.
      (3)   Special permits shall not be granted for periods in excess of one
year, but upon expiration of a special permit reapplication may be made.
   (B)   Application for the permit shall include:
      (1)   A statement concerning the practicability of location within a
local mobile home park;
      (2)   A description of sanitation facilities contained within the mobile
home and those facilities available at the proposed location; and
      (3)   A statement of the desired duration of the special permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)
§ 154.04 EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PARKING.
   Emergency or temporary parking of mobile homes upon the streets, alleys, or
highways, or any other public or private place for a period not in excess of
seven days shall not constitute a violation of §
154.02, but such parking shall be subject to any prohibitions or regulations
contained in other ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)
§ 154.05 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   All mobile homes, modular homes, and factory built homes as defined in the
Iowa Code located outside a mobile home park shall comply with all ordinances
relating to residences or homes in the community, and shall be affixed to a
permanent perimeter foundation (except that any home located outside a mobile
home park on the date this chapter takes effect shall be exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement).
(Prior Code, § 6-1-6) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 435.26
§ 154.06 UTILITY CONNECTIONS.
   A mobile home dealer or an employee of a mobile home dealer may perform
water, gas, electrical, and other utility service connections in a mobile home
space, or within ten feet of such space, located in a mobile home park, and the
dealer or an employee of the dealer may install a tie-down system on a mobile
home located in a mobile home park. The connections are subject to inspection
and approval by city officials, and the mobile home dealer shall pay an
inspection fee of $125. No additional permits shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 6-1-7) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, TRAVEL TRAILER RESIDENCE
§ 154.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A factory-built vehicular structure, not certified as a
manufactured home;
      (2)   Designed only for recreational use and not as a primary residence
or for permanent occupancy;
      (3)   Any vehicle which is self-propelled; and/or
      (4)   Built and certified in accordance with either the NFPA1192-15,
standard for recreational vehicles, or ANSI A119.5-15, recreational park
trailer standard.
(Prior Code, § 6-20-1)
§ 154.21 OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be used as a permanent
residence or occupied for more than ten days in any 12-month period within the
city.
   (B)   Occupancy of a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or motor home is
permitted for up to 60 days, provided the vehicle or trailer is located within
an approved campground or travel park within the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-20-2)
CHAPTER 155: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, and Purpose
   
155.001   Statutory authority
   
155.002   Findings of fact
   
155.003   Statement of purpose
General Provisions
   
155.015   Lands to which chapter applies
   
155.016   Rules for interpretation of flood hazard boundaries
   
155.017   Compliance
   
155.018   Interpretation
   
155.019   Warning, disclaimer of liability
   
155.020   Definitions
   
155.021   Regulations and standards
Floodplain Management Standards
   
155.035   All development
   
155.036   Residential buildings
   
155.037   Non-residential structure
   
155.038   All new and substantially improved structures
   
155.039   Factory-built homes
   
155.040   Utility and sanitary systems
   
155.041   Storage of materials and equipment
   
155.042   Flood control structural works
   
155.043   Watercourse alterations or relocations
   
155.044   Subdivisions
   
155.045   Accessory structures to residential uses
   
155.046   Recreational vehicles
   
155.047   Pipelines
   
155.048   Maximum damage potential development
Administration
   
155.060   Appointment, duties, responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
155.061   Floodplain development permit
   
155.062   Variance
Nonconforming Uses
   
155.075   Structures
   
155.076   Reconstruction
 
   
155.999   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE
§ 155.001 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The legislature of the state has in Iowa Code Chapter 364, as amended,
delegated the power to cities to exercise any power and perform any function it
deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges, and property
of the city or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety,
health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-1)
§ 155.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health, and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
   (B)   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
      (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
      (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-2)
§ 155.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the city and its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its
residents by minimizing those flood losses described in §
155.002(A) with provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement;
   (C)   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard; and
   (D)   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-3)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.015 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands and development
which have special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. For the
purpose of this chapter, the special flood hazard areas are those areas
designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the county and
incorporated areas, within the city, Panel 19061C0330F and 0340F, dated August
10, 2021, which were prepared as part of the County Flood Insurance Study,
shall be used to identify such flood hazard areas and all areas shown there to
be within the boundaries of the base flood shall be considered as having
significant flood hazards. The County Flood Insurance Study is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter for the purpose of administering floodplain
management regulations.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-4)
§ 155.016 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the special flood hazard areas shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official flood insurance rate map. When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Floodplain
Manager shall make the necessary interpretation. The City Council shall hear
and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Manager in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-5)
§ 155.017 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to
uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-6)
§ 155.018 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-8)
§ 155.019 WARNING, DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
designated special flood hazard areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-9)
§ 155.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of the
property as the principal structure to be insured, and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. (See 100-YEAR FLOOD).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   BASEMENT. Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest
level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see LOWEST FLOOR.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials. DEVELOPMENT does not include MINOR PROJECTS or ROUTINE
MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES as defined in this section. It
also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not
involve filling, or grading.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community. May also be referred to as EXISTING
STRUCTURE.
   EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
   EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME. Any structure, designed for residential use which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, FACTORY-BUILT HOMES includes
MOBILE HOMES, MANUFACTURED HOMES, and MODULAR HOMES: and also includes
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
   FIVE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. A flood, the magnitude of which has a 0.2% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on average, will be
equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers, or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the flood insurance study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). A report published by FEMA for a community
issued along with the community’s flood insurance rate map(s). The study
contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water surface
elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a
result of a flood.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream, and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
FLOODWAY area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the special flood hazard areas outside
the floodway.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
         (a)   An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR.
      (1)   The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when all the following criteria are met:
         (a)   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of §
155.038(A);
         (b)   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, and
the like) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as building
access, parking, or storage;
         (c)   Machinery and service facilities (for example, hot water heater,
furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and
         (d)   The enclosed area is not a BASEMENT as defined in this section.
      (2)   In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies divisions (1)(a),
(1)(b), (1)(c), and (1)(d) above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next
highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria above.
   MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL DAMAGE. Hospitals and like institutions; buildings
or building complexes containing documents, data, or instruments of great
public value; buildings or building complexes containing materials dangerous to
the public or fuel storage facilities; power installations needed in emergency
or other buildings or building complexes similar in nature or use.
   MINOR PROJECTS. Small development activities (except for filling, grading,
and excavating) valued at less than $500.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION (NEW BUILDINGS, FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARKS). Those structures
or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES. Repairs necessary
to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of
the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
      (1)   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding;
      (2)   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work;
      (3)   Basement sealing;
      (4)   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes; and
      (5)   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land within a community subject to the base
flood. This land is identified as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99 on the
community’s flood insurance rate map.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION.
      (1)   Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date.
      (2)   The actual start means either the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation.
      (3)   Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
      (4)   For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, and other similar
uses.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement to a structure which satisfies
either of the following criteria:
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
         (b)   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
      (2)   (a)   The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions.
         (b)   The term also does not include any alteration of a historic
structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as a historic structure.
      (3)   (a)   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a
building by 25% or more.
         (b)   All additions constructed on or after the effective date of the
first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added
to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25%.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-32) (Ord. 2012-06, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2021-03, passed
4-27-2021)
§ 155.021 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time
to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.
   (B)   No amendment, supplement, change, or modification shall be undertaken
without prior approval of the Department of Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-31)
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
§ 155.035 ALL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and meet the following applicable performance standards. Where base
flood elevations and floodway data have not been provided on the flood
insurance rate map, the State Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determination.
   (B)   All development within the special flood hazard areas shall:
      (1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement;
      (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage;
      (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage; and
      (4)   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, state, and local
governmental agencies, including approval when required from the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-11)
§ 155.036 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   All new or substantially improved residential structures shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the
base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at
all points, be no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation and extend
at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon.
   (B)   Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject
to favorable consideration by the City Council, where existing topography,
street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential
structures shall be provided with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the base flood.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-12)
§ 155.037 NON-RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE.
   (A)   All new or substantially improved non-residential structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above
the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
   (B)   When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in
the state shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces,
and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure
below the 100-year flood level is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water.
   (C)   A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-13)
§ 155.038 ALL NEW AND SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria.
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
         (c)   1.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
            2.   Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, and low damage potential storage.
   (B)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (C)   New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical meter, electrical service panel box, water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   (D)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water/gas meters, and other similar service utilities
either elevated (or in the case of non-residential structures, optionally
floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation or
designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such level.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-14)
§ 155.039 FACTORY-BUILT HOMES.
   (A)   All new and substantially improvement factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
   (B)   All new and substantially improvement factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-15)
§ 155.040 UTILITY AND SANITARY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
   (B)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
   (C)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the baseflood
elevation.
   (D)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-16)
§ 155.041 STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.
   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive, or
injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated, or:
   (A)   Not be subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to floodwaters; or
   (B)   Be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-17)
§ 155.042 FLOOD CONTROL STRUCTURAL WORKS.
   Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, and the like
shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a base flood with a minimum of
three feet of design freeboard, and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall approve
structural flood control works.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-18)
§ 155.043 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS OR RELOCATIONS.
   Watercourse alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the
flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion. In addition,
the Department of Natural Resources must approve such alterations or
relocations.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-19)
§ 155.044 SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions)
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public
utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter.
   (B)   Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the special flood hazard area.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-20)
§ 155.045 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES TO RESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to
a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements where
the following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. The structure
shall be used solely for low flood damage potential purposes such as parking of
vehicles and limited storage.
      (2)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet. Those portions of the structure
located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be constructed
of flood resistant materials.
      (3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      (4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
      (5)   The structure’s service facilities, such as electrical and heating
equipment, shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
      (6)   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of §
155.038.
   (B)   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-21)
§ 155.046 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of §
155.039 regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
      (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days.
      (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently-attached additions.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
§
155.039 regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-22)
§ 155.047 PIPELINES.
   Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-23)
§ 155.048 MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All new or substantially improved maximum damage potential development
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot
above the elevation of the 500-year flood, or together with attendant utility
and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is
utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state shall certify that
the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the 0.2% annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2%
annual chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating
the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to
which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
      (2)   Where 0.2% chance flood elevation data has not been provided in the
flood insurance study, the State Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-24)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.060 APPOINTMENT, DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Manager is hereby appointed to implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator. The Floodplain Manager is the City Administrator.
   (B)   Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to the following:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
      (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
      (3)   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures in the special flood hazard area.
      (4)   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum 1988) to which all new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
      (5)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (6)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
      (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
      (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the City Council of
potential conflict.
      (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s flood insurance rate maps
when:
         (a)   Development placed within the floodway results in any of the
following:
            1.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
            2.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
         (b)   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
         (c)   Development relocates or alters the channel. Within six months
of the completion of the development, the applicant shall submit to FEMA all
scientific and technical data necessary for a letter of map revision.
      (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards
of this chapter.
      (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the City Council for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-25)
§ 155.061 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. A floodplain development permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any human-
made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built
homes.
   (B)   Application for permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made;
      (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(for example, lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that
will readily identify and locate the work to be done;
      (3)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
      (4)   Elevation of the 100-year flood;
      (5)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed;
      (6)   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements; and
      (7)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (for example, drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this
chapter.
   (C)   Action on permit application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the City Council.
   (D)   Construction and use to be as provided in application and plans.
      (1)   Floodplain development permits based on the basis of approved plans
and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction.
      (2)   Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the
state, that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing, or
other flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or occupancy of any structure.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-26)
§ 155.062 VARIANCE.
   (A)   The City Council may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship.
   (B)   Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      (1)   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (3)   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
   (C)   In passing upon applications for variances, the Council shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments;
      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others;
      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, and the ability
of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions;
      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the city;
      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location;
      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use;
      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area;
      (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
      (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site;
      (12)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges; and
      (13)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily
be limited to:
      (1)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
      (2)   Limitation of periods of use and operation;
      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions;
      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter; and
      (5)   Floodproofing measures.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-27)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 155.075 STRUCTURES.
   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions.
   (A)   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use
of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
   (B)   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-28)
§ 155.076 RECONSTRUCTION.
   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not
include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or the cost of any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-29)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of the requirements shall constitute a simple misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $625.
   (B)   Additionally, the city can take any other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy violation. The cost associated with enforcement,
prevention, or remedies shall be paid by or assessed to the person violating
this chapter, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs,
materials, maintenance, repair, removal, reconstruction, regarding,
replacement, expert services, professional services, or any other costs
incurred by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-15-30) (Ord. 2017-06, passed 11-14-2017)
CHAPTER 156: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Definitions
   
156.004   Administration
   
156.005   Ultimate responsibility
   
156.006   Manual
   
156.007   Applicability
Construction
   
156.020   Performance standards
   
156.021   Management practices
   
156.022   Post-construction stormwater management submittal
   
156.023   Indemnify city
   
156.024   Permit issuance or denial
   
156.025   Notice of construction commencement
   
156.026   Construction violations
   
156.027   As-built drawings
   
156.028   Stabilization requirements
   
156.029   Owner responsibility
Maintenance
   
156.040   Maintenance and repair easement
   
156.041   Maintenance covenants
   
156.042   Requirements for maintenance covenants
Inspections
   
156.055   Inspection of stormwater BMPs
   
156.056   Right-of-entry for inspection
Administration
   
156.070   Records of installation, maintenance, repair activities
   
156.071   Municipal infraction
   
156.072   Abatement required
   
156.073   Stop work order
   
156.074   Violations
   
156.075   Appeal
   
156.076   Enforcement
   
156.077   Cost of abatement
   
156.078   Injunctive relief
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   A chapter amending city-wide standards for the quantity and quality of water
that runs off land under construction within the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-1)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to help protect the city’s surface waters and
quality of life by reducing the negative impacts of sediment, rainfall, melting
snow, and other water runoff. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through
the following objectives:
   (A)   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from development within the
city limits and fringe area in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases
in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
   (B)   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
   (C)   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows
from any specific development project site after completion to not exceed the
predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and
   (D)   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through the establishment of appropriate
minimum stormwater management standards and BMPs and to ensure that BMPs are
properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-2)
§ 156.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a stormwater management permit.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Structural and non-structural measures,
practices, techniques, or devices employed to avoid or minimize sediment or
other pollutants carried in runoff.
   BIORETENTION. A stormwater infiltration device consisting of an excavated
area that is backfilled with an engineered soil, covered with a mulch layer and
planted with a diversity of woody or herbaceous vegetation.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons or corporation, animals, or property. When any
portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion thereof by a
division wall without openings, then such portion shall be deemed to be a
separate building.
   CHANNEL PROTECTION VOLUME (CPV). The volume of runoff produced from a one-
year, 24-hour design storm on a post-development site, which is detained for an
extended period of time (24 hours or more).
   CITY ENGINEER. The officer designated and authorized by the City Council to
carry out various functions as specified in this chapter.
   CLEARING. The stripping, grubbing, scalping, or removal of trees and stumps,
and removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within the site, and
includes the conditions resulting therefrom.
   CONSTRUCTION. The erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition, or
removal of any building or structures; and the clearing, stripping excavating,
filling, grading, and regulation of sites in connection therewith.
   DESIGN STORM. Hypothetical depth of rainfall that would occur for the stated
return frequency (for example, once every two years or ten years), duration
(for example, 24-hours), and timing of distribution (for example, type II). All
values are based on the historical rainfall records for the area.
   DETENTION BASIN.
      (1)   A stormwater management facility designed to protect against
flooding and, in some cases, downstream erosion by storing water for a limited
period of a time.
      (2)   DETENTION BASINS do not retain a significant permanent pool of
water between runoff events.
   DEVELOPER. Any individual, subdivider, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect the development of land.
   DEVELOPMENT. Construction of buildings, other structures, impervious
surfaces, and/or soil disturbance to the extent that peak runoff rates and
volumes are increased, in a location where no such features currently exist.
   DIRECTLY CONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA. An impervious surface that is directly
connected to a storm sewer or water of the state via an impervious flow path.
   DRAINAGE EASEMENT. A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
   EROSION. The process of detachment, transport, and deposition of soil,
sediment, or rock fragments by action of water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   EXTREME FLOOD PROTECTION (QF). The controlling of post-development runoff
100-year peak flows to prevent flood damage from large storm events, maintain
the boundaries of the pre-development 100-year Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and/or locally designated floodplain, and protect the physical
integrity of BMP control structures.
   FLOODPLAIN. A flat or nearly flat land adjacent to a stream or river that
experiences occasional or periodic flooding.
   HOTSPOT LAND USE.
      (1)   A site that produces higher concentrations of trace metals,
hydrocarbons, or other priority pollutants than are normally found in urban
stormwater runoff.
      (2)   Examples of HOTSPOTS include gas stations, vehicle service and
maintenance areas, salvage yards, material storage sites, garbage transfer
facilities, and commercial parking lots with high-intensity use.
   HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG). The meaning used in the runoff calculation
methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices.
   HYDROLOGY. The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water
throughout the earth.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.
      (1)   An area that releases all or a large portion of the precipitation
that falls on it, except for frozen soil.
      (2)   Conventional rooftops and asphalt or concrete sidewalks, driveways,
parking lots and streets are typical examples of impervious surfaces. For
purposes of this chapter, typical gravel driveways and other examples listed
shall be considered impervious unless specifically designed to encourage
infiltration or storage of runoff.
   INFILTRATION. The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through the soil.
   KARST FEATURES. An area or surficial geologic feature subject to bedrock
dissolution so that it is likely to provide a conduit to groundwater, and may
include caves, enlarged fractures, mine features, exposed bedrock surfaces,
sinkholes, springs, seeps, or swallets.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY (OR DISTURBANCE).
      (1)   Any human-made alteration of the land surface that may result in a
change in the topography or existing vegetative or non-vegetative soil cover,
or may expose soil and lead to an increase in soil erosion and movement of
sediment.
      (2)   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY includes clearing and grubbing for future
land development, excavating, filling, grading, building construction, or
demolition, and pit trench dewatering.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A legally recorded document that acts as a property
deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater
BMPs.
   OVERBANK FLOOD PROTECTION (QP). The controlling of post-development runoff
peak flows to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank
flooding generated by development (for example, flow events that exceed the
bank-full capacity of the channel, and therefore must spill over into the
floodplain).
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate at which a unit volume of stormwater is
discharged.
   POST-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION. The extent and distribution of land cover types
anticipated to occur under conditions of full development that will influence
rainfall, runoff, and infiltration.
   PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION. The extent and distribution of land cover types
present before the initiation of land development activity.
   PRE-SETTLEMENT CONDITION. The extent and distribution of land cover types
likely present before European settlement.
   RAIN GARDEN. A depression area, designed and constructed as a landscape
feature that is used to improve water quality and enhance infiltration.
   RECHARGE VOLUME (REV). The volume of rainfall that is captured on a post-
development site and directed through the soil to the groundwater table.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any construction, alteration, or improvement performed on
sites where the existing site is already predominantly developed.
   RUNOFF. Water from rain, snow, or ice melt, or dewatering that moves over
the land surface via sheet or channelized flow.
   RUNOFF CURVE NUMBER (RCN). The meaning used in the runoff calculation
methodology promulgated by the United States Natural Resources Conservation
Service Technical Release 55, “Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds” (commonly
known as TR-55).
   SEDIMENT. Solid earth material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity, or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface at a
different site.
   SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of which the land
disturbing or land development activity will occur.
   SOIL. All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock, and may
include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated by
mechanical equipment.
   SPECIFICATIONS. The general term comprising all the directions, provisions,
and requirements, together with such as may be added or adopted as supplemental
specifications or special provisions approved by the City Engineer.
   STORMWATER. The same meaning as the term RUNOFF.
   SURFACE WATERS. All lakes, bays, rivers, streams, springs, ponds, wells,
impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, drainage systems, and other
surface water or groundwater, natural or artificial, public or private, within
the city.
   TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC). The time needed for water to flow from the most
remote point in a watershed to the watershed outlet. It is a function of
topography, geology, and land use within the watershed.
   VOLUMETRIC RUNOFF COEFFICIENT (RV). The fraction of rainfall during small
storm events that becomes runoff, and can be determined by the methodologies
described by Scheuler (1987) or Pitt (1994).
   WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQV). The storage needed to capture and treat the
runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall. In numerical terms, it is
equivalent to the rainfall depth in inches multiplied by the volumetric runoff
coefficient (Rv) for the site, and the site drainage area.
   WETLANDS. An area where water is at, near, or above the land surface long
enough to be capable of supporting aquatic or hydrophytic vegetation, and which
has soils indicative of wet conditions.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-3)
§ 156.004 ADMINISTRATION.
   This chapter shall be administered by an engineer identified by the city and
the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-4)
§ 156.005 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, if any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-5)
§ 156.006 MANUAL.
   The Iowa Stormwater Management BMP Design Standards Manual shall be
available for inspection and/or copying during regular business hours at City
Hall.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-6)
§ 156.007 APPLICABILITY.
   Stormwater management plans and permits are required for any of the
following:
   (A)   Required for new development and redevelopment site with one-acre or
more of land disturbing area.
   (B)   Development requiring a subdivision plat.
   (C)   Commercial or industrial development that requires a certified survey
map.
   (D)   Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, with a
standard industrial classification (SIC) code that falls under the NPDES
industrial stormwater permit program or a hotspot land use.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-7)
CONSTRUCTION
§ 156.020 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   If during construction the plans require a spring to be crossed or
encroached upon, a stormwater conveyance system may be installed; however, the
natural course of the spring must not be redirected or altered.
   (B)   Post-development peak runoff rates for 24-hour storm events must not
exceed the following peak runoff rates for the same event (exclusion: Sites
where one-year post-development peak discharge is less than 2.0 cfs):
      (1)   Overbank flood protection (Qp). Post-development peak runoff rates
for the two-, ten-, and 25-year, 24-hour storm event must not exceed the pre-
settlement peak runoff rate for the same event. Post development peak rates may
be further restricted by available capacity of downstream drainage systems.
      (2)   Extreme flood protection (Qf). Post-development peak runoff rates
for the 100-year, 24-hour storm event must not exceed the pre-development peak
runoff rate for the same event. Post-development peak rates may be further
restricted by available capacity of downstream drainage systems.
      (3)   Unified stormwater sizing criteria. Summary of the city unified
stormwater sizing criteria for management of stormwater quality and quantity is
as follows:
 
Table 1
Sizing Criteria               Recommended Method
                              Evaluate the effects of the 100-year storm on the
                              stormwater management system, adjacent property,
Extreme Flood Protection (Qf) and downstream facilities and property. Manage
                              the impacts of the extreme storm event through
                              detention controls and/or floodplain management.
                              The runoff resulting from a rainfall depth of
                              1.25 inches or less. Equal to Rev. Goal is to
                              reduce average annual post-development total
Water Quality Volume (WQv)    suspended solids loadings by 80%. Goal is met if
                              Rev is completely infiltrated. WQv = (Rv)(A)(P)/
                              12; Rv = site runoff volume coefficient, A = site
                              drainage area (acres), P = design rainfall depth
                              = 1.25 inches.
 
      (4)   Intakes. Storm sewer intake points (inlet grates, endwalls, and the
like) should have a minimum capacity to convey the post-development condition
ten-year peak flow rate. Intakes shall be designed in such manner that the
flooded street width shall not exceed the following:
 
Table 2: Allowable Pavement Encroachment and Depth of Flow
Street Classification                  Maximum Encroachment
                                       No curb overtopping. Flow spread must
                                       not encroach to within eight feet of the
                                       centerline of a two-lane street. The
                                       flow spread for more than two-lane
Collector/Minor Arterial               streets must leave the equivalent of two
                                       12-foot driving lanes clear of water;
                                       one lane in each direction. For one- way
                                       streets, a single 12-foot lane is
                                       allowed.
Local                                  No curb overtopping. Flow may spread to
                                       crown of street.
                                       No curb overtopping. Flow spread must
                                       not exceed ten feet from the face of the
                                       curb of the outside lane. The flow
                                       spread for streets with more than two
                                       lanes must leave the equivalent of two
                                       12-foot driving lanes clear of water;
Major Arterials (four, or more, lanes) one lane in each direction. For one-way
                                       streets, two 12-foot lanes are required.
                                       For special conditions, when an intake
                                       is necessary in a raised median, the
                                       flow spread should not exceed four feet
                                       from the face of the median curb for an
                                       inside lane.
 
      (5)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers should have a minimum capacity to convey
the post-development condition ten-year peak flow rate. Provisions should be
made for the 25- and 100-year peak flow rate when overland flow is not allowed
or available. A minimum cleaning velocity of three fps should be used for the
design storm. Storm sewer and surface water conveyance easements should be
dedicated to the public. For those storm sewers that will handle footing
drains, the following additional discharge (Q) values should be used.
         (a)   For less than 50 houses, Q = five gpm (0.011 cfs) per house.
         (b)   For greater than 50 houses, Q = 250 gpm (0.556 cfs), plus 2.5
gpm (0.0056 cfs) per house for each additional house over 50.
      (6)   Culverts. Culverts should have capacity to convey the following:
         (a)   Post-development condition 25-year peak flow rate without the
headwater depth exceeding the diameter of the culvert.
         (b)   Post-development condition 50-year peak flow rate without the
headwater depth exceeding one foot over the top of the culvert.
         (c)   Post-development condition 100-year peak flow rate without the
headwater depth exceeding one foot below the low point of the roadway/
embankment, unless there are other, more restrictive elevations.
         (d)   Private culverts should be designed with an overflow so that no
damage is caused upstream of the proposed culvert.
      (7)   Ditches. Ditches should have capacity to convey the post-
development condition 50-year peak flow rate within the ditch banks. Provisions
should be made for the post-development condition 100-year peak flow rate to
flow overland. Surface water flowage easements should be provided to the
general public for all designed drainage ways and overland flow paths.
      (8)   Outlet stabilization. Stable outlets must have the capacity to
handle the designed outflow from the pond outlet or pipe conveyance structures
they serve. If the outlet is to be vegetated, it should be constructed and
established before installation of other stormwater or erosion control
structures. Outlet stabilization shall be designed based on the expected outlet
discharge from the ten-year, 24-hour storm event.
      (9)   Open channel stabilization. To prevent channels from eroding, the
channel lining must be adequate to carry the design velocity and volume. Where
velocities are higher than five feet per section or where the channel must
carry prolonged flow, the channel should be lined with riprap or other armoring
material. Channel linings shall be designed based on the expected channel
velocity from the ten-year, 24-hour storm event.
      (10)   Low impact tools, BMPs. In addition to the previously described
stormwater detention and conveyance requirements previously described, the
stormwater management systems designed as part of this chapter shall be
developed using one or more of the low impact development tools or other best
management practices identified in the Iowa Stormwater Manual, as approved by
the city, or their designated representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-8)
§ 156.021 MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   A comprehensive guide to managing stormwater on post-development sites
has been developed by the State Department of Natural Resources. The Iowa
Stormwater Management Manual can be found on the Internet at: http://
www.ctre.iastate.edu/pubs/stormwater/index.cfm. Rate control measures listed in
this guide include dry detention basins, wet detention basins, low-impact
development (LID) and DCIA minimization strategies, infiltration systems, and
constructed wetlands. Conveyance design measures listed in this guide include
street flow, intake capacity, storm sewer sizing, culvert hydraulics and
sizing, open channel flow design, groundwater barriers, and stormwater swale
systems. Stormwater infiltration measures listed in this guide include
infiltration basins, bioretention systems, infiltration trenches, soil quality
restoration, and native landscaping.
   (B)   Stormwater quality measures listed in this guide include wet detention
basins, stormwater swale systems, bioretention systems, constructed wetlands,
and native landscaping. Contractors and developers are required to stockpile
and redistribute a minimum of four inches of topsoil as part of the final
grading for the project or development. The guide contains figures and tables
summarizing the appropriate use of each of the measures listed, as well as
providing specifications and installation guidelines for each. The use of this
guide is strongly encouraged when choosing management practices for post
development stormwater. Other guides may be used to design outlet stabilization
measures. Acceptable guidelines include the Denver Urban Drainage and Flood
Control District publication Design of Low Tailwater Riprap Basins for Storm
Sewer Pipe Outlets, the FHWA publication HEC-14, and other practices found in
Iowa, Wisconsin, Nebraska, and Minnesota Department of Transportation design
standards.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-9)
§ 156.022 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SUBMITTAL.
   A DNR issued general permit No. 2 will continue to be necessary prior to the
beginning of any construction activity that disturbs more than one or more
acres, or which is part of a larger project that disturbs one or more acres in
total. The submittal of a site development project will require a descriptive
narrative of the site, a site plan, and other supporting documents. They are
provided as a minimum guide and are not to be construed as the specific
information to be supplied on every project drainage report, and other
information may be required. Pre-settlement, pre-development, and post-
development conditions for any given site will require analysis unique to that
area.
   (A)   A project report narrative shall include the following items.
      (1)   A cover sheet with project name and location, name of firm or
agency preparing the report, professional engineer’s signed and sealed
certification, and table of contents. Number each page of the report.
      (2)   The nature of the construction activity (for example, roadway
construction, utility construction, single-family residential construction, and
the like), an estimate of the total area of the project site, and the total
anticipated impervious area.
      (3)   Watershed size for each drainage area (both on-site and off-site)
to determine how much of the area to be developed is affected by other drainage
flowing through the site and to design appropriately sized storm sewer,
culverts, and drainage channels.
      (4)   Describe pre-settlement/pre-development land use, topography,
drainage patterns (including overland conveyance of the 100-year storm event),
and natural and human-made features. Describe pre-development ground coverage,
soil type, and physical properties, such as hydrologic soil group and
infiltration. Pre-settlement ground coverage should be assumed as open prairie
in any non-wooded area.
      (5)   Describe post-developed land use and proposed grading, change in
percent of impervious area, and change in drainage patterns. If an existing
drainage way is filled, the runoff otherwise stored by the drainage way will be
mitigated with stormwater detention, in addition to the post-development
runoff.
      (6)   Describe contributing off-site drainage patterns, land use, and
stormwater conveyance. Identify undeveloped contributing areas with development
potential, and list assumptions about future development runoff contributed to
the site.
      (7)   Discussion of soils located on site and their suitability for
infiltration. If infiltration meets the exclusion criteria, state why.
      (8)   Describe the features that will be installed to control rate of
runoff, pollutants in stormwater, and infiltration in the post-development
condition.
      (9)   Describe the maintenance and repair plan for all stormwater BMPs
including detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
efficient function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a
stormwater BMP that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or
training necessary.
      (10)   Indicate what permits have been applied for and received,
including, but not limited to, IDNR notice of intent, flood permit for sites
affecting FEMA FIRM Zone A or Zone AE, ACOE Section 401 and/or 404 permits for
work in waterways or wetlands.
   (B)   Pre-settlement and pre-development runoff analysis, including:
      (1)   Describe overall watershed area and relationship between other
watersheds or sub-areas. Include a pre-settlement/pre-development watershed map
in the report appendix.
      (2)   The typical method used to predict runoff and peak discharge is the
NRCS TR-55 method. Other methods may be used only with the preapproval of the
City Engineer. If other methods are used, describe the method and provide
documentation of correspondence with the City Engineer regarding the method.
      (3)   Describe the method used to calculate the time of concentration.
Describe runoff paths and travel times through sub-areas. Show and label the
runoff paths on the pre-settlement/pre-development watershed map. Pre-
settlement runoff paths should be assumed to match predevelopment with respect
to location and slope.
      (4)   List runoff coefficients or curve numbers applied to the drainage
areas. The RCNs listed in
Table 3a shall be used in all hydrologic calculations for pre-settlement
conditions required for determining Qp limits (two-, ten-, and 25-year events).
These RCNs have been selected with the intent to mimic hydrologic conditions
that existed in the state prior to settlement and farming. The RCNs listed in
Table 3b shall be used in all hydrologic calculations for pre-development
conditions required for determining Qf limits (100-year event). These RCNs have
been selected with the intent to reflect hydrologic conditions that exist after
settlement and farming. If a geotechnical study of the site was used to
determine HSG, provide boring logs and locations in the appendix of the report.
If a soil survey was used to determine HSG, cite it in the references.
 
Table 3a: RCNs for Projects in the City of Peosta (Pre-settlement
Conditions, 2- thru 25-year events)
Cover Type        Curve Numbers for Hydrologic Soil Group
                 A  B  C  D
Non-Wooded Areas1 30 58 71 78
Wooded Areas2     30 55 70 77
Notes to Table
1.   RCNs are equivalent to the TR-55 listed values for meadow in good
condition with the intent to mimic pre-settlement conditions. Apply to any
pre-development condition area which is not wooded.
2.   RCNs are equivalent to the TR-55 listed values for woods in good
condition.
Table 3b: RCNs for Projects in the City of Peosta (Pre-development 50-year
and 100-year events and all post-development storm events)
Cover Type Curve Numbers for Hydrologic Soil Group
Table 3b: RCNs for Projects in the City of Peosta (Pre-development 50-year and
100-year events and all post-development storm events)
Cover Type                           Curve Numbers for Hydrologic Soil Group
                                    A  B  C  D
Continuous Cropped Agricultural Use1 55 69 78 82
Continuous Mature Wooded Area2       30 55 70 77
Continuous Meadow Area3              30 58 71 78
Lawn and Pasture Areas4              39 61 74 80
Impervious Area5                     98 98 98 98
Notes to Table
1.   RCNs are equivalent to mid-range TR-55 listed values for row crops and
legume crops (excluding crops mown for hay) were conservation practices are
used.
2.   RCNs are equivalent to the TR-55 listed values for woods in good
condition.
3.    RCNs are equivalent to the TR-55 listed values for meadow (ungrazed and
unmowed) in good condition.
4.   Areas include residential lawns, golf courses, cemeteries, grazed or
mowed farm pasture, and other areas with short grass.
5.   Areas include roofs, sidewalks, paved streets and roads (excluding the
right-of-way), curbs, paved parking lots, and driveways.
 
      (5)   The typical precipitation model and rainfall duration used for the
design storm is the NRCS Type II 24-hour distribution. Total 24-hour rainfall
amounts for given frequency shall reflect data from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 8 as
displayed in
Table 4 below. Other methods (such as a user-defined model based on collected
precipitation data) or durations (such as a critical duration analysis) may be
used only with the preapproval of the City Engineer. If other methods are used,
describe the method and provide documentation of correspondence with the
engineer regarding the method.
Table 4: City of Peosta, Dubuque County
24-hour Rainfall Depth for Various Storm Events
Return Period Rainfall Depth (in)
Table 4: City of Peosta, Dubuque County
24-hour Rainfall Depth for Various Storm Events
Return Period Rainfall Depth (in)
1 year        2.66
2 years       3.02
5 years       3.72
10 years      4.41
25 years      5.50
50 years      6.47
100 years     7.55
 
      (6)   Provide summary table(s) of model results including drainage area,
time of concentration, frequency, peak discharge, and accumulative routed flows
at critical points within the development (if any) and at development
boundaries. At a minimum, flow rates for pre-settlement two-, ten-, and 25-year
storms and pre-development 100-year storm must be provided.
   (C)   Post-development runoff analysis, including:
      (1)   Describe overall watershed area and sub-areas. Discuss if the post-
development drainage area differs from the pre-development drainage area.
Include a post development watershed map in the report appendix.
      (2)   The method used to predict runoff and peak discharge will be the
same as used in the pre-development analysis, except for variables changed to
account for the developed conditions.
      (3)   The time of concentration method used will be the same as used in
the pre-development analysis. Describe change in times of concentration due to
development (for example, change in drainage patterns). Show and label the
runoff paths on the post-development watershed map.
      (4)   List runoff coefficients or curve numbers applied to the drainage
areas. The RCNs listed in
Table 3b above shall be used in all hydrologic calculations for post-
development conditions. Include an analysis of the proposed increase in
impervious area and describe the change in runoff volume due to development.
Directly connected impervious area (roads, front of houses, and the like) shall
be separated out from the pervious area and unconnected impervious areas (backs
of houses, and the like) in the determination of a weighted RCN. Provide a
summary of the total directly connected impervious area and the total
unconnected impervious area for each sub-watershed/catchment.
      (5)   The precipitation model storm event, total rainfall, and total
storm duration will be the same as used for the pre-development model.
      (6)   Provide summary table(s) of model results including drainage area,
time of concentration, frequency, peak discharge, and accumulative routed flows
at critical points within the development (if any) and at development
boundaries. At a minimum, flow rates for one-, two-, ten-, 25-, and 100-year
storms must be provided.
      (7)   Summary of post-development runoff shall include the following:
         (a)   Description of BMP including water quality practices
(methodology);
         (b)   Provide table(s) including drainage area, time of concentration,
frequency, duration, and peak discharge. Summarize in narrative form the change
in hydrologic conditions due to the development; and
         (c)   Post-developed discharge should take into account any upstream
offsite detention basins and undeveloped offsite areas assumed to be developed
in the future with stormwater detention.
   (D)   Rate control structure and conveyance system analysis, including:
      (1)   Describe any detention basin locations by discussing existing
topography and relationship to basin grading. Determine if rock deposits will
affect construction and if a high water table precludes basin storage.
Floodplain locations should be avoided.
      (2)   The detention basin size in final design should be based upon
actual hydrograph routing for the design storms controlled by the basin. Note
the TR-55 approximate method of sizing detention basins (TR-55 Chapter 6) may
result in storage errors of 25%, and should not be used in final design.
      (3)   The top of any dike used in forming a detention basin should be a
minimum of one foot above the 100-year storage elevation. Large detention basin
design may require IDNR approval (see Iowa Administrative Code Title V, Chapter
70).
      (4)   Discuss the basin outlet design in terms of performance during low
and high flows and downstream impact. Note that a single-stage outlet (for
example, one culvert pipe) may not be appropriate because of its inability to
detain post-developed runoff from storms less than the ten-year interval. A
more desirable outlet has two or more stages (such as a riser structure with an
orifice) which will serve to detain runoff for low-flow events of a two-year
storm, and pass greater storm events via the riser outlet.
      (5)   Design the spillway for high flows using weir and/or spillway
design methods. The steady-state open channel flow equation is not intended for
use in spillway design.
      (6)   Describe methods to protect the basin during overtopping flow.
      (7)   Describe channel protection/lining and velocity dissipation at
outlets.
      (8)   Provide a summary table of the respective volumes and discharge
rates for the project area after routing though rate control structures, and a
comparison to the calculated allowable release rate from the site for the two-,
ten-, 25-, and 100-year storm events.
   (E)   A site map (or maps) including the following items.
      (1)   (a)   A preliminary plat (with pre- and post-development
topography) may be used to show the proposed development. Minimum scale of one
inch equals 500 feet or larger to ensure legibility should be used for all
drainage areas. (Drawings no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches should be
inserted in eight and one-half-inch by 11-inch sleeves in the back of the bound
report). The plat is to show street layout and/or building location on a
contour interval not to exceed two feet.
         (b)   The map must show on- and off-site conditions. Label flow
patterns used to determine times of concentration. Drainage plans (preliminary
plat or topography map) must extend a minimum of 250 feet from the edge of the
proposed preliminary plat boundary, or a distance specified by jurisdiction.
         (c)   The limits of swale and ditch easements should be established
based upon the required design frequency. This includes 100-year overflow
easements from stormwater controlled structures.
      (2)   Identify areas of the site located within the floodway or
floodplain boundaries as delineated on flood insurance rate maps, or as
determined by other engineering analysis. Identify wetland areas on the site,
as delineated by the National Wetlands Inventory, or as determined by a
specific wetland study.
      (3)   Soil map or geotechnical information.
      (4)   Location and elevations of jurisdictional benchmarks. All
elevations should be on jurisdictional datum.
      (5)   Proposed property lines (if known).
      (6)   Existing drainage facilities and structures, including existing
roadside ditches, drainage ways, gutter flow directions, culverts, and the
like. All pertinent information such as size, shape, slope location, 100-year
flood elevation, and floodway fringe line (where applicable), should also be
included to facilitate review and approval of drainage plans.
      (7)   Proposed drainage facilities and structures, including storm sewers
and open drainage ways, right-of-way and easement width requirements, 100-year
overland flow easement, proposed inlets, manholes, culverts, erosion and
sediment control, water quality (pollution) control, infiltration basins,
energy dissipation devices, and other appurtenances.
      (8)   Cross sections and profiles of road ditches designed to carry storm
flows and to ensure non-erosive velocities.
      (9)   Proposed outfall point(s) for runoff from the study area.
      (10)   The 100-year flood elevation and major storm floodway fringe
(where applicable) are to be shown on the plans, report drawings, and plats
(preliminary and final). In addition, the report should demonstrate that the
stormwater system has adequate capacity to handle a 100-year storm event, or
provisions are made for overland flow.
      (11)   Show the critical minimum lowest opening elevation of buildings
for protection from major and minor storm runoff.
   (F)   Supporting computations. Computations may be done by hand or with
computer software (P8, WinSLAMM, or other DNR approved models). If software was
used, attach computer-generated reports and output and underline and label
results, such as the peak discharge. Provided computations must include:
      (1)   Runoff coefficients and curve numbers for each sub-watershed;
      (2)   Total impervious area (square feet and percentage of total drainage
area);
      (3)   Times of concentration for each sub-watershed;
      (4)   Storm sewer design summaries;
      (5)   Peak runoff calculations (show results in tabular format and pre-
and post-developed hydrographs);
      (6)   Detention basin design (show tabular stage-storage-discharge
results and inflow/outflow hydrographs. Include both extended-detention and
rate control results);
      (7)   Water quality volume calculations;
      (8)   Infiltration basin design calculations;
      (9)   Open channel flow calculations. For ditches that drain areas over
two square miles in urban areas and over ten square miles in rural areas,
design may require the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) approval
(see Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 567.71);
      (10)   Culvert design calculations or nomographs. For culverts that drain
areas over two square miles in urban areas and over ten square miles in rural
areas, design may require the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR)
approval (see Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 567.71); and
      (11)   Erosion protection design.
   (G)   Before the recording of final plat and issuance of a permit, or as
condition of approval of final plat and issuance of a permit, the Commission
and city shall require the following guarantees to ensure that the stormwater
BMPs are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management final plan.
      (1)   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the stormwater BMPs approved under the permit,
plus 10%. The performance guarantee shall be posted by the subdivider or
subdivider’s contractor under §
157.024 with the City Council guaranteeing the improvements will be constructed
and shall remain in full force and effect until final acceptance of the
improvements by the city. Final acceptance of the plat will not constitute
final acceptance by the city of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed,
and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements
have been completed and accepted by the City Council resolution.
      (2)   The performance guarantee shall contain forfeiture provisions for
failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management final plan.
      (3)   The performance guarantee shall be released in full only upon
submission of “as built plans” of all stormwater BMPs specified in the
stormwater management final plan and written certification by a professional
engineer that the stormwater BMPs have been installed in accordance with the
approved stormwater management final plan and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. The city will make a final inspection of stormwater BMPs to
ensure compliance with the approved stormwater management final plan and the
provisions of this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the
performance guarantee based on the completion of various development stages can
be made at the discretion of the city.
   (H)   The city shall also require the submittal of a maintenance performance
guarantee prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater
BMPs are maintained in an effective state for a minimum of two years.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-10)
§ 156.023 INDEMNIFY CITY.
   The application form signed by the applicant for a City Stormwater
Management permit shall include the following statement:
 
“The undersigned Applicant hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold the City,
its officers, and employees harmless from any and all claims, damages or suits
of any kind arising directly or indirectly out of any act of commission or
omission by the Applicant, or any employee, agent, assign, contractor or
subcontractor of the Applicant, in connection with the Applicant’s State NPDES
General Permit No. 2 and/or City Stormwater Management Permit.”
 
(Prior Code, § 6-21-11)
§ 156.024 PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   Upon receipt of an application for a city stormwater management permit, if
the city finds that the application complies with this chapter, the city shall
issue a city stormwater management permit in accordance with this chapter. If
the city finds that the application fails to comply with this chapter, the city
shall provide the applicant a schedule identifying wherein the application does
not comply with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-12)
§ 156.025 NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT.
   The applicant must notify the city in advance before the commencement of
construction. Regular inspections of construction of the stormwater BMPs shall
be conducted by the city or the city’s designated representative. All
inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the
following information:
   (A)   The date and location of the inspection;
   (B)   Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater
management concept plan; and
   (C)   Variations, if any, from the approved stormwater management concept
plan.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-13)
§ 156.026 CONSTRUCTION VIOLATIONS.
   If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of
the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work
shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-14)
§ 156.027 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.
   After construction is completed, applicants are required to submit actual
“as built” drawings satisfactory to the city for any stormwater BMPs located
on-site. The drawings must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater BMPs and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final
inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance
securities can occur.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-15)
§ 156.028 STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Stabilization shall be accomplished to prevent violation of the city
stormwater requirements or impairment of BMPs.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-16)
§ 156.029 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   The applicant or owner of every site shall be responsible for maintaining
as-built stormwater BMPs in an effective state as determined in the sole
judgment of the city for two years after acceptance of improvements.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-17)
MAINTENANCE
§ 156.040 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR EASEMENT.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit for development involving any stormwater
BMP, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance and repair
easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by the stormwater BMP. The agreement shall provide for access to the BMP
and the land it serves at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city,
or the city’s designee, and for regular or special assessments of property
owners to ensure that the BMP is maintained in proper working condition to meet
the city stormwater requirements. The easement agreement shall be recorded by
the city at the expense of the permit holder or property owners.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-18)
§ 156.041 MAINTENANCE COVENANTS.
   Maintenance of all stormwater BMPs shall be ensured through the creation of
a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the city and recorded
prior to the stormwater management final plan approval. As part of the
covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will
occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater BMPs. The covenant shall also
include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the BMPs
between scheduled cleanouts. The city, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may
but is not required to accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
BMP to include the city responsibility for maintenance and repair, provided
that the maintenance and repair of such element will not impose an undue burden
on other city taxpayers who enjoy little if any benefit from the BMP, the BMP
meets all the requirements of this chapter, and the dedication includes
adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise,
for inspection and regular maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-19)
§ 156.042 REQUIREMENTS FOR MAINTENANCE COVENANTS.
   All stormwater BMPs must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to
document maintenance and repair needs, and ensure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs
may include but are not limited to, removal of silt, litter, and other debris
from all catch basins, inlets, and drainage pipes, grass cutting, and
vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any
maintenance or repair needs detected must be corrected by the developer or
entity responsible under a written maintenance agreement in a timely manner, as
determined by the city, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be
increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater
BMPs.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-20)
INSPECTIONS
§ 156.055 INSPECTION OF STORMWATER BMPS.
   (A)   Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis,
including, but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections;
inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations;
inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical
sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges
of contaminants or pollutants, or with discharges of a type which are more
likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water
or sediment quality standards, or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint
inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
   (B)   Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance
and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in stormwater BMPs; and evaluating the condition of
stormwater BMPs.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-21)
§ 156.056 RIGHT-OF-ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any permit for development involving any
stormwater BMP, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance
and repair easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of
the land served by the stormwater BMP.
   (B)   The agreement shall provide for access to the BMP and the land it
serves at reasonable times for the periodic inspection by the city or the
city’s designee and for regular or special assessments of property owners to
ensure that the BMP is maintained in proper working condition to meet the city
stormwater requirements. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the city
at the expense of the permit holder or property owners.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-22)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.070 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, REPAIR ACTIVITIES.
   Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs
shall make records of the installation permanent. Maintenance and repair
records shall be retained for ten years. These records shall be made available
to the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times
upon request.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-23)
§ 156.071 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation by any person of any provision of this chapter, including the
commencing, constructing, causing, or permitting the commencement of any land
disturbing activity without a city stormwater management permit as required by
this chapter, constitutes a municipal infraction.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-24)
§ 156.072 ABATEMENT REQUIRED.
   The city may order compliance with this chapter by written notice of
violation to a person violating this chapter setting forth the time within
which remediation or restoration must be completed and that if the person fails
to complete such remediation or restoration within such time, the city shall
cause such remediation or restoration work to be done and the person shall be
liable for such costs.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-25)
§ 156.073 STOP WORK ORDER.
   The city may issue an order to stop all construction activities on any
property where land disturbing activity is being conducted until conditions of
noncompliance with this chapter are corrected. Construction activity, other
than that which is required to correct a condition of noncompliance prior to
the correction of the conditions of noncompliance, shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-26)
§ 156.074 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The city will work with applicants for consistent enforcement of the
city minimum standards. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the
requirements of the maintenance covenant or any provision of this chapter, the
city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation by performing all
necessary work to place the BMP in proper working condition. In the event that
the stormwater BMP becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city
shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater BMP in
writing.
   (B)   Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days
to effect maintenance and repair of the stormwater BMP in an approved manner.
After proper notice, the city may assess, jointly and severally, the owner(s)
of the stormwater BMP, or the property owners or the parties responsible for
maintenance under any applicable written agreement, for the cost of repair work
and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or
prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the
tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-27)
§ 156.075 APPEAL.
   The determination by the city of a violation of this chapter may be appealed
by an aggrieved party to the City Council, provided written notice of appeal is
received by the city within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation.
Upon hearing, the City Council may rescind, modify, or affirm the notice of
violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-28)
§ 156.076 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Engineer and/or Public Works Director, or their representative, may
enter upon any property where land disturbing activity is being conducted and
take any and all action necessary to abate any violation of this chapter and/or
remediate or restore the property to its condition prior to the land disturbing
activity. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to refuse to
allow the City Engineer and/or City Inspector to enter upon property for such
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-29)
§ 156.077 COST OF ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.
   Within 30 days after abatement of a violation of this chapter, the owner of
the property shall be notified in writing by the city of the cost of abatement,
including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest
with the city objecting to the amount of the cost of abatement within 15 days
thereafter. If the cost of abatement is not paid to the city within 60 days
after the date of the notice, the cost of abatement shall be certified by the
city in the manner of a special assessment against the property, and shall
constitute a lien on the property.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-30)
§ 156.078 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   The city may seek equitable relief restraining any person from any activity
in violation of this chapter including compelling the performance of abatement
or remediation of such violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-21-31) (Ord. 2021-04, passed 5-25-2021)
CHAPTER 157: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Short title
   
157.002   Purpose
   
157.003   Application
   
157.004   Recording of plat
   
157.005   Definitions
Improvements
   
157.020   Improvements required
   
157.021   Inspection
   
157.022   Minimum improvements
   
157.023   Completion of improvements
   
157.024   Performance bond
Minimum Standards for the Design of Subdivisions
   
157.035   Minimum standards
Procedures and Submission Requirements for Plats
   
157.050   Procedures and submission requirements for plats
   
157.051   Pre-application conference
   
157.052   Sketch plan required
   
157.053   Presentation to City Council
   
157.054   Subdivision classification
   
157.055   Plats required
   
157.056   Requirements of preliminary plat
   
157.057   Referral of preliminary plat
   
157.058   Action by the City Engineer
   
157.059   Action by the governing body
   
157.060   Final plat
   
157.061   Referral final plat
   
157.062   Requirements of the final plat
   
157.063   Final plat attachments
   
157.064   Action by the governing body
Other Provisions
   
157.075   Variances
   
157.076   Chain subdividing
   
157.077   Extraterritorial review agreement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Peosta, Iowa,
Subdivision Control Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 6-7-1)
§ 157.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design,
development, and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions of
land, so that existing developments will be protected, and so that adequate
provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so that growth
occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the comprehensive plan, and to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-2)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code §§ 354.1 and 364.1
§ 157.003 APPLICATION.
   Every owner of any original parcel of land, 40 acres or part thereof,
entered of record in the office of the County Recorder as a single lot, parcel,
or tract on or before the effective date of these regulations (April 2, 1985)
into three or more lots, parcels, or tracts for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots,
acreage or suburban lots, transfer of ownership or building development within
the city, and within two miles of the corporate limits of the city shall cause
plats of such area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as
hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the
plat on record.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-3)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 354.9
§ 157.004 RECORDING OF PLAT.
   (A)   No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat, or street dedication within
the city and within two miles of the corporate limits of the city as recorded
in the office of the County Recorder and filed with the County Auditor, as
provided in Iowa Code § 354.9, shall be filed for record with the County
Recorder, or recorded by the County Recorder, until a final plat of such
subdivision, resubdivision, or street dedication has been reviewed and approved
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing body, it shall be
the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the County
Auditor and County Recorder, as required by law. Such approval shall be
revokable after 30 days, unless such plat has been duly recorded and evidence
thereof filed with the City Clerk within such 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-4)
Statutory reference
   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 354.9
§ 157.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates, or requires, a different meaning.
   ACQUISITION PLAT. The graphical representation of the division of land or
rights in land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for
right-of-way purposes by an agency of the government or other persons having
the power of eminent domain (per Iowa Code § 441.29).
   ALIQUOT PART. A fractional part of a section within the United States public
land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-quarter, one-half
of one-quarter, or one-quarter of one-quarter shall be considered an ALIQUOT
PART of a section (per Iowa Code § 354.2(2)).
   ALLEY. Public property dedicated to public use primarily for vehicular
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   AUDITOR’S PLAT. A subdivision plat required by either the Auditor or the
Assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of the Auditor (per Iowa
Code § 354.2(3)).
   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land, or the boundary
of the subdivision.
   BUILDING LINES. A line on a plat between which line and public right-of-way
no building or structures may be erected.
   CITY ENGINEER. The professional engineer registered in the state designated
as the CITY ENGINEER by the governing body or other hiring authority.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The general plan for the development of the community
that may be titled master plan, comprehensive plan, or some other title, which
plan has been adopted by the governing body. Such COMPREHENSIVE PLAN shall
include any part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such
plan or parts thereof.
   CONVEYANCE. An instrument filed with the Recorder as evidence of the
transfer of title to land, including any form of deed or contract (per Iowa
Code § 354.2(5)).
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having one end connecting to another street, and the
other end terminated by a vehicular turn around.
   DIVISION. Dividing a tract or parcel of land into two parcels of land by
conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other than
public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the purpose of
this chapter (per Iowa Code §§ 354.2(6) and 355.1(2)).
   EASEMENT. An authorization by a property owner for another to use a
designated part of said owner’s property for a specified purpose.
   FORTY-ACRE ALIQUOT PART. One-quarter of one-quarter of a section (per Iowa
Code § 354.2(7)).
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council (per Iowa Code § 354.2(8)).
   GOVERNMENT LOT. A tract, within a section, that is normally described by a
lot number as represented and identified on the township plat of the United
States public land survey system (per Iowa Code §§ 354.2(9) and 355.1(3)).
   IMPROVEMENTS. Changes to land necessary to prepare it for building sites
including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb paving,
sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways, and other public works
and appurtenances.
   LOT. A tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat (per Iowa Code § 354.2(10)).
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. Any lot that is not a corner lot that abuts two
streets.
   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of land that uses distances and
angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the parcel
by reference to physical features of the land (per Iowa Code § 354.2(11)).
   OFFICIAL PLAT. Either an auditor’s plat or a subdivision plat that meets the
requirements of this chapter and has been filed for record in the offices of
the Recorder, Auditor, and Assessor (per Iowa Code § 354.2(12)).
   ORIGINAL PARCEL. Forty acres or part thereof entered of record in the office
of the County Recorder as a single lot or parcel on or before April 2, 1985.
   OWNER. The legal entity holding title to the property being subdivided, or
such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its behalf.
   PARCEL. A part of a tract of land (per Iowa Code § 354.2(13)).
   PERFORMANCE BOND. A surety bond or cash deposit made out to the city in an
amount equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this
chapter, said cost estimated by the city and said surety bond or cash bond
being legally sufficient to secure to the city that the said improvements will
be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
   PERMANENT REAL ESTATE INDEX NUMBER. A unique number or combination of
numbers assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to Iowa Code §§ 441.29 and 352.2
(14).
   PLAT. A map drawing, or chart on which a subdivider’s plan for the
subdivision of land is presented, that said subdivider submits for approval and
intends, in final form, to record.
   PLATS OFFICER. The individual assigned the duty to administer this chapter
by the governing body or other appointing authority.
   PLAT OF SURVEY. The graphical representation of a survey of one or more
parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel
within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor (per Iowa Code §§ 354.2
(15) and 355.1(9)).
   PROPRIETOR. A person who has a recorded interest in land, including a person
selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons holding
mortgage, easement, or lien interest (per Iowa Code § 354.2(16)).
   RESUBDIVISION. Any subdivision of land that has previously been included in
a recorded plat. In appropriate context it may be a verb referring to the act
of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
   STREET. Public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular circulation.
In appropriate context the term STREET may refer to the right-of-way bounded by
the property lines of such public property, or may refer to the paving
installed within such right-of-way.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street primarily intended to carry traffic from one part
of the city to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting
property.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street primarily designed to connect smaller areas of
the community, and to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street primarily designed to provide access to abutting
property.
   SUBDIVIDER. The owner of the property being subdivided, or such other person
or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The accumulative effect of dividing an original lot, tract, or
parcel of land, as of April 2, 1985 into three or more lots for the purpose of
immediate or future sale or transfer for development purposes excluding public
roadways, public utility extensions, and land taken by condemnation.
      (2)   The term includes a RESUBDIVISION or REPLATTING. When appropriate
to the context, the word may relate to the process of subdividing or the land
subdivided.
      (3)   Any person not in compliance with the provisions of this definition
at the time of its effective date (April 2, 1985), shall not be required to
comply with such provisions unless or until a new division, re-subdivision, or
replatting occurs following that effective date (per Iowa Code §§ 354.2(17) and
355.1(10)).
   SUBDIVISION PLAT. The graphical representation of the subdivision of land,
prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter designation
for each lot within the plat and succinct name or title that is unique for the
county where the land is located (per Iowa Code §§ 354.2(18) and 355.1(11)).
   SURVEYOR. A registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of land
surveying pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 542B and §§ 354.2(19) and 355.1(12).
   TRACT. An aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official plat, or a
government lot (per Iowa Code § 354.2(20)).
   UTILITIES. Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
electricity, wastewater, and stormwater.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-5)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 157.020 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The subdivider shall, at said subdivider’s expense, install and construct
all improvements required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established
for such improvements by the city, and as shown on the approved preliminary
plat.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-6)
§ 157.021 INSPECTION.
   The construction of all improvements which at any time shall be deeded to
the city, including all streets, alleys, sanitary, or storm sewers or water
works, shall be subject to inspection. The person responsible for installation
of the improvement shall employ the design engineer or engineering firm (or
other qualified licensed engineer or firm) to provide a resident project
representative during construction. The City Engineer will provide periodic
observations of the construction as directed by the city. The engineer employed
by the entity installing the improvement shall certify to the city that the
improvement was constructed in accordance with the plans as approved by the
city and shall furnish construction record drawings for the improvements to the
city and City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-7) (Ord. 2008-03, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 157.022 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS.
   The improvements set forth below shall be considered the minimum
improvements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare (per
Iowa Code § 364.1).
   (A)   Streets and alleys. All streets and alleys within the platted area
which are dedicated for public use shall be brought to the grade approved by
the governing body after receiving the report and recommendations of the City
Engineer.
   (B)   Roadways. All roadways shall be surfaced with Portland cement concrete
or with asphaltic concrete over a crushed stone base as the governing body may
require.
   (C)   Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. All
curb and gutter shall be constructed to the grade approved by the governing
body after receiving the report and recommendations of the City Engineer. Newly
constructed curbs and gutters shall comply with the Americans With Disabilities
Guidelines (ADAAG).
   (D)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be required on all public street frontages and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of §§
151.40 through
151.57. Sidewalks shall be shown on all final subdivision plats approved after
July 26, 2022.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be placed four feet behind the curb parallel to the
street, unless an exception has been permitted by the city to preserve
topographical or natural features or to provide visual interest, or unless the
subdivider shows that an alternative pedestrian system provides safe and
convenient circulation.
       (3)   In planned developments, sidewalks (as used in this subsection)
may be located away from the road system to link dwelling units with other
dwelling units, and the street to on-site activity centers such as parking
areas and recreational areas. Developer may also be required to install
sidewalks parallel to the street.
      (4)   For all zoning districts, sidewalks must be installed before the
earliest of the following events:
         (a)   Sidewalks must be installed along the frontage of an improved
property before occupancy is permitted. The City Council has granted an
extension of time to install the required sidewalk.
         (b)   Upon 80% of lots in any subdivision being served by sidewalks,
the remaining properties, unserved by sidewalks, shall have sidewalks installed
within two years whether the remaining lots are developed or not. The mailing
of a letter to the property owner by the city that 80% of lots have sidewalks
shall serve as the starting point of the two-year period.
          (c)   All sidewalks in a subdivision must be installed within five
years (or suggestions of a date) of the date on which the City Council approved
the final plat.
          (d)   If an undeveloped lot is sold to an owner of an adjacent
developed lot for use as part of the adjacent developed lot or for a future
undetermined purpose, the undeveloped lot must have sidewalks installed within
30 days of the date of sale unless an extension is granted by the City Council,
which shall only be granted for good cause shown.
         (e)   Any undevelopable lots, lots on which stormwater detainage/
retainage is located, or lots to be used for other purposes, such as parks and/
or public areas, shall have sidewalks installed by the developer, at
developer’s expense, within one year of the City Council approval of the final
plat unless an extension is granted by the City Council which shall only be
granted for good cause shown.
   (E)   Water lines. Where a public water main is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall connect with such water main and provide a water connection
for each lot with service pipe installed to the property line in accordance
with the City Water Department standards, procedures, and supervision.
   (F)   Sewers.
      (1)   Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall connect or provide for the connection with such sanitary sewer
and shall provide within the subdivision the sanitary sewer system as required
to make the sewer accessible to each lot in the subdivision. Sanitary sewers
shall be stubbed into each lot. Sewer systems shall be approved by the
governing body and the State Department of Health, and the construction subject
to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Utilities.
      (2)   Where sanitary sewers are not available, other facilities, as
approved by the governing body and the State Department of Health, must be
provided for the adequate disposal of sanitary wastes.
      (3)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters,
subject to the approval of the governing body and to the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Utilities.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-8) (Ord. 2022-09, passed 7-26-2022)
§ 157.023 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before the governing body shall approve the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
governing body. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall report that said improvements meet all
city specifications and ordinances or other city requirements, and the
agreements between the subdivider and the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-9)
§ 157.024 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   The completion requirement may be waived in whole or in part if the
subdivider will post a performance bond with the governing body guaranteeing
that improvements not completed will be constructed within a period of one year
from final acceptance of the plat, but final acceptance of the plat will not
constitute final acceptance by the city of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed,
and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements
have been completed and accepted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-10)
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE DESIGN OF SUBDIVISIONS
§ 157.035 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be considered the minimum standards necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (A)   Relation to existing streets. The arrangement, character, extent,
width, grade, and location of all streets shall be considered in their relation
to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses
of the land to be served by such streets. The arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either provide for the continuation of appropriate projection
of existing principal streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plat for the
neighborhood approved by the governing body to meet a particular situation
where topographical or other conditions made continuance or conformance to
existing streets impracticable.
   (B)   Acreage subdivisions.
      (1)   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s
plat, a sketch of the prospective future system of the unsubmitted part shall
be furnished and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in
the light of adjustments in connection with the street system of the part not
submitted.
      (2)   Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building
lots such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.
      (3)   Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets
controlling access to public ways will not receive approval.
   (C)   Local streets.
      (1)   Local streets shall be so planned as to discourage through traffic.
      (2)   Cul-de-sac streets are permitted where topography and other
conditions justify their use. Such street shall not be longer than 500 feet and
shall terminate with a turn-around, having an outside roadway diameter of at
least 80 feet and street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. The
right-of-way width of the straight portion of such streets shall be a minimum
of 60 feet. The property line at the intersection of the turn-around and the
straight portion of the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 20
feet.
   (D)   Frontage streets.
      (1)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the governing body may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
      (2)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way
or limited access highway right-of-way, the governing body may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes
in residential districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due
regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
   (E)   Half-streets. Half-streets shall be prohibited except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, and where the governing body finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Wherever a half-street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
   (F)   Street geometrics.
      (1)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
      (2)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
      (3)   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than 200 feet for minor
and collector streets, and of such greater radii as the governing body shall
determine for special cases.
   (G)   Intersections.
      (1)   Insofar as is practical, acute angles between streets at their
intersection are to be avoided.
      (2)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
      (3)   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a
radius of ten feet, or of a greater radius where the governing body may deem it
necessary. The governing body may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
   (H)   Street names. Streets that are in alignment with others already
existing and named shall bear the name of the existing streets. The proposed
names of new streets shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street
names. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the governing body.
   (I)   Street grades.
      (1)   Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed 5%, with due
allowance for reasonable vertical curves.
      (2)   No street grade shall be less than one-half of 1%.
   (J)   Alleys.
      (1)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the governing body may waive this requirement where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      (2)   The width of an alley shall be 20 feet.
      (3)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movements.
      (4)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the
dead-end, as determined by the governing body.
   (K)   Blocks. No block may be more than 1,320 feet or less than 500 feet in
length between the centerlines of intersecting streets, except where, in the
opinion of the governing body, extraordinary conditions unquestionably justify
a departure from these limits. In blocks over 700 feet in length, the governing
body may require at or near the middle of the block a public way or easement of
not less than ten feet in width for use by pedestrians and/or as an easement
for public utilities.
   (L)   Lots.
      (1)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
and use contemplated.
      (2)   Minimum lot dimensions and sizes.
         (a)   Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall not be
less than 80 feet wide nor less than 10,000 square feet in area.
         (b)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-
street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
         (c)   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra ten feet of
width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both
streets.
      (3)   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means
of public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public
street.
      (4)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
      (5)   A planting screen easement of at least ten feet and across which
there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots
abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
      (6)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight
street lines or radial to curved street lines.
   (M)   Building lines. Building lines shall be shown on all lots within the
platted area. The governing body may require building lines in accordance with
the needs of each subdivision.
   (N)   Easements.
      (1)   Easement across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide.
      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
further width for construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
   (O)   Plat markers. Markers shall be placed at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets, and all such intermediate points as shall
be required by the governing body. The markers shall be of such material, size,
and length as may be approved by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-11) (Ord. 2022-14, passed 8-23-2022)
PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS
§ 157.050 PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS.
   In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the governing body,
the subdivider and owner shall submit a plat in accordance with the
requirements hereafter set forth and install improvements or provide a
performance bond.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-12)
§ 157.051 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivision located within the platting jurisdiction of the
city is proposed, the owner and subdivider shall schedule a pre-application
conference with the City Clerk. The conference should be attended by the City
Clerk and such other city or utility representatives as is deemed desirable;
and by the owner and said owner’s engineer and/or planner, as deemed desirable.
   (B)   The purpose of such conference shall be to acquaint the city with the
proposed subdivision, and to acquaint the subdivider with the requirements,
procedures, and any special problems relating to the proposed subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-13)
§ 157.052 SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED.
   For the pre-application conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or
sketch showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any
proposed streets and other improvements, and the general layout and arrangement
of intended land uses, in relation to the surrounding area.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-14)
§ 157.053 PRESENTATION TO CITY COUNCIL.
   The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the governing body for review,
prior to incurring significant costs preparing the preliminary or final plat.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-15)
§ 157.054 SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION.
   Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as minor
subdivision or a major subdivision.
   (A)   Minor subdivision. Means any subdivision that contains not more than
four lots fronting on an existing street and that does not require construction
of any public improvements, and that does not adversely affect the remainder of
the parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.
   (B)   Major subdivision. Any subdivision that, in the opinion of the
governing body, does not for any reason meet the definition of a minor
subdivision, shall be classified as a major subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-16)
§ 157.055 PLATS REQUIRED.
   In order to secure approval of a proposed subdivision, the owner and
subdivider of any major subdivision shall comply with the requirements for a
preliminary plat and the requirements for a final plat. The owner and
subdivider of a minor subdivision or an auditor’s plat may elect to omit the
submission of a preliminary plat (per Iowa Code § 354.6).
(Prior Code, § 6-7-17)
§ 157.056 REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The subdivider shall prepare and file with the City Clerk four copies of a
preliminary plat of adequate scale and size showing the following:
   (A)   Title, scale, north point, and date;
   (B)   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearing angles, and
references to section, townships, and range lines or corners;
   (C)   Present and proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks, with their right-
of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs, and planting
strips, and location of street lights;
   (D)   Proposed layout of lots, showing numbers, dimensions, radii, chords,
and the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular;
   (E)   Building setback or front yard lines;
   (F)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community purposes;
   (G)   Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes,
and limitation;
   (H)   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, waterlines, gas mains, electric utilities,
and other facilities, with the size, capacity, invert elevation, and location
of each;
   (I)   Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or resemble
existing subdivision names in the county;
   (J)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder, and engineer,
surveyor, or architect who prepared the preliminary plat, and the engineer,
surveyor, or architect who will prepare the final plat;
   (K)   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
property;
   (M)   A general summary description of any protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat; and
   (N)   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet if the
general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals of not
more than five feet if the general slope is 10% or greater, unless the City
Council waives this requirement.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-18)
§ 157.057 REFERRAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The City Clerk shall forthwith refer two copies of the preliminary plat to
the City Engineer and two copies to the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-19)
§ 157.058 ACTION BY THE CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Engineer shall carefully examine said preliminary plat as to its
compliance with Iowa Code § 354.8 and the laws and regulations of the city, the
existing street system, and good engineering practices, and shall, as soon as
possible, submit the City Engineer’s findings in duplicate to the governing
body together with one copy of the plat received.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-20)
§ 157.059 ACTION BY THE GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body shall, upon receiving the report of the City Engineer, as
soon as possible, but not more than 30 days thereafter, consider said report,
negotiate with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and
extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, and pass upon the
preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If the governing body
does not act within 30 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be
approved, provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of
the time for a period not to exceed an additional 60 days. It shall then set
forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval, modification, or
disapproval.
   (A)   In the event that substantial changes or modifications are made by the
governing body or disapproval of the plat, it shall give its reasons therefor
and it may request and cause the revised preliminary plat to be resubmitted in
the same manner as the original plat.
   (B)   If approved, the governing body shall express its approval as
conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any.
   (C)   The action of the governing body shall be noted on two copies of the
preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other copy retained by the
governing body.
   (D)   The conditional approval by the governing body shall not constitute
final acceptance of the addition or subdivision by the city but an
authorization to proceed with preparation of the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-21)
§ 157.060 FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms
to all requirements of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-22)
§ 157.061 REFERRAL FINAL PLAT.
   The subdivider shall, within 12 months of the conditional approval of the
preliminary plat by the governing body prepare and file four copies of the
final plat and other required documents with the City Clerk as hereafter set
forth, and upon the subdivider’s failure to do so within the time specified,
the conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless
an extension of time is applied for and granted by the governing body. Upon
receipt of the final plat and other required documents, the City Clerk shall
transmit two copies of the final plat to the governing body for its
recommendations and approval. Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision
or an auditor’s plat as set forth herein, no final plat shall be considered by
the governing body until and unless a preliminary plat for the area included in
the proposed final plat has been approved and has not expired and become void
as set forth above.
At its discretion the governing body may refer the final plat to the City
Engineer pursuant to the procedure established in §
157.056.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-23)
§ 157.062 REQUIREMENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT.
   The final plat shall conform to the requirements of Iowa Code Chapter 355
and shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to
one inch with permanent ink on a reproducible tracing material. It shall show
(per Iowa Code §§ 354.8 and 355.8):
   (A)   The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded;
   (B)   The linear dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot of the
subdivision boundary, lot lines, streets, and alleys. These should be exact and
complete to include all distances, radii, arc, chords, points of tangency, and
central angles;
   (C)   Street names and clear designations of public alleys. Streets that are
continuations of present streets should bear the same name. If new names are
needed, they should be distinctive. Street names may be required to conform to
the city plan;
   (D)   Location, type, materials, and size of all monuments and markers
including all U.S., county, or other official bench marks;
   (E)   The signature and acknowledgment of the subdivision land owner and the
subdivision land owner’s spouse; and
   (F)   A sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat and that the plat
conforms to Iowa Code § 354.8 by the professional engineer or land surveyor who
drew the final plat.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-24)
§ 157.063 FINAL PLAT ATTACHMENTS.
   The final plat shall have the following attached to it:
   (A)   A correct description of the subdivision land (per Iowa Code § 354.6
(2));
   (B)   A certificate by the owner and the owner’s spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with the free consent, and is in accordance with the desire of
the owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the
owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds (per Iowa Code § 354.11(1));
   (C)   A complete abstract of title and an Attorney’s opinion showing that
the fee title to the subdivision land is in the owner’s name and that the land
is free from encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond (per
Iowa Code § 354.11(1)(c));
   (D)   A certificate from the County Treasurer that the subdivision land is
free from taxes (per Iowa Code § 354.11(1)(f));
   (E)   A certificate from the Clerk of District Court that the subdivision
land is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics, or other liens of
record in the Clerk’s office;
   (F)   A certificate from the County Recorder that the title in fee is in the
owner’s name and that it is free from encumbrances other than those secured by
an encumbrance bond (per Iowa Code § 354.11(2));
   (G)   A certificate of dedication of streets and other public property (per
Iowa Code § 354.11(1));
   (H)   A statement of restrictions of all types that run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds of lots;
   (I)   Resolution and certificate for approval by the governing body and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk (per Iowa Code § 354.11(1)(d));
   (J)   Profiles, typical cross sections, and specifications of street
improvements and utility systems, to show the location, size, and grade. These
should be shown on a 50-foot horizontal scale and a five foot vertical scale
with west or south at the left;
   (K)   A certificate by the City Clerk, or similar official, that all
required improvements and installations have been completed, or that a
performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City Attorney
and filed with the City Clerk, or that the governing body has agreed that the
city will provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess the
costs against the subdivider or future property owners in the subdivision; and
   (L)   The encumbrance bond, if any, as specified in Iowa Code §§ 354.11,
354.11(2), and 354.12.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-25)
§ 157.064 ACTION BY THE GOVERNING BODY.
   Upon receipt of the plat, but not more than 60 days following submission of
the final plat to the Clerk as stated in §
157.061 the governing body shall either approve or disapprove the final plat
(per Iowa Code § 354.8).
   (A)   In the event that said plat is disapproved by the governing body, such
disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out wherein said
proposed plat is objectionable.
   (B)   In the event that said plat is found to be acceptable and in
accordance with this chapter, the governing body shall accept the same.
   (C)   The passage of a resolution by the governing body accepting the plat
shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final
plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such
recording before the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and
effect.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-26)
OTHER PROVISIONS
§ 157.075 VARIANCES.
   Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that
strict compliance with the requirement of this chapter would result in
extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, because of unusual topography or
other conditions, the governing body may vary, modify, or waive the
requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secure. Provided, however, that such variance, modification, or waiver will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such
variances and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of three-
fourths of the members of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-27)
§ 157.076 CHAIN SUBDIVIDING.
   No more than two building permits for each separate tract existing at the
effective date of this chapter shall be issued unless the tract has been
platted in accordance with this chapter; except that this provision shall not
limit the number of building permits that may be issued for accessory buildings
as defined by the restricted residence district ordinance or additions or
improvements to a main or accessory building already legally located upon said
tract.
(Prior Code, § 6-7-28)
§ 157.077 EXTRATERRITORIAL REVIEW AGREEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall apply the same standards and conditions for review and
approval of a subdivision in the extraterritorial review area as established in
§
157.004.
   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, waive its right to review the
subdivision or waive the requirements of any of its standards or conditions for
approval of the subdivision in the extraterritorial area. Such resolution shall
be certified and recorded with the plat.
   (C)   Procedures for certifying approval of subdivisions in the
extraterritorial area of the city shall be the same as those established for
other subdivisions with the city unless waived by the governing body (per Iowa
Code §§ 354.8 and 354.9).
(Prior Code, § 6-7-29) (Ord. 03-04, passed 9-9-2003)
CHAPTER 158: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
   
158.01   Adopted by reference
§ 158.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s zoning ordinance, along with any amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference as if incorporated into this code in full.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-8-2022; Ord. 2025-03, passed 5-27-
2025; Ord. 2025-16, passed 10-28-2025)
CHAPTER 159: WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
   
159.01   Purpose
   
159.02   Definitions
   
159.03   Zoning and land use
   
159.04   Special use permit required
   
159.05   Special use permit application process
   
159.06   Exceptions
   
159.07   Application review for all applications
   
159.08   Application review for eligible facilities requests
   
159.09   Application review for new tower construction
   
159.10   Application review for initial placement, installation, modification
or other requests for construction or placement of transmission equipment
   
159.11   Proprietary leasing of city owned or controlled property
   
159.12   Removal of abandoned wireless communication facilities
§ 159.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter implements Section 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief
and Job Creation Act of 2012 ("Spectrum Act"), as interpreted by the Federal
Communications Commission's ("FCC" or "Commission") Acceleration of Broadband
Deployment Report & Order and Iowa Code Chapter 8C. This chapter does not apply
to micro or small wireless facilities as defined pursuant to the provisions of
Iowa Code Chapter 8C; FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities; satellite
dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one
meter in diameter; or towers or transmission equipment erected by the city,
county, or state for public safety or other public purposes.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all and new existing wireless
communications facilities, including cell towers, small wireless facilities
(e.g., 5G nodes, rooftop antennas, distributed antenna systems (DAS) and
equipment cabinets and support structures).
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025; Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the city,
shall be construed as defined in this section unless, from the context, a
different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically
defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
   APPLICANT. Any person engaged in the business of providing wireless
telecommunications services or the wireless telecommunications infrastructure
required for wireless telecommunications services and who submits an
application.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for the
following:
      (1)   An eligible facilities request;
      (2)   To construct a new tower;
      (3)   For the initial placement of transmission equipment on a wireless
support structure;
      (4)   For the modification of an existing tower or existing base station
that constitutes a substantial change to an existing tower or existing base
station; or
      (5)   Any other request to construct or place transmission equipment that
does not meet the definition of an eligible facilities request.
   BASE STATION. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-
licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a
communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein
or any equipment associated with a tower. BASE STATION includes, without
limitation:
      (1)   Equipment associated with wireless communications services, such as
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless
services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul.
      (2)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular
and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (3)   Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant
application is filed with the city under this section, supports or houses
equipment described in divisions (1) and (2) of this definition that has been
reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not
built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.
      (4)   The term does not include any structure that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the city under this section, does not
support or house equipment described in division (1) and (2) of this
definition.
   COLLOCATION. The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an
eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving
radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
   ELECTRIC UTILITY. Any owner or operator of electric transmission or
distribution facilities subject to the regulation and enforcement activities of
the Iowa Utilities Board relating to safety standards.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. Any request for modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
      (1)   Collocation of new transmission equipment;
      (2)   Removal of transmission equipment; or
      (3)   Replacement of transmission equipment.
   ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any tower or base station as defined in this
section, provided it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed
with the city under this section.
   EXISTING. A constructed tower or base station is EXISTING for purposes of
this section if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning
or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process,
provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was
not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is
existing for purposes of this section.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   INITIAL PLACEMENT or INSTALLATION. The first time transmission equipment is
placed or installed on a wireless support structure.
   MONOPOLE CONSTRUCTION. A tower consisting of a single vertical structure not
supported by radiating guy wires or support structure, and distinguishable from
a lattice or truss tower.
   SITE. Towers not in the public right-of-way, the current boundaries of the
leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility
easements currently related to the SITE, and, for other eligible support
structures other than towers, that are in proximity to the structure and to
other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. A modification substantially changes the physical
dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
increases the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not
to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures,
it increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than ten
feet, whichever is greater;
      (2)   For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for
other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the
body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by
more than six feet;
      (3)   For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of
more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology
involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-
of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment
cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated
with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are
more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with the structure;
      (4)   It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
      (5)   It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
      (6)   It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting
approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure
or base station equipment, provided, however, that this limitation does not
apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not
exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs divisions (1) through (6) of
this definition.
      (7)   Height shall be measured from the original support structure in
cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on
buildings' rooftops. Otherwise, height shall be measured from the dimensions of
the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and
any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act,
Pub. L. No. 112-96, Tit. VI.
   TOWER. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any
FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including
structures that are constructed for wireless communications services,
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services,
as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as
microwave backhaul, and the associated site.
   TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-
licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not
limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and
regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with
wireless communications services, including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
transmission of wireless communications or information of any kind between user
equipment and a communications network, except that WIRELESS FACILITY does not
include coaxial or fiberoptic cable that is not immediately adjacent to, or
directly associated with, a particular antenna.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure that exists at the time an
application is submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or
installation of transmission equipment in compliance with applicable codes,
including, but not limited to, water towers, buildings, and other structures,
whether within or outside the public right-of-way. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE
does not include a tower or existing base station.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.03 ZONING AND LAND USE.
   The city exercises zoning, land use, planning, and permitting authority
regarding the siting of transmission equipment within the city's territorial
boundaries and within the two-mile limit of the city's territorial boundaries,
subject to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 8C and federal law.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.04 SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   All applications, except for applications for eligible facilities requests,
shall require a special use permit. Applications for the construction of new
towers shall be limited to the city's M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment may, following public hearing, and subject to applicable
state and/or federal requirements, approve, approve with conditions, or deny
requests for special use permits relative to an application.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.05 SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.
   A special use permit shall not be considered by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment unless and until the following requirements are met:
   (A)   An application for special use permit and all information set out in
division (C) of this section are submitted for review, which the Zoning Board
of Adjustment will consider in approving, approving with conditions, or denying
a special use permit. In the event of a conflict between provisions of this
subchapter and provisions generally applicable to a special use permit, the
provisions of this subchapter shall control. Further, the written protest
provisions set forth in §
159.04, special use permit required, shall not apply to special use permits
considered under this subchapter.
   (B)   Notice of a public hearing on an application for special use permit
shall be published in accordance with the provisions of Iowa Code § 362.3 not
less four and not more than 20 days in advance of such hearing. Additionally,
the city shall send public hearing notices by regular mail to owners of
property located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the site.
   (C)   Application submittals. A person or entity seeking a special use
permit pursuant to this section shall submit the following information to the
City Clerk:
      (1)   A building permit application on forms provided by the city.
      (2)   A special use permit application on forms provided by the city.
      (3)   The applicant's written description of the building's intended use.
      (4)   A detailed site plan which shall include, though not necessarily be
limited to:
         (a)   The location of the proposed building along with its dimensions,
including its height.
         (b)   All existing buildings on the same lot and their dimensions.
         (c)   The locations of all property lines and the physical dimensions
of the property.
         (d)   The right-of-way of any public street that is contiguous to the
property.
         (e)   The dimensions and locations of any easements on the property.
         (f)   Dimensions between buildings located on the site plan.
         (g)   Demonstrated compliance to all setback requirements as set forth
herein.
         (h)   A plan for storm water management if the city determines that it
is necessary.
      (5)   Four different photographs of the surrounding area from the
building's proposed location, one facing each cardinal direction.
      (6)   An accurate visual representation showing the proposed building's
appearance upon its completion (for example elevation drawings for the actual
building and/or photographs or drawings of a substantially similar building or
buildings).
      (7)   Information concerning the materials to be used in the construction
of the building.
      (8)   One recorded copy, or alternatively one fully executed original
copy of restrictive covenants providing that no interest in either the lot upon
which the building is proposed to be constructed or the lot upon which the
owner presently resides shall be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed separate
or apart from the other for a period of no less than five years from the date
construction of the building is completed.
      (9)   Any documentation demonstrating that, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment, the proposed building is safe, and the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected.
   (D)   Special use permit required. Qualified storage buildings are declared
to be special uses within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts within the City of
Peosta. No such buildings shall be permitted unless a special use permit is
approved by the Board of Adjustment following a public hearing. No application
for a special use permit shall be approved unless it satisfies all conditions
of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in approving a special use permit, grant
exceptions from the criteria set forth in §
159.05(C) if applicant submits a technical study acceptable to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment which confirms the exception is essential to the provision of
service and no alternative is available that conforms to the criteria in
question.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.07 APPLICATION REVIEW FOR ALL APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application. Applicant shall complete an application form and indicate
whether its application and intended use is for:
      (1)   An eligible facilities request;
      (2)   Construction of a new tower;
      (3)   Initial placement of transmission equipment on a wireless support
structure;
      (4)   Modification of an existing tower or existing base station that
constitutes a substantial change to an existing tower or existing base station;
or
      (5)   Any other request to construct or place transmission equipment that
does not meet the definition of an eligible facilities request.
   (B)   Application fee. The application fee, including all city and third-
party fees for review or technical consultation, shall be reasonably related to
actual and direct administrative costs according to Iowa law and are as
follows:
      (1)   Five hundred dollars for eligible facilities request.
      (2)   Three thousand dollars for new tower.
      (3)   Three thousand dollars for initial placement or installation of
transmission on a wireless support structure.
      (4)   Three thousand dollars for modification of an existing tower that
constitutes a substantial modification.
      (5)   Three thousand dollars for any other application to construct or
place transmission equipment.
   (C)   Third-party review or technical consultation. The city may retain the
services of third-party entities of its choosing to provide review or technical
consultation of applications, including, but not limited to, attorneys,
surveyors, and engineers. Such third-party review may include without
limitation:
      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of applications, including items
submitted therewith;
      (2)   The validity of analysis, techniques, and methodologies proposed by
applicant;
      (3)   The validity of conclusion reached by applicant; and
      (4)   Whether the application satisfies applicable approval criteria set
forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Review process. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall apply the
following criteria, as applicable, in approving, approving with conditions, or
denying a special use permit relative to an application:
      (1)   Height, setback, fall zone, and lot area requirements:
         (a)   No tower shall exceed a height of 150 feet above grade, unless
otherwise approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. A lightning rod, not to
exceed ten feet in height, shall be not be included within the height
limitation.
         (b)   No transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or base stations
installed upon or affixed to a wireless support structure shall exceed the
height of the wireless support structure, at its highest point, by more than 25
feet, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
         (c)   Towers and base stations shall be located so the distance from
the base of the tower (or distance from guy wires if used in conjunction with a
tower) and to any adjoining property satisfies the minimum building setback
requirement for the zoning district in which the tower is located. Base
stations shall similarly comply with such minimum building setbacks.
         (d)   Notwithstanding compliance with minimum building setback
requirements for the zoning district in which a tower is located, all towers
shall be situated to provide a sufficient fall zone such that the distance from
the base of the tower to the nearest occupied structure, public right-of-way,
residential zoning district, and/or property designated for residential use by
the city's comprehensive plan, exceeds the height of the tower. Provided, if
the tower is constructed utilizing breakpoint design technology, the minimum
distance for purposes of this division shall be equal to 110% the distance from
the top of the tower to the designed breakpoint. For example, on a 100-foot
monopole tower with a breakpoint at 80 feet, the minimum distance would be 22
feet (100% of 20 feet, the distance from the top of the tower to the
breakpoint).
         (e)   For the purposes of determining compliance with setbacks, lot
coverage, and other such requirements for the zoning district in which a tower
and base station are located, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall
control, even if located on a leased area situated within such lot or parcel.
      (2)   Compliance with state and federal requirements. Towers,
transmission equipment, and base stations must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FCC, FAA, and any other state or federal agency with the
authority to regulate towers.
      (3)   Compliance with applicable building codes/safety standards. Towers,
transmission equipment, and base stations shall be constructed, installed, and
maintained in compliance with standards set forth in applicable state or local
building codes and industry safety standards and subject to all applicable
permitting and approvals.
      (4)   Collocation. In furtherance of the city's objective of encouraging
collocation, towers exceeding 80 feet in height must be designed and
constructed to accommodate additional communication antennas when technically
feasible.
      (5)   Design and construction. All towers shall be of monopole
construction and equipped with anti-climbing devices, unless otherwise approved
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
      (6)   Fencing. Towers (and guy wires if used in conjunction with a tower)
shall be enclosed by a security fence not less than six feet in height,
provided this requirement shall not prevent fencing required to satisfy state
or federal requirements.
      (7)   Lighting. Towers and transmission equipment shall not be
illuminated unless required to conform to FCC, FAA, or other state or federal
requirements. If lighting is required, the lighting alternative or design
chosen must cause the least disturbance to surrounding views and/or surrounding
properties. Security lighting may be provided around the base of a tower if
zero cut-off luminaries with a maximum mounting height of 12 feet are used to
limit lighting to the tower site.
      (8)   Finishing. Towers shall be painted or coated silver or have a
galvanized finish or be painted a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness
to the maximum extent possible, unless otherwise required by state or federal
requirements. Towers and transmission equipment shall not be painted in such a
manner as to convey a company identity, and all transmission equipment shall be
of a color that matches the tower, unless otherwise required by state or
federal requirements.
      (9)   Signage. No signage, logos, decals, symbols, or messages of a
commercial nature may be displayed upon a tower, base station, wireless support
structure, or required fencing, except for warning and identification signs and
notifications, and such other signs as may be required by local, state, or
federal requirements.
      (10)   Landscaping/buffering.
         (a)   Towers and associated base stations shall be landscaped with a
buffer of plant material that effectively screens from view the base of the
tower and base station from adjacent properties and/or streets. The plantings
installed shall be of a size and species that can achieve a height of six feet
and 75% opacity during at least three seasons.
         (b)   In locations where the visual impact of the tower and base
station would be minimal, as determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived. Existing mature tree growth
and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible. Natural growth around the perimeter of the site may be considered a
sufficient buffer for a tower and base station, as determined by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
      (11)   Concealment.
         (a)   Transmission equipment or base stations installed upon or
affixed to a wireless support structure shall be installed so as to camouflage,
disguise, or conceal them to make them closely compatible with and blend into
the setting and/or wireless support structure.
         (b)   Transmission equipment or base stations installed upon or
affixed to a building shall be concealed within existing architectural features
to the maximum extent feasible. Any new architectural features proposed to
conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the architectural
features of the building, shall be proportional to the building, and shall
utilize materials of a similar quality finish, color, and texture as the
building.
         (c)   Roof-mounted transmission equipment or base stations shall be
set back from all roof edges to the maximum extent feasible with need for
light-of-sign transmission and reception of signals.
      (12)   Outdoor storage prohibited. Except during a reasonable period
during construction or maintenance, as determined by the City Manager or the
City Manager's designee, outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, tools,
supplies, materials, and other items at sites is prohibited.
      (13)   Vehicular access. All sites shall have vehicular access to and
from the site and a public street.
   (E)   Required submissions. Applications submitted pursuant to this
subchapter, excluding application's for eligible facilities requests (unless
otherwise noted), shall include the following materials:
      (1)   Identifying information. The legal name of applicant and name,
title, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of the individual
responsible for filing and processing the applicant's application.
      (2)   Application designation. An attestation from an applicant stating
whether the application constitutes an eligible facilities request, and
application for new tower construction; or an application for the initial
placement or installation of transmission equipment on wireless support
structures, modification of an existing tower or existing base station that
constitutes a substantial change, or other requests for construction or
placement of transmission equipment that do not constitute an eligible
facilities request.
      (3)   Explanation regarding request for new tower. An explanation
regarding the reason for choosing the proposed location for construction of a
new tower and the reason applicant did not choose collocation. The explanation
shall include a sworn statement from an individual who has responsibility over
placement of the tower attesting that collocation within the area determined by
applicant to meet applicant's radio frequency engineering requirements for the
placement of a site would not result in the same mobile service functionality,
coverage, and capacity, is technically infeasible, or is economically
burdensome to applicant.
      (4)   FCC documentation. Applicant shall provide a copy of applicant's
FCC license or registration.
      (5)   FAA documentation. An affidavit attesting conformity with
applicable FAA lighting and marking requirements.
      (6)   Evidence of site control. A legally binding document demonstrating
the applicant has control of the site for purposes set forth in applicant's
application.
      (7)   Site plan. Complete and accurate plans and drawings, drawn to
scale, prepared signed and sealed by an Iowa-licensed engineer, land surveyor
and/or architect, including:
         (a)   Depiction of all proposed transmission equipment, wireless
facilities, towers, base stations, and/or wireless support facilities;
         (b)   Elevation drawings demonstrating compliance with applicable
height requirements;
         (c)   A depiction of required fencing, landscaping, and/or screening;
         (d)   A depiction of all proposed utility runs and points of contact;
and
         (e)   A depiction and description of the leased or licensed area
showing the relative location of all proposed transmission equipment, wireless
facilities, towers, base stations, and/or wireless support facilities, with all
rights-of-way and/or easements for access and utilities clearly identified.
      (8)   Visual analysis. A color visual analysis that includes to-scale
visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction/
installation views from at least four angles, together with a map indicating
the location of each view.
      (9)   Design justification. A clear and complete written analysis that
explains how the proposed design complies with applicable designed standards
set to the maximum extent feasible and identifies all applicable design
standards complete with a factually detailed explanation of how and why the
proposed design either complies or cannot feasibly comply.
      (10)   Structural assessment. A structural assessment of the proposed
tower or wireless support structure conducted by an Iowa-licensed engineer.
      (11)   Compliance statement. A certificate, report, or plan containing a
statement by an Iowa-licensed engineer indicating compliance with applicable
Building Codes and/or Safety Standards.
      (12)   Other published materials. All other information or materials the
city may reasonably require from time to time, provided notice of the same is
made publicly available and designated as part of the application requirements.
      (13)   Limitation of information. The information requested for an
application shall not include information about or evaluate applicant's
business decisions with respect to its application, applicant's designed
service, customer demand for service, or quality of applicant's service to or
from a particular area or site.
   (F)   Disclosure of public records. All records, documents, and electronic
data submitted by applicant in the possession or custody of the city are
subject to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 22. Disclosure of such records
shall be consistent with applicable law.
   (G)   Duration of approval. The duration of the approval shall not be
limited, except that construction of the approved structure or facilities shall
be commenced within one year of final approval, including the disposition of
any appeals, and diligently pursued to completion.
   (H)   Final inspection.
      (1)   A certificate of occupancy will only be granted upon satisfactory
evidence applicant's work pursuant to a granted application substantially
complies with approved plans, submissions, and specifications.
      (2)   If it is found applicant's work does not substantially comply with
the approved plans, submissions, and specifications, applicant shall make all
changes required to bring such work into compliance promptly and prior to
operation.
   (I)   Limitation of review for other potential locations or collocation. The
city's review will not:
      (1)   Include evaluating the availability of other potential locations
for the placement or construction of a tower or transmission equipment; or
      (2)   Require applicants to establish other options for collocation
instead of the construction of a new tower or modification of an existing tower
or existing base station that constitute a substantial change to an existing
tower or existing base station.
   (J)   Transmission equipment and technology. The city shall not dictate the
type of transmission equipment or technology to be used by applicant or
discriminate between different types of infrastructure or technology.
   (K)   Radio frequency and environmental impacts. The city shall not:
      (1)   Deny an application, in whole or in part, based on perceived or
alleged environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as provided in 47
U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iv);
      (2)   Establish or enforce regulations or procedures for radio frequency
signal strength or the adequacy of service quality; or
      (3)   Impose environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring requirements
or other compliance measures for radio frequency emissions from transmission
equipment that are categorically excluded under FCC rules for radio frequency
emissions pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 1.1307(b)(1).
   (L)   Removal. The city shall not require the removal of existing towers,
base stations, or transmission equipment, wherever located, as a condition to
approval of an application.
   (M)   Emergency power systems. The city shall not prohibit the placement of
emergency power systems that comply with federal and state environmental
requirements.
   (N)   Zoning for airports and airspace. The city may administer and enforce
airport zoning pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 329 for the
protection of navigable airspace.
   (O)   Surety requirements. The city shall not impose surety requirements,
including bonds, escrow, deposits, letters of credit, or any other type of
financial surety, to ensure that abandoned or unused towers or transmission
equipment can be removed.
   (P)   Tower space. The city shall not condition the approval of an
application on applicant's agreement to:
      (1)   Provide space on or near the tower, base station, or wireless
support structure for the city or local governmental or nongovernmental
services at less than the market rate for such space; or
      (2)   Provide other services via the structure or facilities at less than
the market rate for such services.
   (Q)   Historic properties and overlay districts. The city may administer and
enforce zoning regulations to approve or deny applications for proposed
alterations to exterior features of designated local historic landmarks.
Applicants shall also comply with federal and state historic property laws.
   (R)   Discrimination. The city shall not discriminate based on the
ownership, including ownership by the city, of any property, structure, or
tower when promulgating rules or procedures for siting wireless facilities or
for evaluating applications.
   (S)   Remedies. Applicants and the city may bring claims related to this
ordinance to any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.08 APPLICATION REVIEW FOR ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS.
   (A)   Application for eligible facilities requests. For those applications
identified by applicant and determined by the city to be an eligible facilities
request, the application shall be limited to the information necessary for the
city to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. The
application may not require applicant to demonstrate a need or business case
for the proposed modification.
   (B)   Type of review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible
facilities request pursuant to this chapter, the City Administrator or the City
Administrator's designee shall review such application to determine whether the
application so qualifies.
   (C)   Timeframe for review. Within 60 days of the date applicant submits an
application seeking approval under this chapter, the City Administrator or the
City Administrator's designee shall approve the application unless it
determines the application is not covered by this chapter.
   (D)   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 60-day review period begins
to run when the application is filed with the city and may be tolled only by
agreement between the city and applicant, or in cases where the City
Administrator or the City Administrator's designee determines that the
application is incomplete. the timeframe for review is not tolled by a
moratorium on the review of applications.
      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the city must provide
written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required for the
application.
      (2)   The timeframe for review begins running again when applicant makes
a supplemental submission in response to the city's notice of incompleteness.
      (3)   Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify applicant
within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information.
The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to
the procedures identified in division (D). Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not
delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      (4)   The city shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
application in writing within the timeframe provided (accounting for any
tolling).
   (E)   Interaction with § 332(c)(7) of the United States Federal Code. If the
city determines applicant's request is not an eligible facilities request, the
city shall notify applicant in writing the application is being construed
otherwise and the basis of its determination. The timeframes under divisions §
159.09(C) and §
159.10(B) will begin to run from the issuance of the city's decision that the
application is not an eligible facilities request. To the extent such
information is necessary, the city may request additional information from
applicant to evaluate the application under §
159.05 and §
159.06, pursuant to the limitations applicable to said sections.
   (F)   Failure to act. In the event the city fails to approve or deny a
request seeking approval under this chapter within the timeframe for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed
grant does not become effective until applicant notifies the city in writing
after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the
application has been deemed granted.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.09 APPLICATION REVIEW FOR NEW TOWER CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Application. For those applications identified by applicant and
determined by the city to propose construction of a new tower, applicant shall
submit the necessary copies and attachments of the application to the City
Administrator or the City Administrator's designee and comply with applicable
local ordinances concerning land use and the appropriate permitting processes.
   (B)   Explanation for proposed location. The city may require applicant to
provide an explanation regarding the reason for choosing the proposed location
for construction of a new tower and the reason applicant did not choose
collocation. the explanation shall include a sworn statement from an individual
who has responsibility over placement of the tower attesting that collocation
within the area determined by applicant to meet applicant's radio frequency
engineering requirements for the placement of a site would not result in the
same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity, is technically
infeasible, or is economically burdensome to applicant.
   (C)   Timeframe for review. Within 150 days of the date on which applicant
submits an application seeking approval to construct a new tower, the city
shall approve or deny the application, unless another date is specified in a
written agreement between the city and applicant. The City Administrator or the
City Administrator's designee shall review the application for conformity with
applicable local zoning regulations, building permit requirements, and
consistency with Iowa Code Chapter 8C.
   (D)   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 150-day review period begins
to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by agreement
between the city and applicant, or in cases where the City Administrator or the
City Administrator's designee determines that the application is incomplete.
The City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee shall review the
application for conformity with applicable local zoning regulations, building
permit requirements, and consistency with this chapter. the timeframe for
review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.
      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the city must provide
written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required for the
application. the city's timeframe to review is tolled beginning on the date the
notice is sent.
      (2)   The city's timeframe of 150 days for review begins running again
when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the city's
notice of incompleteness.
      (3)   The city's 150-day timeframe for review does not toll if the city
requests any information the city may not lawfully consider pursuant to the
provisions of Iowa Code § 8C.3.
      (4)   Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify applicant
within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information.
The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to
the procedures identified in division (D). Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not
delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      (5)   The city shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
application in writing within the timeframe provided (accounting for any
tolling).
   (E)   Failure to act. In the event the city fails to approve or deny a
request seeking approval under division (E) within the timeframe for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.10 APPLICATION REVIEW FOR INITIAL PLACEMENT, INSTALLATION, MODIFICATION
OR OTHER REQUESTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Application. For those applications identified by applicant and
determined by the city to be for the initial placement or installation of
transmission equipment on wireless support structures, modification of an
existing tower or existing base station that constitutes a substantial change,
or other requests for construction or placement of transmission equipment that
do not constitute eligible facilities requests an eligible facilities request,
applicant shall submit the necessary copies and attachments of the application
to the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee and comply with
applicable local ordinances concerning land use or regulations concerning land
use and zoning and the appropriate local permitting processes.
   (B)   Timeframe for review. Within 90 days of the date on which applicant
submits an application seeking approval to construct a new tower, the city
shall approve or deny the application, unless another date is specified in a
written agreement between the city and applicant. The City Administrator or the
City Administrator's designee shall review the application for conformity with
applicable local zoning regulations, building permit requirements, and
consistency with Iowa Code Chapter 8C.
   (C)   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 90-day review period begins
to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by agreement by the
city and applicant, or in cases where the City Administrator or the City
Administrator's designee determines that the application is incomplete. The
City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee shall review the
application for conformity with applicable local zoning regulations, building
permit requirements, and consistency with this chapter. The timeframe for
review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.
      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the city must provide
written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the
application and the city's timeframe to review is tolled beginning the date the
notice is sent.
      (2)   The city's timeframe of 90 days for review begins running again
when applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the city's notice
of incompleteness.
      (3)   The city's 90-day timeframe for review does not toll if the city
requests information regarding any of the considerations the city may not
consider as described in Iowa Code § 8C.3.
      (4)   Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify applicant
within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information.
The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to
the procedures identified in division (C). Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not
delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
      (5)   The city shall make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
application in writing within the timeframe.
   (D)   Failure to act. In the event the city fails to approve or deny a
request seeking approval under this section within the timeframe for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.11 PROPRIETARY LEASING OF CITY OWNED OR CONTROLLED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Leasing of city owned or controlled property. The city reserves all
rights to leasing of city owned or controlled property but shall offer the
market rate value for use of the property.
   (B)   Lease term. Leases shall be for no less than 20 years, but all or a
portion of the property may be subject to release for public purposes after 15
years.
   (C)   Appraisal process for market value determination. If the city and
applicant cannot agree on the market rate for a lease on real property or
structures owned by the city, the city and applicant shall follow the process
set forth in Iowa Code § 8C.6.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
§ 159.12 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any tower, transmission
equipment, and/or wireless facilities regulated pursuant to this chapter that
are not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered
abandoned. This presumption may be rebutted by showing the same serves as
auxiliary, backup, or emergency equipment or is otherwise not abandoned. For
any tower, transmission equipment, and/or wireless facilities deemed abandoned,
all related equipment shall be removed within 90 days following receipt of
notice from the city to remove the same. Irrespective of any agreement between
them to the contrary, the owner or operator of the abandoned facilities and the
owner of the land or building to which they are affixed, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for their removal. If the abandoned tower, transmission
equipment, and/or wireless facilities are not removed within 90 days of written
notice from the city, the city may remove the same and recover from the owner
or operator of the same, or the owner of the land or building, all costs
incurred by the city as a result, including reasonable attorneys' fees and
court costs. If there are two or more users of a tower, transmission equipment,
and/or wireless facility, the same shall not be considered abandoned until all
users cease using the same.
(Ord. 2025-10, passed 7-22-2025)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
II.   LAND VACATIONS
      
III.   URBAN REVITALIZATION, RENEWAL AREAS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Electric franchise granted to Interstate Power & Light
-        - -         Company for a term of 25 years.
                     (Prior Code, Title VII, Chapter 3)
                     Gas franchise granted to Aquila Inc., doing business as
2007-09  12-11-2007  Aquila Networks, for a term of 25 years.
                     (Prior Code, Title VII, Chapter 4)
                     Telecommunications and electric franchise granted to
2017-02  4-25-2017   Maquoketa Valley Rural Electric Cooperative for a term of
                     25 years.
                     (Prior Code, Title VII, Chapter 5)
2025-12  8-26-2025   Establishing electric franchise fee for Maquoketa Valley
                     Rural Electric Cooperative.
2025-13  8-26-2025   Amending electric franchise fee for Interstate Power &
                     Light Company.
2025-14  8-26-2025   Establishing franchise fee on energy providers operating
                     in the city.
                    
 
TABLE II: LAND VACATIONS
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Vacation of railroad easement between Lot 1 of West Dubuque Industrial
-    - -    Park No. 5, and Lot 2 of Lot 4 and Lot 2 of Lot B of West Dubuque
            Industrial Park No. 2.
            (Prior Code, § 7-2-5)
72-  4-3-   Vacation of Lots 108 “A,” 110 “A,” 111 “A,” and 115 “A.”
02   1972   (Prior Code, Title VII, Chapter 2)
           
 
TABLE III: URBAN REVITALIZATION, RENEWAL AREAS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Designation of Lot 3 of the West Dubuque Industrial Park
-        - -         No. 5 as an urban revitalization area.
                     (Prior Code, Title VI, Chapter 12)v
89-01    8-14-1989   Taxes levied on certain property in the city within the
                     City Urban Renewal Area plan approved by Res. 89-09.
01-04    10-10-2001  Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2007-02  2-13-2007   Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2007-05  8-28-2007   Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2016-01  3-8-2016    Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2019-03  5-14-2019   Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2020-05  10-13-2020  Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2021-02  4-27-2021   Adding more properties, along with taxes levied on said
                     properties, to the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
2022-02  3-22-2022   Deleting properties in the City Urban Renewal Area plan.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Iowa Code
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE
Iowa Code Cite Code Section
Iowa Code Cite                             Code Section
                                           159.01;
Chapter 8C                                 159.03;
                                           159.10
8C.3                                       159.09;
                                           159.10
8C.6                                       159.11
9C.2                                       114.03
Chapter 22                                 31.03;
                                           159.07
22.1                                       31.03
22.2                                       31.03
22.7                                       31.03
64.13                                      31.24;
                                           31.26
64.23                                      31.27
100.19                                     131.45
103A.3(8)                                  154.01
123.2                                      110.02
123.3                                      110.02
123.18                                     110.02
123.22                                     110.02
123.28                                     110.02
123.30                                     110.02
123.31                                     110.02
123.32(2)                                  110.03
123.33                                     110.02
123.34                                     110.02
123.35                                     110.02
123.36                                     110.02
123.38                                     110.02;
                                           110.04
123.39                                     110.02
123.40                                     110.02
123.44                                     110.02
123.46                                     110.02
123.47                                     70.016;
                                           110.02
123.47(3)                                  70.016
123.49                                     110.02
123.49(2h)                                 70.016
123.50                                     110.02
123.51                                     110.02
123.52                                     110.02
123.90                                     110.02
123.95                                     110.02
123.122—123.145                          110.02
123.171— 123.182                         110.02
124.101                                    90.002
126.23A                                    70.016
142D.9                                     70.016
216C.9                                     151.48
321                                        72.48
321.1                                      70.002;
                                           72.01
321.11                                     72.50
321.12                                     72.51
321.13                                     72.51
321I.14(1a)                                72.52
321I.14(1c)                                72.52
321I.14(1d)                                72.52
321.17                                     70.016;
                                           72.46
321G.17                                    70.016
321G.19                                    70.016
321.20B                                    70.016;
                                           72.54
321.25                                     70.016
321.32                                     70.016
321.34                                     70.016
321.37                                     70.016
321.38                                     70.016
321.41                                     70.016
321.45                                     70.016
321.46                                     70.016
321.47                                     70.016
321.48                                     70.016
321.52                                     70.016
321.54                                     70.016
321.55                                     70.016
321.57                                     70.016
321.62                                     70.016
321.67(1)                                  70.016
321.67(2)                                  70.016
321.89(1)(b)                               90.066
321.89(2)                                  90.067
321.89(3)                                  90.068;
                                           90.070
321.89(3)(a)                               90.068;
                                           90.069
321.89(3)(b)                               90.068
321.89(3)(c)                               90.068
321.89(4)                                  90.071
321.91                                     70.016
321.95                                     70.016
321.98                                     70.016
321.99                                     70.016
321.104(1)                                 70.016
321.104(2)                                 70.016
321.104(3)                                 70.016
321.104(4)                                 70.016
321.104(5)                                 70.016
321.104(6)                                 70.016
321.115                                    70.016
321.115A                                   70.016
321.174                                    70.016
321.174A                                   70.016
321.178(2)(a)                              70.016
321.180                                    70.016
321.180B                                   70.016
321.180B(6A)(a)                            70.016
321.193                                    70.016
321.194                                    70.016
321.194(1)(c)                              70.016
321.216                                    70.016
321.216B                                   70.016
321.216C                                   70.016
321.219                                    70.016
321.220                                    70.016
321.229                                    70.015;
                                           70.016
321.231                                    70.016
321.232                                    70.016
321.234                                    70.016
321.234A                                   70.016;
                                           72.48
321.235A                                   70.016
321.236                                    71.01;
                                           71.02
321.236(1)                                 Ch. 75, Schd. I
321.247                                    70.016
321.255                                    70.030
321.256                                    70.016;
                                           70.030
321.257(2a)                                70.016
321.257(2b)                                70.016
321.257(2d)                                70.016
321.257(2e)                                70.016
321.257(2f)                                70.016
321.257(2g)                                70.016
321.257(2h)                                70.016
321.266                                    70.003;
                                           72.50
321.271                                    70.003
321.275(1-7)                               70.016
321.275(8)                                 70.016
321.276                                    70.016
321.277A                                   70.016
321.281(1)                                 70.016
321.281(2)                                 70.016
321.284                                    70.016;
                                           110.02
321.284A                                   70.016
321.285                                    70.016
321.288(1)                                 70.016
321.288(1)                                 70.016
321.294                                    70.016
321.295                                    70.016
321.297                                    70.016
321.298                                    70.016
321.299                                    70.016
321.302                                    70.016
321.303                                    70.016
321.304(1)                                 70.016
321.304(2)                                 70.016
321.304(3)                                 70.016
321.305                                    70.016
321.306                                    70.016
321.307                                    70.016
321.308                                    70.016
321.309(1)                                 70.016
321.309(2)                                 70.016
321.310                                    70.016
321.311                                    70.016;
                                           70.045
321.312                                    70.016
321.313                                    70.016
321.314                                    70.016
321.315                                    70.016
321.316                                    70.016
321.317                                    70.016
321.318                                    70.016
321.319                                    70.016
321.320                                    70.016
321.321                                    70.016
321.322                                    70.016
321.323                                    70.016
321.323A                                   70.016
321.324                                    70.016
321.325                                    70.016
321.326                                    70.016;
                                           70.091
321.327                                    70.016;
                                           70.090
321.328                                    70.016
321.329                                    70.016
321.331                                    70.016
321.332                                    70.016
321.333                                    70.016
321.340                                    70.016
321.341                                    70.016
321.342                                    70.016
321.343(1)                                 70.016
321.343(2)(a)                              70.016
321.343(2)(b)                              70.016
321.343(2)(c)                              70.016
321.343(2)(d)                              70.016
321.343(2)(e)                              70.016
321.344                                    70.016
321.344B                                   70.016
321.350                                    Ch. 74, Schd. IV
321.353                                    70.016
321.354(1)                                 70.016
321.354(2)                                 70.016
321.358                                    70.016;
                                           71.35
321.360                                    70.016
                                           70.016;
321.361                                    71.20;
                                           71.21;
                                           71.22
321.362                                    70.016
321.363                                    70.016
321.364                                    70.016
321.365                                    70.016
321.366                                    70.016
321.367                                    70.016
321.368                                    70.016
321.369                                    70.016;
                                           131.30
321.370                                    70.016
321.372(1)                                 70.016
321.372(2)                                 70.016
321.372(3)                                 70.016
321.381                                    70.016
321.381A                                   70.016
321.382                                    70.016
321.383                                    70.016
321.384                                    70.016
321.385                                    70.016
321.386                                    70.016
321.387                                    70.016
321.388                                    70.016
321.389                                    70.016
321.390                                    70.016
321.392                                    70.016
321.393                                    70.016
321.394                                    70.016
321.395                                    70.016
321.397                                    70.016
321.398                                    70.016
321.402                                    70.016
321.403                                    70.016
321.404                                    70.016
321.404A                                   70.016
321.409                                    70.016
321.415                                    70.016
321.419                                    70.016
321.420                                    70.016
321.421                                    70.016
321.422                                    70.016
321.423(2)                                 70.016
321.423(6)                                 70.016
321.430                                    70.016
321.432                                    70.016
321.433                                    70.016
321.434                                    70.016
321.436                                    70.016
321.437                                    70.016
321.438(1)                                 70.016
321.438(2)                                 70.016
321.438(3)                                 70.016
321.439                                    70.016
321.440                                    70.016
321.441                                    70.016
321.442                                    70.016
321.444                                    70.016
321.445                                    70.016
321.446                                    70.016
321.449                                    70.016
321.450                                    70.016
321.454                                    70.016
321.455                                    70.016
321.456                                    70.016
321.457                                    70.016
321.458                                    70.016
321.460                                    70.016
321.461                                    70.016
321.462                                    70.016
321.466                                    70.016
321G.3                                     70.016
321G.5                                     70.016
321G.9                                     70.016
321G.11                                    70.016
321G.12                                    70.016
321G.13(1a)                                70.016
321G.13(1b)                                70.016
321G.13(1d)                                70.016
321G.13(1e)                                70.016
321G.13(1f)                                70.016
321G.13(1g)                                70.016
321G.13(1h)                                70.016
321G.13(2)                                 70.016
321G.13(3)                                 70.016
321G.20                                    70.016
321G.21                                    70.016
321G.24(1)                                 70.016
321L.2A(2)                                 70.016
321L.2A(3)                                 70.016
321L.3                                     70.016
321L.4 Sub. 2                              71.06
321L.4(2)                                  70.016
321L.7                                     70.016
Ch. 329                                    159.07
351.37                                     91.06
351.39                                     91.06
351.41                                     91.04
352.2(14)                                  157.005
354.1                                      157.002
354.2(2)                                   157.005
354.2(3)                                   157.005
354.2(5)                                   157.005
354.2(6)                                   157.005
354.2(7)                                   157.005
354.2(8)                                   157.005
354.2(9)                                   157.005
354.2(10)                                  157.005
354.2(11)                                  157.005
354.2(12)                                  157.005
354.2(13)                                  157.005
354.2(15)                                  157.005
354.2(16)                                  157.005
354.2(17)                                  157.005
354.2(18)                                  157.005
354.2(19)                                  157.005
354.2(20)                                  157.005
354.6                                      157.055
354.6(2)                                   157.063
                                           157.058;
354.8                                      157.062;
                                           157.064;
                                           157.077
                                           157.003;
354.9                                      157.004;
                                           157.077
354.11                                     157.063
354.11(1)                                  157.063
354.11(1)(c)                               157.063
354.11(1)(d)                               157.063
354.11(1)(f)                               157.063
354.11(2)                                  157.063
354.12                                     157.063
355.1(2)                                   157.005
355.1(3)                                   157.005
355.1(9)                                   157.005
355.1(10)                                  157.005
355.1(11)                                  157.005
355.1(12)                                  157.005
355.8                                      157.062
362.3                                      11.02;
                                           159.05
362.3(2)                                   11.01
                                           90.001;
                                           90.065;
                                           110.01;
364.1                                      130.01;
                                           131.30;
                                           157.002;
                                           157.022
                                           131.30;
364.12                                     151.42;
                                           151.46
364.12(2)                                  131.30;
                                           131.31
364.12(2)(a)                               131.15
364.12(2c)                                 151.43
364.12(2b)                                 151.42
364.12(2)(b and e)                         151.01
364.12(e)                                  151.46
364.12(2e)                                 151.42
364.12(3)(b)                               90.003
364.12(3)(c)                               90.003
364.12(3)(d)                               90.003
364.12(3)(e)                               90.003
                                           52.03;
364.12(3)(f)                               52.04;
                                           90.003
364.12(3)(g)                               90.003
                                           51.11;
                                           90.004;
                                           90.005;
                                           90.006;
364.12(3)(h)                               90.008;
                                           90.009;
                                           90.010;
                                           90.074;
                                           90.075
364.12A                                    90.012
364.13                                     90.011
364.14                                     151.44
364.22                                     10.99
372.1                                      Charter §
                                           2.07
                                           Charter §§
372.4                                      2.03;
                                           2.05;
                                           2.06
                                           31.02; 31.06;
                                           31.40;
                                           33.02;
372.13(4)                                  34.06;
                                           51.01;
                                           51.05;
                                           51.08;
                                           51.10
372.13(8)                                  30.01;
                                           30.02
372.14(1)                                  30.35
372.14(3)                                  30.35
372.14(4)                                  31.02
372.15                                     32.21
376.2                                      Charter §
                                           2.04
380.5                                      30.35
380.6(2)                                   30.35
380.7                                      11.02
384.16                                     34.01
384.16(2)                                  34.01
384.18                                     34.02
                                           34.03;
384.20                                     34.07;
                                           34.08
384.22                                     34.04
384.38                                     151.54
                                           50.32;
384.38(3)                                  51.15;
                                           51.31
384.50                                     151.55
384.51                                     151.56
384.60                                     151.57
384.84(1)                                  50.16
384.84(3)                                  50.17
384.84(3)(a)(3)                            50.17
427A.1, subsection (1), paragraph e (1983) 34.20
435.1(3)                                   154.01
435.1(4)                                   154.01
435.1(7)                                   154.01
435.26                                     154.05
441.29                                     157.005
453A.2(1)                                  70.016
453A.2(2)                                  70.016
473.8                                      70.016
555A.3                                     114.06
635.1                                      154.01
                                           90.001;
657.1                                      90.072;
                                           91.05
657A.1                                     90.012
657A.10a                                   90.012
657.2                                      90.001;
                                           90.002
657.2(1)                                   90.001
657.2(2)                                   90.001
657.2(3)                                   90.001
657.2(4)                                   90.001
657.2(5)                                   90.001
657.2(6)                                   90.001
657.2(7)                                   90.001
657.2(8)                                   90.001
657.2(9)                                   90.001
657.2(10)                                  90.001
657.2(11)                                  90.001
657.2(12)                                  90.001
709.9                                      131.16
                                           52.07;
716.1                                      90.001; 91.002;
                                           131.31;
                                           151.01
716.5                                      151.01
717B.4                                     91.06
718.2                                      131.30
723.4(1)                                   131.15
723.4(2)                                   131.15
723.4(3)                                   131.15
723.4(4)                                   131.15
Chapter 723A                               90.002
724.4                                      131.30
727.2                                      131.30
727.3                                      131.30
727.8                                      131.31
903.1(1)(a)                                10.99
Chapter 100                                131.47
Chapter 321                                72.47
Chapter 355                                157.062
Chapter 364                                155.001
Chapter 384, division IV                   151.54
Chapter 414                                32.06
Chapter 414.6 (2013)                       32.01
Chapter 542B                               157.005
Chapter 657                                90.001
Chapter 657A                               90.012
Chapters 690—747                         10.99;
                                           72.99
Chapter 727                                131.45
Chapter 805                                10.99
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code  2023 Code
1-1-1       10.01
1-1-2       10.02
1-1-3       10.03
1-1-4       10.04
1-1-6       10.05
1-1-7       10.06
1-1-8       10.07
1-2-1       31.01
1-3-1       10.99
1-3-2       10.99
1-3-3       10.99
1-4-1       30.15
1-4-2       30.16
1-4-3       30.17
1-4-4       30.18
1-4-5       30.19
1-4-6       30.20
2-2-1       31.20
2-2-2       31.21
2-2-3       31.22
2-2-4       31.23
2-2-5       31.24
2-2-6       31.25
2-2-7       31.26
2-2-8       31.27
2-2A-1      31.41
2-2A-2      31.41
2-2A-3      31.41
2-2A-4      31.41
2-2A-5      31.41
2-3-1       31.02
2-3-2       31.03
2-3-4       31.04
2-3-5       30.35
2-3-7       31.40
2-3-8       33.02
2-4-1       30.01
2-4-2       30.02
2-4-3       31.05
2-5-1       34.01
2-5-2       34.02
2-5-4       34.03
2-5-5       34.04
2-5-6       34.05
2-5-8       34.06
2-5-9       34.07
2-5-10      34.08
2-5-11      34.09
2-6-1       11.01
2-6-2       11.02
2-6-3       11.03
3-1-1       131.01
3-1-2       131.15
3-1-3       131.16
3-1-4       151.01
3-1-5       131.30
3-1-6       131.31
3-2-1       90.001
3-2-2       90.002
3-2-3       90.003
3-2-4       90.004
3-2-5       90.005
3-2-6       90.006
3-2-7       90.007
3-2-8       90.008
3-2-9       90.009
3-2-10      90.010
3-2-11      90.011
3-2-12      90.012
3-3-1       70.001
3-3-2       70.002
3-3-3       70.003
3-3-4       70.015
3-3-5       70.016;
            131.32
3-3-6       70.030
3-3-7       70.031
3-3-10      70.045
3-3-11      70.046
3-3-12      70.047
3-3-13      70.048
3-3-14      70.060
3-3-15      Ch. 74, Schd. II
3-3-16      70.061;
            Ch. 74, Schd. III
3-3-17      70.075
3-3-18      Ch. 74, Schd. IV
3-3-19      70.076
3-3-20      70.077
3-3-21      70.078
3-3-23      70.090
3-3-24      70.091
3-3-25      71.20
3-3-26      71.21
3-3-27      71.22
3-3-28      71.23
3-3-29      71.35
3-3-30      71.36;
            Ch. 75, Schd. I
3-3-31      71.37
3-3-32      71.01
3-3-33      71.02
3-3-34      71.03
3-3-35      71.04
3-3-37      70.105
3-3-38      71.08
3-3-39      70.120
3-3-40      70.121
3-3-41      70.122
3-3-42      Ch. 74, Schd. V
3-3-43      Ch. 74, Schd. VI
3-3-44      72.01
3-3-45      72.02
3-3-46      72.03
3-3-47      72.04
3-3-48      72.05
3-3-49      72.06
3-3-50      72.07
3-3-51      72.08
3-3-52      72.09
3-3-53      72.10
3-3-54      72.25
3-3-55      72.26
3-3-56      72.27
3-3-57      72.28
3-3-58      72.29
3-3-59      72.30
3-3-60      72.31
3-3-64      71.05
3-3-65      71.06
3-3-66      71.07
3-3-68      70.004
3-5-1       33.01
3-5-2       33.15
3-6-1       130.01
3-6-2       130.02
3-6-3       130.03
3-6-4       130.04
3-6-5       130.05
3-8-1       112.01
3-8-2       112.02
3-8-3       112.03
3-8-4       112.04
3-8-5       112.05
3-8-6       112.06
3-8-7       112.07
3-8-8       112.08
3-9-1       110.01
3-9-2       110.02
3-9-3       110.03
3-9-4       110.04
3-10-1      90.065
3-10-2      90.066
3-10-3      90.067
3-10-4      90.068
3-10-5      90.069
3-10-6      90.070
3-10-7      90.071
3-10-8      90.072
3-10-9      90.073
3-10-10     90.074
3-10-11     90.075
3-10-12     90.076
3-10-13     90.077
3-11-1      113.01
3-11-2      113.02
3-11-3      113.03
3-11-4      113.04
3-11-5      113.05
3-11-6      113.06
3-11-7      113.07
3-11-8      113.08
3-11-9      113.09
3-11-10     113.10
3-11-11     113.11
3-11-12     113.12
3-11-13     113.13
3-11-14     113.14
3-12-1      73.01
3-12-2      73.02
3-12-3      73.03
3-12-4      73.04
3-12-5      73.05
3-12-6      73.06
3-12-7      73.07;
            73.99
3-13-1      131.45
3-13-2      131.99
3-13-3      131.46
3-13-4      131.47
3-13-5      131.48
3-13-6      131.49
3-13-7      131.50
3-13-8      131.51
3-14-1      72.45
3-14-2      72.46
3-14-3      72.47
3-14-4      72.48
3-14-5      72.49
3-14-6      72.50
3-14-7      72.51
3-14-8      72.52
3-14-9      72.53
3-14-10     72.54
3-14-11     72.55
3-14-12     72.99
4-1-1       91.01
4-1-4       91.04
4-1-5       91.05
4-1-6       91.06
4-1-7       91.07
4-1-8       91.08
4-1-9       91.09
4-2-1       92.01
4-2-2       92.02
4-3-1       32.20
4-3-2       32.21
4-3-3       32.22
4-3-4       32.23
4-3-5       32.24
4-3-6       32.25
4-3-7       32.26
6-1-1       154.01
6-1-2       154.02
6-1-3       154.03
6-1-4       154.04
6-1-6       154.05
6-1-7       154.06
6-2-1       52.01
6-2-2       52.02
6-2-3       52.03
6-2-4       52.04
6-2-5       52.05
6-2-6       52.06
6-2-7       52.07
6-2-8       52.08
6-2-9       52.99
6-3-1       51.01
6-3-2       51.02
6-3-3       51.03
6-3-4       51.04
6-3-5       51.05
6-3-6       51.06
6-3-7       51.07
6-3-8       51.08
6-3-9       51.09
6-3-10      51.10
6-3-11      51.11
6-3-12      51.12
6-3-13      51.13
6-3-14      51.14
6-3-15      51.15
6-3-16      51.30
6-3-17      51.31
6-3-18      51.32
6-3-19      51.33
6-4-1       53.01
6-4-2       53.02
6-4-3       53.03
6-4-4       53.04
6-4-5       53.05
6-4-6       53.06
6-4-7       53.07
6-4-8       53.08
6-4-9       53.10
6-4-10      53.11
6-4-11      53.12
6-4-12      53.13
6-4-13      53.14
6-4-14      53.15
6-5-1       50.01
6-5-2       50.02
6-5-3       50.15
6-5-4       50.16
6-5-5       50.17
6-5-6       50.18
6-5-8       50.30
6-5-9       50.31
6-5-10      50.32
6-6-1       151.15
6-6-2       151.16
6-6-3       151.17
6-6-4       151.18
6-6-5       151.19
6-7-1       157.001
6-7-2       157.002
6-7-3       157.003
6-7-4       157.004
6-7-5       157.005
6-7-6       157.020
6-7-7       157.021
6-7-8       157.022
6-7-9       157.023
6-7-10      157.024
6-7-11      157.035
6-7-12      157.050
6-7-13      157.051
6-7-14      157.052
6-7-15      157.053
6-7-16      157.054
6-7-17      157.055
6-7-18      157.056
6-7-19      157.057
6-7-20      157.058
6-7-21      157.059
6-7-22      157.060
6-7-23      157.061
6-7-24      157.062
6-7-25      157.063
6-7-26      157.064
6-7-27      157.075
6-7-28      157.076
6-7-29      157.077
6-8-1       151.40
6-8-2       151.41
6-8-3       151.42
6-8-4       151.43
6-8-5       151.44
6-8-6       151.45
6-8-7       151.46
6-8-8       151.47
6-8-9       151.48
6-8-10      151.49
6-8-11      151.50
6-8-12      151.51
6-8-13      151.52
6-8-14      151.53
6-8-15      151.54
6-8-16      151.55
6-8-17      151.56
6-8-18      151.57
6-9-1       34.20
6-9-2       34.21
6-9-3       34.22
6-9-5       34.23
6-9-6       34.24
6-9-7       34.25
6-9-9       34.26
6-13-1      150.001
6-13-2      150.001
6-13-3      150.002
6-13-4      150.003
6-13-5      150.004
6-13-6      150.005
6-13-7      150.020
6-13-8      150.021
6-13-9      150.022
6-13-10     150.110
6-13-11     150.111
6-13-12     150.112
6-13-13     150.113
6-13-14     150.114
6-13-15     150.115
6-13-16     150.116
6-13-17     150.035
6-13-18     150.036
6-13-19     150.037
6-13-20     150.038
6-13-21     150.039
6-13-22     150.040
6-13-23     150.041
6-13-24     150.042
6-13-25     150.043
6-13-26     150.044
6-13-27     150.045
6-13-28     150.046
6-13-29     150.047
6-13-30     150.048
6-13-31     150.049
6-13-32     150.050
6-13-33     150.065
6-13-34     150.066
6-13-35     150.067
6-13-36     150.068
6-13-37     150.069
6-13-38     150.070
6-13-39     150.071
6-13-40     150.085
6-13-41     150.086
6-13-42     150.087
6-13-43     150.088
6-13-44     150.089
6-13-45     150.090
6-13-46     150.091
6-13-47     150.092
6-13-48     150.093
6-13-49     150.094
6-14-1      111.01
6-14-2      111.02
6-14-3      111.03
6-14-4      111.04
6-14-5      111.05
6-14-6      111.06
6-14-7      111.07
6-15-1      155.001
6-15-2      155.002
6-15-3      155.003
6-15-4      155.015
6-15-5      155.016
6-15-6      155.017
6-15-8      155.018
6-15-9      155.019
6-15-11     155.035
6-15-12     155.036
6-15-13     155.037
6-15-14     155.038
6-15-15     155.039
6-15-16     155.040
6-15-17     155.041
6-15-18     155.042
6-15-19     155.043
6-15-20     155.044
6-15-21     155.045
6-15-22     155.046
6-15-23     155.047
6-15-24     155.048
6-15-25     155.060
6-15-26     155.061
6-15-27     155.062
6-15-28     155.075
6-15-29     155.076
6-15-30     155.999
6-15-31     155.021
6-15-32     155.020
6-17-1      32.01
6-17-2      32.02
6-17-3      32.03
6-17-4      32.04
6-17-5      32.05
6-17-6      32.06
6-18-1      153.01
6-18-2      153.02
6-18-3      153.03
6-18-4      153.04
6-18-5      153.05
6-18-6      153.06
6-18-7      153.07
6-19-1      90.045
6-19-2      90.046
6-19-3      90.047
6-19-4      90.048
6-19-5      90.049
6-19-6      90.050
6-20-1      154.20
6-20-2      154.21
6-21-1      156.001
6-21-2      156.002
6-21-3      156.003
6-21-4      156.004
6-21-5      156.005
6-21-6      156.006
6-21-7      156.007
6-21-8      156.020
6-21-9      156.021
6-21-10     156.022
6-21-11     156.023
6-21-12     156.024
6-21-13     156.025
6-21-14     156.026
6-21-15     156.027
6-21-16     156.028
6-21-17     156.029
6-21-18     156.040
6-21-19     156.041
6-21-20     156.042
6-21-21     156.055
6-21-22     156.056
6-21-23     156.070
6-21-24     156.071
6-21-25     156.072
6-21-26     156.073
6-21-27     156.074
6-21-28     156.075
6-21-29     156.076
6-21-30     156.077
6-21-31     156.078
6-22-5   159.05
6-22-5-4    159.05
6-22-5.3    159.06
7-7-1       115.01
7-7-2       115.02
7-7-3       115.03
7-7-4       115.04
7-7-5       115.05
7-7-6       115.06
7-7-7       115.07
9-7-321-322 70.049
            
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         158.01
72-02    4-3-1972    TSO Table II
89-01    8-14-1989   TSO Table III
                     50.16;
                     52.01—
89-04    9-12-1989   52.04;
                     52.06—
                     52.08;
                     52.99
90-02    8-7-1990    92.02
99-01    10-12-1999  33.01
01-04    10-10-2001  TSO Table III
01-05    10-24-2001  31.06
02-03    2-12-2002   51.07
02-01    2-19-2002   53.13
02-02    2-19-2002   52.05
02-03    2-19-2002   51.13
02-05    6-11-2002   50.17;
                     51.13
02-06    8-29-2002   51.30—
                     51.33
02-07    10-22-2002  71.04;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. VI
03-03    7-8-2003    51.14
                     10.99;
                     30.01;
                     30.35;
                     34.01;
                     34.04;
                     50.16;
                     50.18;
                     51.14;
                     51.15;
                     51.30—
                     51.33;
                     52.02;
                     52.05;
                     52.07;
                     52.99;
                     53.01;
                     53.13;
                     70.004;
                     70.030;
                     70.031;
                     71.06;
                     71.07;
                     71.37;
03-04    9-9-2003    72.31;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. V;
                     Ch. 74, Schd. VI;
                     90.001;
                     90.066—
                     90.68;
                     90.071;
                     91.01;
                     91.04—
                     91.09;
                     113.10;
                     113.14;
                     110.02;
                     114.09—
                     114.11;
                     131.16;
                     131.30;
                     131.31;
                     151.01;
                     151.48;
                     154.01;
                     154.05;
                     154.06;
                     157.077
05-02    6-14-2005   151.01
05-04    7-12-2005   70.002
                     71.06;
06-02    5-23-2006   71.36;
                     Ch. 75, Schd. I
2007-01  2-13-2007   32.26
2007-02  2-13-2007   TSO Table III
2007-03  5-8-2007    50.30
2007-05  8-28-2007   TSO Table III
2007-09  12-11-2007  TSO Table I
2008-01  1-22-2008   91.07
2008-02  5-27-2008   111.07
2008-03  8-26-2008   157.021
2010-04  9-14-2010   150.094
2010-05  10-12-2010  53.03
2010-06  11-9-2010   150.035
65-10    12-20-2010  70.049
2012-01  2-28-2012   11.02
2012-02  3-13-2012   91.09
2012-04  6-26-2012   50.30
2012-05  6-26-2012   30.01
2012-06  7-10-2012   155.020
2013-02  10-22-2013  152.12
                     150.020;
2013-04  12-10-2013  150.035;
                     150.065;
                     150.085
2013-03  1-28-2014   32.06
2014-02  7-22-2014   153.07
2014-03  7-22-2014   90.003
2014-04  9-9-2014    73.06;
                     73.99
2015-01  4-14-2015   71.35
2015-02  5-26-2015   50.30
2015-03  7-28-2015   50.30
2016-01  3-8-2016    TSO Table III
2016-02  4-12-2016   32.21
2016-03  4-12-2016   31.22
2016-04  5-24-2016   50.30;
                     50.32
2016-05  6-15-2016   150.020
2017-02  4-25-2017   TSO Table I
                     50.16;
2017-03  5-23-2017   50.17;
                     50.30-
                     50.32
2017-06  11-14-2017  155.999
2019-03  5-14-2019   TSO Table III
2018-01  5-22-2018   50.30-
                     50.32
2019-05  6-25-2019   50.30;
                     50.32
2019-07  9-24-2019   50.32
2020-01  1-28-2020   50.17
2020-02  2-11-2020   31.41
2020-03  8-11-2020   50.32
2020-05  10-13-2020  TSO Table III
2020-06  11-24-2020  112.08
2021-01  2-23-2021   32.02
2021-02  4-27-2021   TSO Table III
2021-03  4-27-2021   155.020
2021-04  5-25-2021   156.078
2021-05  8-10-2021   50.18
                     72.45-
2021-06  9-14-2021   72.55;
                     72.99
2022-04  - -2022     90.025-
                     90.32
2022-01  2-8-2022    158.01
2022-02  3-22-2022   TSO Table III
2022-05  6-14-2022   114.01—
                     114.11
2022-07  7-12-2022   90.001
                     72.47;
2022-10  7-12-2022   72.48;
                     72.51;
                     72.52
2022-08  7-26-2022   151.47
2022-09  7-26-2022   157.022
2022-11  8-9-2022    91.10
2022-12  8-9-2022    Ch. 75, Schd. I
2022-13  8-23-2022   90.001
2022-14  8-23-2022   157.035
2022-16  9-27-2022   151.48
                     150.020,
                     150.035,
                     150.065,
                     150.067 -
2022-17  9-27-2022   150.069,
                     150.085,
                     150.088 -
                     150.090,
                     150.092 -
                     150.094
2023-02  3-28-2023   Ch. 74, Schd. I
2023-03  4-11-2023   50.31
2023-10  6-27-2023   150.065;
                     150.085
2023-11  6-27-2023   90.002
2023-13  7-25-2023   152.01—
                     152.14
2023-16  9-12-2023   112.02
                     53.01;
2023-17  9-12-2023   53.09;
                     53.99
2023-18  10-10-2023  50.30;
                     50.32
2024-01  1-23-2024   50.17,
                     51.14
2024-02  3-12-2024   Adopting Ordinance
2024-03  4-9-2024    91.06
2024-04  4-9-2024    70.017,
                     70.079
2024-05  4-9-2024    71.06,
                     71.36
                     50.31,
2024-06  5-14-2024   53.01,
                     53.05,
                     53.08
2024-07  5-14-2024   110.02,
                     110.03
                     114.03—
2024-09  10-22-2024  114.05,
                     114.09
2024-10  10-22-2024  Ch. 74, Schd. I
                     50.31,
2025-02  1-28-2025   53.01,
                     53.05,
                     53.09
2025-03  5-27-2025   158.01
2025-07  7-8-2025    53.07
2025-08  7-22-2025   71.04,
                     71.09
2025-10  7-22-2025   159.01—
                     159.12
2025-09  8-12-2025   152.11
2025-10  7-22-2025   159.01
2025-11  8-12-2025   72.56
2025-12  8-26-2025   TSO Table I
2025-13  8-26-2025   TSO Table I
2025-14  8-26-2025   TSO Table I
2025-15  10-28-2025  50.30,
                     50.32
2025-16  10-28-2025  158.01
2025-17  11-11-2025  71.08
2025-18  11-11-2025  90.001
                    
 
