CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF QUIMBY, IOWA
Adopted February 12, 2023, by Ordinance No. 2024-1
 
Current through Ord. 2025-3, passed 12-8-25
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
 
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
Sep-24    Ch. 52                  2024-2   5-13-24  Grass and Weeds
          5.02                    2024-3   9-9-24   Bond Requirements
          7.05(4)                 2024-4   9-9-24   Operating Budget
                                                    Preparation
          18.03                   2024-5   9-9-24   Publication of Minutes
          5.06                    2024-6   9-9-24   Electronic Meetings
Dec-24    99.01                   2024-7   12-9-24  Rates of Service
Aug-25    55.19                   2025-1   8-11-25  Dog and Cat License
                                                    Required
Dec-25    150.02(2)               2025-2   10-13-25 Building Numbering
          52.06                   2025-3   12-8-25  Minimum Charge and
                                                    Administrative Fee
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title                  1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.02 Definitions            1.10 Altering Code
1.03 City Powers            1.11 Severability
1.04 Indemnity              1.12 Warrants
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.13 General Standards for Action
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.14 Standard Penalty
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.15 Right of Entry
1.08 Amendments
 
1.01   TITLE.
   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Quimby, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the
Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases
used herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise
in another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would
be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the city of Quimby, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Quimby, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Quimby, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of Quimby, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means Cherokee County, Iowa.
   8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
   9.   “May” confers a power.
   10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
   11.   “Must” states a requirement.
   12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Quimby, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
   The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if
not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the
rights, privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents, and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and
the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
   The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
   When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to
have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person
by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
   Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
   All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
   Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the
Council or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does
not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00. The court may order imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine. † 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 3.
1.15   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance
violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the
City, any authorized official of the City may, upon presentation of proper
credentials, enter such building or premises at any reasonable time to inspect
the same and to perform any duty imposed upon such official by ordinance.
Except in emergency situations, such official shall first give the owner and/or
occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, a 24-hour written
notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect. In the event the
owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official is empowered to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Quimby, Iowa. † 2
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 47 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
2 approved by the Council on September 8, 1975. Terms of Council members were
  extended to four years pursuant to an election held on November 4, 1975.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
   The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
   The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies
of the charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
3.01 Municipal Infraction    3.04 Civil Citations
3.02 Environmental Violation 3.05 Alternative Relief
3.03 Penalties               3.06 Alternative Penalties
 
3.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein
adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty
required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically
provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious
misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code
of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided
herein. † 3
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
3 Ordinances, see Section
  1.14.
3.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
   A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of
Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the
Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable
until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding
the violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
3.03   PENALTIES.
   A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
      Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
repeat offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
3.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
   Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
   If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to
the condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local
housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or
safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District
Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County
Treasurer.
3.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
3.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
   This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal
citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit
the authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances
by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings               
 
 
5.01   OATHS.
   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Quimby
as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
      A.   Mayor
      B.   City Clerk
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 5.02 – Ord. 2024-3 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open
to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
   Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of
each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time,
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 5.06 – Ord. 2024-6 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect,
in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services
to be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was elected
if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
   A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled
in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
   Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 10 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
   The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
   Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy.
The petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5, and 45.6)
6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
   The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of
validity thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the
effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of
such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by
the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
   The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on
the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose         7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control    7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control    7.08 Financial Reports
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
   To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
   There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
   The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2(2)(B)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B.
   The proposed property tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March
20 of the budget year immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax
is being proposed. At the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written
testimony from any resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing
shall be separate from any other meeting of the Council, including any other
meeting or public hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of
the City that is not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the
information in the statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing.
After all testimony has been received and considered, the governing body may
decrease, but not increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in
the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than 10
nor more than 20 days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper published at least
once weekly and having general circulation in the City. However, if the City
has a population of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three
public places in the City.
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Subsection 2, Paragraph B.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the county
auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord. 2024-4 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until the requirements, of
Subsection 4 of this section, are completed, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
   A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
   The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk following
Council approval, except as provided by Subsection 5 hereof.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not
paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
 
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           NAME OF AREA
82            November 11, 2000 Quimby Urban Renewal Area
                               
                               
                               
                               
 
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
give direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments,
and have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   1.   Mayor Pro Tem
   2.   Library Board of Trustees
15.04   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Mayor is $45.00 per meeting attended.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
   The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the
Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from
employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
   The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for
overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
 
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38[1])
   3.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   4.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
   5.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   6.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
   The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
   “All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does
not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the
Council are as set by resolution of the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
   The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their
powers, duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Clerk
   2.   City Attorney
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   4.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
17.06   COMPENSATION.
   The salary of each Council member is $35.00 for each meeting attended, but
in no event shall any Council member ever be paid more than $1000.00 in any one
year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification                 
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   At its first meeting in January each year, the Council shall appoint by
majority vote a City Clerk to serve for a term of one year. The Clerk shall
receive such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
   The Clerk (or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk)
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances,
and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
   Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the
Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the
total expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of
general circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include
a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the
gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 18.03 – Ord. 2024-5 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
   The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings, and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City, except that ordinances and amendments
may be published by posting in the following places:
   City Hall
   Post Office
   Quimby Public Library
   The Clerk is hereby directed to post promptly such ordinances and
amendments, and to leave them so posted for not less than 10 days after the
first date of posting. Unauthorized removal of the posted ordinance or
amendment prior to the completion of the 10 days shall not affect the validity
of said ordinance or amendment. The Clerk shall note the first date of such
posting on the official copy of the ordinance and in the official ordinance
book immediately following the ordinance.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
   The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
   The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or
limits to the recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
   The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to
offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they
shall assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
   The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate.
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
 
19.01   APPOINTMENT.
   The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the
position of Treasurer.
19.02   COMPENSATION.
   The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of
the Treasurer.
19.03   DUTIES OF TREASURER.
   The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
   2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
   4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
   5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by
the Treasurer from special assessments.
   6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
   7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of
each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
   8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
   9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City            20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.08 Prepare Documents
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve for a
term of one year and shall establish by resolution the City Attorney’s
compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
   The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any
court, tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or
defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving
an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to
or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
   The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
   The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees       22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board        22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties                22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
 
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   The public library for the City is known as the Quimby Public Library. It is
referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of five resident members and two nonresident members. All resident
members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The
nonresident members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
County Board of Supervisors.
22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
   All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents
of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a bona fide citizen
and resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of 18
years.
22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
   The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if
such member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident
Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or
into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such
member is absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in
the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies on
the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except
that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the
Library, its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, and authorize the Librarian
to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the Librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of
the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
   The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of
the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08   EXPENDITURES.
   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of
the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of
fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
Library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the Council.
22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to
the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11   THEFT.
   No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12   NOTICE POSTED.
   There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:
   1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months
or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
 
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of five members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
   If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise,
a successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 30
CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT
30.01   CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   The Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other qualified
lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City, and the
Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the powers and duties as
provided in said contract and as required by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.09 Constitution
35.02 Organization              35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.03 Approved by Council       35.11 Liability Insurance
35.04 Training                  35.12 Calls Outside City
35.05 Compensation              35.13 Mutual Aid
35.06 Election of Officers      35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.07 Duties of Fire Chief      35.15 First Responder Service
35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
   The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03   APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
   No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department
until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the
Council members.
35.04   TRAINING.
   All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05   COMPENSATION.
   Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06   ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its
constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of Fire Chief shall be
subject to the approval of the Council. In case of absence of the Fire Chief,
the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all the
powers of Fire Chief.
35.07   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to
the Fire Department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10
days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire
incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514)
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09   CONSTITUTION.
   The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated
to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
35.10   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61, and Sec. 410.18)
35.11   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or
members of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out
of and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside
the corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
35.12   CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.
   The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.13   MUTUAL AID.
   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter
into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments.
Copies of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.14   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
   Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.15   FIRST RESPONDER SERVICE.
   The department is authorized to provide first responder service and the
accidental injury and liability insurance provided for herein shall include
such operation.
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
 
36.01   PURPOSE.
   In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates
an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied
by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
   The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of,
or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents
of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused
by that person.
36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources
and the County Sheriff’s Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition
as soon as possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the
hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The County
Sheriff’s Department shall immediately notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
County Sheriff’s Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
   If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or
an authorized representative may:
   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under
this section.
36.07   LIABILITY.
   The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries,
or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault    40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.02 Harassment 40.04 Failure to Disperse
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
      An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
   No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
   This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
                                                         41.08 Abandoned or
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  Unattended
                                                         Refrigerators
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
Safety Entities                                          41.10 Barbed Wire and
                                                         Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Drug
Device                                                   Paraphernalia
                                                        41.16 Failure to
                                                         Assist
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
   No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or
she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer
or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to
be a peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A
of the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or
volunteer, or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303
[4] of the Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope
of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
   It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind
or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns,
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building,
including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway,
doorway, or window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
            b.   Chasers;
            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
            d.   Firecrackers;
            e.   Mine and shell devices;
            f.   Missile-type rockets;
            g.   Roman candles;
            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
            i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph which are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Cone fountains;
            b.   Cylindrical fountains;
            c.   Flitter sparklers;
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance
with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
            e.   Ground spinners;
            f.   Illuminating torches;
            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
            h.   Wheels;
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
      B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
      C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the
APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator, but no such permit shall be required for the display of display
fireworks at the Iowa State Fairgrounds by the Iowa State Fair Board, at
incorporated county fairs, or at district fairs receiving State aid.. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
      A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
      B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
      C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
   3.   Consumer Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode
consumer fireworks within the City.
   3.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties.
41.15   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 124.414)
   1.   As used in this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment,
products or materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination
with a controlled substance, except those items used in combination with the
lawful use of a controlled substance, to knowingly or intentionally and
primarily do any of the following:
      A.   Manufacture a controlled substance.
      B.   Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance.
      C.   Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled
substance.
      D.   Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
   Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if
manufactured, delivered, sold, or possessed for a lawful purpose.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally
manufacture, deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia.
41.16   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
   A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry                 
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down,
or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   
Chapter 22 – Library
      A.   Section
22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section
22.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   
Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
      A.   Section
105.07 – Littering Prohibited
   3.   
Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section
136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section
136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section
136.16 – Defacing
      D.   Section
136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section
136.18 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section
136.19 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means 21
years of age or more.  
   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from
any retail alcohol licensee or wine or beer permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Section
62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
   A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01   CURFEW.
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms are
defined:
      A.   “Allow” means to either permit or neglect to prevent with actual or
constructive knowledge. Knowledge will be presumed if the circumstances be such
that a reasonable prudent parent or person should have known the minor was
violating this chapter.
      B.   “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action, to include but not limited to,
fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      C.   “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
store, bar, restaurant, laundromat, car wash, bank facility, and place of
amusement or entertainment inclusive of the grounds thereof.
      D.   “Minor” means an unemancipated person who has not yet reached his or
her 18th birthday. A minor does not include a person under 18 who is married or
who is a member of the armed forces of the United States.
      E.   “Parent” means a person having legal custody of a minor as a natural
or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco
parentis, or by virtue of court order.
      F.   “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, roadways, parks, public recreation, entertainment or civic facility,
schools, and the common areas of hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      G.   “Remain” means to stay behind, to tarry, or to stay unnecessarily
at, upon or in any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway, fail
to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner,
operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      H.   “Street” means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for vehicular or pedestrian travel,
including but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, irrespective of what
the right of way is called.
   2.   Loitering of Minors Prohibited. No minor under 18 shall loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, or play in or upon any public streets, highways, alleys, vacant
lots, in any public parks, public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment located within the incorporated limits of the City between the
hours of:
      A.   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday,
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
      B.   12:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day.
   3.   Exceptions. In the following situations, a minor shall not be
considered in violation of this curfew chapter. The exceptions are as follows:
      A.   When the minor is accompanied by their parent, guardian, or other
adult person then having the care and custody of the minor;
      B.   When the minor is accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of
such minor to take said parent’s place in accompanying said minor for a
designated period of time and purpose. Such permission shall be written and
presented to a peace officer upon request;
      C.   When the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business as
directed in writing, dated and signed by their parent, guardian, or other adult
person then having the care and custody of the minor and presented to a peace
officer upon request;
      D.   When the minor exercises First Amendment rights, such as freedom of
speech, free exercise of religion, right of assembly, or right to petition the
government, and use of City streets is a necessary incident thereto;
      E.   When the minor is traveling to or from a school-sponsored or church-
sponsored, or government-sponsored event, said minors while at the event or
while traveling along the most direct route between the event and the minor’s
place of residence shall not be deemed to violate Subsection 2(A) until after
12:00 a.m.;
      F.   When the minor is returning home by a direct route from and within
30 minutes from the termination of a school or church activity, or government-
sponsored activity or event;
      G.   When the minor traveling to report for work or returning home from
work along the most direct route between the minor’s place of residence and the
minor’s place of employment;
      H.   When the minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City
beginning, ending, or passing through the City when such travel is by direct
route.
   4.   Responsibility of Parents. It is a violation of this chapter for any
parent, guardian, or other person having the care, custody, and control of a
minor under the age of 18 to knowingly or negligently permit or allow such
minor to violate the provisions of Subsection 2, except as otherwise provided
in Subsection 3.
   5.   Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is a violation of this
chapter for any person operating a place of business or amusement within the
corporate limits of the City to knowingly or negligently permit or allow any
minor to be in or upon any place of business or amusement operated by them
within the curfew hours set by Subsection 2, except as otherwise provided in
Subsection 3. This section, however, shall not apply to any minor who is
lawfully employed on the premises.
   6.   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
peace officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that no exception set forth in Subsection 3 is applicable. Upon
arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or
other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
   7.   Referral and Follow-Up. All contacts with juveniles under this section
shall be referred to the policy social worker for follow-up contact with the
minor’s parent or guardian.
   8.   Legal Control of Minors. This section shall not be construed to give
any minor the right to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the
public streets, roads, alleys, vacant lots, public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment until and except for the hours designated n this
chapter, and all minors shall at all times, be subject to legal control by
parents, guardian, or others having care, custody, and control of any minor.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
   It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age
to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                47.04 Littering
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.05 Parks Closed
47.03 Fires                  47.06 Camping
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park
facilities by the general public by establishing rules and regulations
governing the use of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive any car, cycle, or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.03   FIRES.
   No fire shall be built, except in a place designated for such purpose, and
such fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.
47.04   LITTERING.
   No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or
foreign substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that
purpose.
47.05   PARKS CLOSED.
   No person shall enter or remain within any park between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
47.06   CAMPING.
   No person shall camp in any portion of a park.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited    
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water.
   4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether
erected and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and
impair the view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway,
boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render
dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
   8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other
vegetation in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
   10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
   11.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within
1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-
off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or
enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
   The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
   2.   Weeds and Grass (See
Chapter 52)
   3.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
   4.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
   5.   Trees (See
Chapter 151)
   6.   Building Permits (See
Chapter 155)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance,
public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section 50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
   Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: † 4   
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
   4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to
abide by the notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not
been paid within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County
Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner
as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
4 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the
requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to
municipal infractions as set forth in
Chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance  
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
      A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
      D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
      E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of
its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
   Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on
any private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
   It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the health
and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private
property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property
upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
   1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
   2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated
within the City.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement
procedures as outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 52
WEEDS AND GRASS
 
52.01 Purpose                52.05 Publication of Notice
52.02 Exemptions             52.06 Failure to Comply
52.03 Definitions            52.07 Collection of Costs
52.04 Cutting Specifications 52.08 Failure to Abate
 
52.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to beautify and preserve the appearance of
the City by requiring property owners and occupants to maintain grass lawns at
a uniform height within the boundaries of their property and on abutting street
right-of-way in order to prevent unsightly, offensive, or nuisance conditions.
52.02   EXEMPTIONS.
   The Council reserves the right to declare any particular area exempt from
this chapter if it involves conservation or other natural grass, flower, or
wildlife area, such exemption to be approved by the Council by motion and filed
in writing with the Clerk.
52.03   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cut” or “mow” means to mechanically maintain the growth of grass,
weeds, or brush at a uniform height.
   2.   “Owner” means a person owning private property in the City and any
person occupying private property in the City.
   3.   “Parking” means that part of a street in the City not covered by a
sidewalk and lying between the lot line or property line and the curb line; or
on unpaved streets, that part of the street lying between the lot line or
property line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular
traffic.
52.04   CUTTING SPECIFICATIONS.
   1.   Every owner, of any lot, place, area, or tract of ground, including the
parking area, situated within the City shall not permit any grass, weeds,
vines, or brush, or other growth, exclusive of trees, bushes, flowers, or other
ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding eight (8) inches. Grass,
weeds, and brush that are allowed to grow in excess of the above-specified
limitations, are deemed to be violations of this chapter. Any property within
the City, whether vacated or non-vacated, is required to conform to these
specifications.
52.05   PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   Annual spring publication of the ordinance codified in this chapter in an
official newspaper shall serve as notice to property owners. The City will be
authorized to respond to violations without additional notice being given.
52.06   FAILURE TO COMPLY.  
   If the City or other designated person cuts or destroys grass or weeds on
any premises, the actual cost of cutting or destruction, with a minimum charge
of $200.00, and administrative fee of $50.00 shall be reported to the City
Clerk, who shall forthwith send a statement for such costs to the owner at the
address used for mailing of tax statements. If not paid within thirty (30)
days, such costs shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer
to be collected as regular taxes against the premises, or by any other means
available to the City.
(Section 52.06 – Ord. 2025-3 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
52.07   COLLECTION OF COSTS.  
   The City Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense incurred to the
property owner who has failed to abide by the publication notice. If the amount
shown by the statement has not been paid within thirty (30) days, the Clerk
shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be
collected with-and in the same manner as-general property taxes.
52.08   FAILURE TO ABATE.  
   Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse to
abate or remove the same is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
(Chapter 52 – Ord. 2024-2 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.13 At Large: Impoundment
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.14 Disposition of Animals
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.15 City Impounding Fees
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.16 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.05 Livestock                    55.17 Vicious Animals
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.18 Prohibited Dog Species
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.19 Dog and Cat License Required
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.20 Keeping of Dangerous or Illegal
                                   Animals Prohibited
55.09 Number of Animals Limits     55.21 Dangerous or Illegal Animal Exceptions
55.10 Rabies Vaccination           55.22 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.11 Owner’s Duty               55.23 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
55.12 Confinement                   
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag, or articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain
dogs or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel.
   5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   8.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   9.   “Illegal animal” means:
      A.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition; and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals and
having known tendencies as a species to do so;
      B.   Any animal declared to be illegal by the Council;
      C.   Any non-domesticated member of the order of carnivore which as an
adult exceeds the weight of 20 pounds;
      D.   Any of the following animals, which shall be deemed to be illegal
animals, per se:
         (1)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, hyenas, cougars, cheetahs,
lynx, and bobcats;
         (2)   Wolves, coyotes and foxes, or partial breeds with dogs;
         (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, otters, skunk, mink, and other
mustelids;
         (4)   Raccoons and opossums;
         (5)   Bears;
         (6)   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
         (7)   Bats
         (8)   Alligators, crocodiles, and caimans;
         (9)   All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes and reptiles
such as poisonous frogs and Gila Monsters;
         (10)   Constrictor snakes;
         (11)   All apes, baboons, and macaques;
         (12)   Gamecocks and other fighting birds;
         (13)   Any crossbreed of such animals which have similar
characteristics to the animals specified above.
   10.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an
animal’s health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or
organ, or the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   11.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   12.   “Maintain” means the act of providing any of the necessities of life
to an animal. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, the
provision of water, food, warmth, or cooling. “Maintain” shall be construed as
a lesser standard of care than “Owner.” Evidence of maintenance can be used to
support a finding that an individual is an “Owner.
   13.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
   14.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   15.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   16.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   17.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant
to Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place
to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
   1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody of the cat or dog.
   2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound or that has
been issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture
and Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning
regulations.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   NUMBER OF ANIMALS LIMITED.
   No household in the City shall maintain more than three separate, or a
combination of three, domestic animals together with litters from up to the age
of six months without paying the “excessive animal fee” of $25.00 per animal
per year as stated in Section 55.19.
55.10   RABIES VACCINATION.
   Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It
is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession,
six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs
kept in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are
not subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11   OWNER’S DUTY.
   It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten
or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12   CONFINEMENT.
   If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
   Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded at the impoundment facilities utilized by the City, or at the
discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear
before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.14   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by
the owner upon payment of the City impounding fee, any boarding costs of the
impoundment facility, and if an unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately
vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal within seven days from the
date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner cannot be located within seven
days, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with law or destroyed by
euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.15   CITY IMPOUNDING FEES.
   City impounding fees are $25.00 for the first impoundment, $50.00 for the
second impoundment and $100.00 for the third, and each subsequent impoundment,
within a 12-month period.
55.16   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.17   VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal within the
City. An animal is deemed to be vicious when it has attacked or bitten any
person without provocation, or when propensity to attack or bite persons exists
and is known or ought reasonably to be known to the owner. Any animal adjudged
vicious or found vicious by the Court must be removed from the corporate limits
of the City within five days of said finding. If the animal is not removed from
the corporate limits of the City within five days of said finding, then the
City shall have the authority to remove the animal from the corporate limits of
the City or have the animal humanely destroyed.
55.18   PROHIBITED DOG SPECIES.
   It is unlawful to have any of the following dog species within the City.
   1.   Pit bull terriers, including the following:
      A.   The Bull Terrier breed of dog;
      B.   The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dog;
      C.   The American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dog;
      D.   The American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog;
      E.   Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed which breed
or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; or
      F.   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominately of the breeds of Bull Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, any other breed
commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers, or a
combination of any of these breeds.
   2.   Any Wolf breed of dog.
   3.   Dogs of the breed or mixed breeds of Akita, Rottweiler, Doberman, or
Chow.
55.19   DOG AND CAT LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every owner of a dog or cat shall procure a license from the City on an
annual basis. Upon payment of a license fee of $5.00 for the first 3 animals
and $25 for animals over the limit as stated in Section
55.09 to the City Clerk and proof of rabies vaccination in compliance with
Section 55.10 a license tag will be issued. All license fees shall become
delinquent on the second day of July of the year they are due and payable and a
penalty of $10 for the first month and $5.00 for each succeeding month shall be
added to each unpaid license on and after July 2 2025.
(Ord. 2025-1 – Aug. 25 Supp.)
55.20   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS OR ILLEGAL ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous or illegal animal as
a pet, or act as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter, or
harbor such animal for any other purpose or in any other capacity with the City
except as provided in Section
55.21 of this chapter.
55.21   DANGEROUS OR ILLEGAL ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS.
   The prohibition contained in Section
55.20 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous or illegal
animals in the following circumstances:
   1.   The keeping of dangerous or illegal animals in a public zoo, bona fide
educational or medical institution, humane society, or museum where they are
kept as live specimens for the public to view or for the purpose of
instruction, research, or study.
   2.   The keeping of dangerous or illegal animals for exhibition to the
public by a bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit, or show.
   3.   The keeping of dangerous or illegal animals in a bona fide, licensed
veterinary hospital for treatment.
   4.   The keeping of dangerous or illegal animals by a wildlife rescue
organization with appropriate permit from the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
   5.   Any dangerous or illegal animals under the jurisdiction of and in the
possession of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to Chapters
481A and 481B of the Code of Iowa.
55.22   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
   It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.23   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
   It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
CHAPTER 56
POT-BELLIED PIGS
 
56.01 Purpose                              56.05 Issuance, Term, Renewals
56.02 Definition                           56.06 Regulations
56.03 License, Compliance with Regulations 56.07 Revocation of License
56.04 Licensing Procedures                  
 
56.01   PURPOSE.
   Miniature pot-bellied pigs are increasing in popularity as domesticated pets
and the keeping of not more than two such animals on any single-family
property, is permitted in the City. However, as such animals are still
livestock notwithstanding size, the keeping of such animal needs to be closely
regulated and controlled to insure that such animal does not become a nuisance
or danger to the general public and the neighborhood, in which it is kept. The
Council finds that the keeping of pot-bellied pigs so as not to create a
nuisance can be reasonably accommodated by licensing and other restrictions.
56.02   DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the words “pot-bellied pig” shall mean a
domesticated miniature Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian pot-bellied, or pot-belly
pig not exceeding 125 pounds in weight and 18 inches in height when measured at
the shoulder.
56.03   LICENSE, COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to own or have custody, control, or possession
of any pot­bellied pig within the City unless such pig is licensed pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter within 10 calendar days upon said pig’s entry to
the City.
56.04   LICENSING PROCEDURES.
   Any person owning or having custody or control of a pot-bellied pig within
the City may obtain a license for such pig from the Clerk in accordance with
the following procedures:
   1.   Application. File with the Clerk an application on a form provided by
the City which shall contain the following information:
      A.   The name and address of the applicant and the address of the
property upon which the pot-bellied pig is to be kept;
      B.   The name, age, and weight of the pot-bellied pig including any
identifying marks or tattoos;
      C.   Such other information as the Council deems appropriate.
   2.   License Fee. The application shall be accompanied by nonrefundable
license fee in an amount of $25.00.
   3.   Veterinary Certification. The application shall be accompanied by a
statement signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the pot-bellied pig
has been spayed or neutered, that the pig is in good health, has received all
necessary vaccinations, and the height and weight of the pig. Such
certification shall be no older than 30 calendar days when submitted to the
Clerk.
56.05   ISSUANCE, TERM, RENEWALS.
   1.   Issuance of License. The Council shall issue a license for the keeping
of a pot-bellied pig upon the filing of a completed application and a finding
that the animal meets the requirements set forth in Section
56.06.
   2.   Terms of License. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance; provided, however,
any license expiring on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, shall be valid until
the next workday.
   3.   Renewals. Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be renewed
for periods of one year each upon the filing of an application for such renewal
with the Clerk accompanied by a nonrefundable renewal fee in the amount of
$25.00. The renewal application shall be on such form as provided by the City.
The Council shall issue such renewed license unless it is found that the pot-
bellied pig is not in compliance with the regulations as set forth in Section
56.06.
56.06   REGULATIONS.
   The owner or person having custody, control, or possession of a pot-bellied
pig within the City shall comply with the following regulations:
   1.   Spayed or Neutered. The pot-bellied pig shall be spayed or neutered.
   2.   Weight. The pot-bellied pig shall not weigh more than 125 pounds.
   3.   Height. The pot-bellied pig shall not exceed 18 inches in height as
measured from the shoulder of said animal.
   4.   De-tusked. Any male pot-bellied pig two years of age or older must have
its tusks removed.
   5.   Confinement on Premises. Each pot-bellied pig shall be provided with a
fenced yard designed to assure that the animal is confined and managed in a
safe, clean, and odor-free manner when out-of-doors. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code, the pot-bellied pig may be kept as a pet in the
residence on the lot upon which said pig resides.
   6.   Leash Requirements. Each pot-bellied pig while on a street, sidewalk,
or other public place shall be restrained by a harness and leash or similar
restraint not longer than six feet in length hold by a competent person.
   7.   All regulations found in
Chapter 55 Animal Protection and Control including but not limited to Sections
55.06 through
55.08 and Sections
55.11 through
55.15 remain applicable and in full force.
56.07   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The license for a pot-bellied pig issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Council upon the finding that the provisions of Subsections 1
through 7 of Section
56.06 have been violated and not corrected within 10 calendar days of issuance
by the Clerk of a notice of such alleged violation or within such longer period
as may be specified in the notice of violation. Upon failing to correct the
violation within the required time, the Clerk shall issue a written notice of
the revocation of the license and the pot-bellied pig must be removed from the
City within 10 calendar days thereafter or such longer period as may be set
forth in the notice of revocation.
CHAPTER 57
URBAN CHICKENS
 
57.01 Purpose                     57.08 Odor and Noise Impacts
57.02 Definitions                 57.09 Predators, Rodents, Insects, and
                                  Parasites
57.03 Permit Required             57.10 Feed and Water
57.04 Issuance of Permit          57.11 Waste Storage and Removal
57.05 Number and Type of Chickens 57.12 Chickens At Large
Allowed
57.06 Non-Commercial Use Only     57.13 Unlawful Acts
57.07 Enclosures                  57.14 Nuisances
 
57.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to permit urban chickens in the City.
57.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Chicken” means a member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, a
domesticated fowl.
   2.   “Permitted tract of land” means the tract of land as identified by the
application upon which a permit is granted for keeping chickens pursuant to
this chapter.
   3.   “Permittee” means an applicant who has been granted a permit to raise,
harbor or keep chickens pursuant to this chapter.
57.03   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall raise, harbor, or keep chickens within the City without a
valid permit obtained from the Council under the provisions of this chapter.
   1.   Annual Application and Fee. In order to obtain a permit, an applicant
must submit a completed application each year on forms provided by City Hall
and pay all fees required by this chapter. Fees for the application shall be:
$15.00 paid annually. There is no refund on fees.
   2.   Inspection and Fee. Prior to an applicant obtaining the first permit
for a tract of land, the applicant must allow inspection of the property and
pay a one-time inspection fee of $10.00. No permit shall be issued until the
Permitting Officer has provided written approval of the inspection
requirements.
   3.   Permission From Owner. If the applicant is a renter, they must obtain
written permission from the landlord or property owner prior to any permit
being issued.
57.04   ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   1.   Issuance of Permit. If the Council concludes as a result of the
information contained in the application that the requirements for a permit
have been met, the Clerk shall issue the permit.
   2.   Renewal of Permit. A permittee shall apply to renew his permit every
July.
   3.   Denial, Suspension, Revocation, Non-Renewal. The Council’s appointed
designee may deny, suspend, revoke, or decline to renew any permit issued for
any of the following grounds:
      A.   False statements on any application or other information or report
required by this section to be given by the applicants;
      B.   Failure to pay any application, penalty, re-inspection, or
reinstatement fee required by this section or Council resolution;
      C.   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in abatement notices in the
time specified in the notice;
      D.   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation or
remediation plan by the County;
      E.   Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.
   4.   Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, deny, or not renew a
permit    shall be in writing, delivered by ordinary mail or in person to the
address indicated on the application. The notification shall specify reason for
action.
   5.   Effect of Revocation. When an application for a permit is denied, or
when a permit is revoked, the applicant may not re-apply for a new permit for a
period of one year from the date of the denial or revocation.
   6.   Appeals. No permit may be denied, suspended, revoked, or not renewed
without notice and an opportunity to be heard is given the applicant or holder
of the permit. In any instance where the Council designee has denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed a permit, the applicant or holder of said permit may
appeal the decision to the Council within 10 business days of receipt by the
applicant or holder of the permit of the notice of the decision. The applicant
or holder of the permit will be given an opportunity for a hearing. The
decisions of the Council hearing the appeal, or any decision by the Council
designee which is not appealed in accordance to this chapter shall be deemed
final action
57.05   NUMBER AND TYPE OF CHICKENS ALLOWED.
   1.   The maximum number of chickens allowed is six per tract of land.
   2.   Only female chickens (hens) are allowed.
   3.   In no case shall a permit be granted for greater than six chickens.
57.06   NON-COMMERCIAL USE ONLY.
   A permit shall not allow the permittee to engage in chicken breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
57.07   ENCLOSURES.
   1.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure of sturdy wire fencing at all
times. Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse or chicken tractor during
non-daylight hours.
   2.   Enclosures must be kept in a clean, dry, odor-free, neat, and sanitary
condition at all times.
   3.   Henhouses, chicken tractors, and chicken pens must provide adequate
ventilation and adequate sun and shade and must be impermeable to rodents, wild
birds, and predators, including dogs and cats.
      A.   Henhouse and Chicken Tractors. Henhouses and chicken tractors shall
be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions for the chickens with
a minimum of four-square feet per bird while minimizing adverse impacts to
other residents in the neighborhood.
      B.   A henhouse or chicken tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and
shall have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked at
night. Opening windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird-proof
wire of less than one inch openings.
      C.   The materials used in making a henhouse or chicken tractor shall be
uniform for each element of the structure such that the walls are made of the
same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any
windows or openings are constructed using the same materials. The use of scrap,
waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited. Henhouses and
chicken tractors shall be well-maintained.
      D.   Henhouses, chicken tractors, and chicken pens shall only be located
in the rear yard, and they may be kept in a side yard but not within 40 feet of
a neighboring dwelling. No henhouse, chicken tractor, or chicken pen shall be
allowed in any front yard.
57.08   ODOR AND NOISE IMPACTS.
   1.   Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken related
substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted
tract of land.
   2.   Noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries of
the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of
reasonable sensitivity.
57.09   PREDATORS, RODENTS, INSECTS, AND PARASITES.
   The permittee shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of
predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation may be removed by a person designated
by the Council with the assistance of City policy, if necessary.
57.10   FEED AND WATER.
   Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times.
The feed and water shall not be available to rodents, wild birds, and
predators.
57.11   WASTE STORAGE AND REMOVAL.
   The henhouse, chicken tractor, chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept
free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed in a
timely manner.
57.12   CHICKENS AT LARGE.
   The permittee shall not allow the permittee’s chickens to roam off the
permitted tract of land. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal which kills
a chicken off the permitted tract of land will, for that reason alone, be
considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the City’s responsibility to
enforce its animal control provisions.
57.13   UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chicken in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any other provision of the Code.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter, or lease holder of property
to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
   3.   No person shall keep chickens inside a single-family dwelling unit,
multi-family dwelling unit(s), or rental unit.
   4.   No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City.
   5.   No person shall keep a rooster.
   6.   No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract of land
unless the property is adjacent to the owner-occupied property.
57.14   NUISANCES.
   Any violation of the terms of this chapter that constitutes a health hazard
or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of neighboring property is a
nuisance and may be abated under the general nuisance abatement provision of
this Code.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
 
60.01   TITLE.
   Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as
the “Quimby Traffic Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
   Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law,
such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
   2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
   3.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   4.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   5.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
   6.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
   7.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   8.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   9.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   10.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
   11.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   12.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or
alley.
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the peace officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the
Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the
City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.04 Standards
61.02 Installation            61.05 Compliance
61.03 Crosswalks
 
61.01   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and
maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and
zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading
zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones
other than the above, truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield
right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic
and play streets. The Council shall also have the power to designate and
indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns
shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons or other
indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning at such intersections.
61.02   INSTALLATION.
   The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices
to carry out the provisions of this Traffic Code or State law or to regulate,
guide or warn traffic. The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 and 321.255)
61.03   CROSSWALKS.
   The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to
the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under
Section 321.231 and 321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle      62.08 Skateboards, Roller Skates, and In-Line
                               Skates
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
   61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access
facilities.
   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
   The Council shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall
drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area
except at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be
abated in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
   1.   It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate any
engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid
in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle, which results in excessive,
loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle on the following streets
within the City.
      A.   Main Street from the north City limits to the south City limits.
      B.   Highway 31 from the east City limits to the west City limits.
   2.   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in such a manner so as to be
audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall constitute
evidence of a prima facie violation of this section..
62.08   SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND IN-LINE SKATES.
   1.   The use of skateboards, roller skates, and in-line skates is prohibited
on Main Street from the north City limits to the south City limits.
   2.   Users of skateboards, roller skates, and in-line skates on other
streets within the City shall give the right-of-way to any pedestrian, motor
vehicle, bicycle, or any other user of any street, sidewalk, or other public
place, and shall not interfere with the proper use of any sidewalk, street, or
other public place by any other person.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots  
 
63.01   GENERAL.
   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District – 20 MPH.
   2.   Residence or School District – 25 MPH.
   3.   Suburban District – 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
   A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
   In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
- NONE -
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
   The Council may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
   No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the
street, for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop or Yield                 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops                  65.05 Yield to Pedestrians In Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk  
 
65.01   STOP OR YIELD.
   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic control
devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02   SCHOOL STOPS.
   At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the approach
side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need
be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk
or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight  
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by such signs erected in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
   The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are
erected in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
   Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on
the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
   When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in
Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross
traffic, shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb         69.07 Parking Prohibited
69.03 Parking on One-Way Streets    69.08 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.04 Angle Parking                 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking       69.10 Snow Removal
 
69.01   PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.
   Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by
designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this
Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle in violation of
any such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of
a peace officer.
69.02   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement
and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking
and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04   ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
   1.   Baptist Church, on Plain Street adjacent to church property, and on
East 3rd Avenue adjacent to church property.
   2.   Methodist Church, on Sellers Street adjacent to church property, and
same area on opposite side of Sellers Street adjacent to the City park.
   3.   Pilgrim Lutheran Church, on West 3rd Avenue adjacent to church
property, and same area on opposite side of West 3rd Avenue.
   4.   Quimby City Hall, on East 2nd Avenue, adjacent to City Hall property.
   5.   Quimby Fire Station, on East Railway, adjacent to Fire Station
property.
   6.   Quimby Post Office, on West 2nd Avenue, adjacent to Post Office
property and on Clark Street adjacent to Post Office property.
   7.   West 2nd Avenue adjacent to bank property, and same area directly
across the street on West 2nd Avenue.
69.05   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked
for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as
indicated by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load
thereon, when said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall
extend into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 72 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code
of Ordinances.
69.07   PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
   10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
   17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
   18.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
69.08   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of
persons with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
   Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or
receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall park a motor truck, semi-
trailer, or other motor vehicle weighing five tons or more, when loaded or
empty, upon any street or alley within the City for a period of time of more
than one hour. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.10   SNOW REMOVAL.
   No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City owned off-street parking area between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 10:00 a.m., from November 1st through April 1st, after the
accumulation of one inch or more of snow unless the snow has been removed or
plowed from said street, alley, or parking area.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
   For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of
the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of
those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
   Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
$15.00 for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit. If such fine is not paid within 30 days, it shall be increased
by $5.00. The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code,
and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   1.   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
      A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is
so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
      C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban
on parking during snow removal operations.
      D.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for
a continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can
be located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
CHAPTER 75
ATVS, UTVS, AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose                  75.05 Operation of ATVs and UTVs
75.02 Definitions              75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations      75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles, off-road utility vehicles, and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than
Type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
      An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000
pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and
is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-
terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only
under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
      B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
         (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a
quick and safe crossing;
         (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
         (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
         (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
   5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.05   OPERATION OF ATVS AND UTVS.
   The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions
as to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 and 3])
   2.   Trails. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
   3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
   4.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   5.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
   6.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV or UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which
such vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.06   NEGLIGENCE.
   The owner and operator of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile. The owner of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be liable for any
such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV, UTV, or
snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the
owner’s consent to operate the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile at the time the injury
or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   Whenever an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more,
either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify
a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging From Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles                
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street
or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions that by their nature can have no
application. Whenever such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be
subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05   SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
that prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
   1.   Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk
within the Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of
Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   TOWING.
   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured
for such use.
76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.
   No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.11   PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
   1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except
that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
   2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                   90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties     90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections         90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections         90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit                        90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit                90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required              90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                   90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains                  
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or
any duly authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.  
   The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes
and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining
to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter
shall apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to
new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
   The owners of any houses, buildings or structures used for human occupancy,
employment or use, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley
or right-of-way in which there is located a public water main are hereby
required to connect such facilities to the City’s public water system in
accordance with the provisions of these Water Service chapters within 60 days
after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public water
main is located within 100 feet of the property line of such owner.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
   When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a
new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned
off at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
   Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the permit
is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an
extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit
may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT.
   The person who makes the application shall pay a $50.00 permit fee to the
Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating, and
inspecting the work.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
   The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
   All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision
of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other.
   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter
shall receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six
inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall
be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
   3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
   4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be Type K
copper or plastic. The use of any other pipe material for the service line
shall first be approved by the Superintendent. Pipe must be laid sufficiently
waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of
the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails
to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to
the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.14   CURB VALVE.
   There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off
valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent.
The shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the
pavement or ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
   There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
   All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
   Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours
after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system,
or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish
or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property
owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the
costs before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
   The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because
of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
   It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at
the curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City,
shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose
whatsoever.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Meter Installation Fee
91.05 Meter Setting                     91.10 Meter Testing
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
   All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by
the City and installed by the City.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
   Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
   All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter
readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
   The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for
proper setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the
meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and
shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER COSTS.
   The full cost of any meter larger than that required for a single-family
residence shall be paid to the City by the property owner or customer prior to
the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole option of the
City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase and install
such meter in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
   Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer
at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09   METER INSTALLATION FEE.
   There shall be a fee charged to the property owner for each new installation
of a water meter in accordance with the schedule of such fees approved by
resolution of the Council.
91.10   METER TESTING.
   The Superintendent shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter at
any time when requested in writing. If it is found that such meter overruns to
the extent of two percent or more, the cost of the test shall be paid by the
City and a refund shall be made to the customer for overcharges collected since
the last known date of accuracy, but not for a longer period than 12 months. If
the meter is found to be accurate or slow or less than two percent fast, the
customer shall pay the cost of the test.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges             92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service           92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Water Tower Maintenance Fee 92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service   92.09 Customer Deposits
92.05 Service Discontinued
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
   Unless it is an empty lot, each property shall pay for water service
provided by the City based upon the use of water as determined by meters
provided in
Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Line Fee. All parcels shall pay a monthly line fee of $10.00 per parcel
with any structure located on the property. This line fee shall be due and paid
regardless of whether the water service is connected or turned on.
   2.   Water Service Fees. In addition to the Line Fee in Subsection 1, each
customer shall pay to the City the following fees for water service furnished
monthly:
 
Gallons Used Per Month Rate
First 1,000            $20.00 (minimum bill)
Next 1,000             $1.60 per 1,000 gallons
Next 12,000            $2.60 per 1,000 gallons
Next 300,000_          $1.75 per 1,000 gallons
 
92.03   WATER TOWER MAINTENANCE FEE.
   The City shall charge $10.00 per property per month for water tower
maintenance and repair, unless said property is an empty lot.
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on a monthly basis.
   2.   Billing Form. The following information shall be included on the
billing form or made available to the customer at the Clerk’s office:
      A.   The actual or estimated meter readings at the beginning and end of
the billing period.
      B.   The dates of the meter readings.
   3.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by the 21st day of each month.
   4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one time late payment penalty of $25.00 shall be added to each
delinquent bill.
   5.   Partial Payments. When a partial payment is made prior to the
delinquent date, the late payment charge shall apply to the utility service
bill outstanding on the date of delinquency.
   6.   Where Payable. Bills shall be paid by mail or in person at the Clerk’s
office.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected
in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service
will be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service
account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified
in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
   2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
   3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the
shut off, the Mayor shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a
determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is justified.
If the Mayor finds that disconnection is justified, then such disconnection
shall be made, unless payment has been received. The decision of the Mayor is
final.
   4.   Fees. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged on the last day of each month to
each customer with an unpaid balance of over $50.00. Water service will be
disconnected in instances where the curb stop is working and accessible after
proper notice is given. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary
trips in the regular changes in occupancies of property. During the period of
shut-off, minimum water service, water tower maintenance fee, and sanitary
sewer fees shall continue to be due and payable monthly.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.
   A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
   A customer deposit is required from all customers who are tenants, and
customers having no established credit record, and customers who have an
unacceptable credit record or who have a prior record of failure to pay utility
bills rendered by the City. Such deposit shall be in the amount of $150.00.
CHAPTER 93
WELL PROTECTION
 
93.01 Distances   93.03 Nonconforming Uses
93.02 Application
 
93.01   DISTANCES.
   No structure or facility of the enumerated types set out in the following
Table A shall be located within the distances set forth in said Table from
public wells within the City.
93.02   APPLICATION.
   Proscriptions set forth in Table A shall apply to all public wells existing
within the City, except public water wells formerly abandoned for use by
resolution of the Council.
93.03   NONCONFORMING USES.
   The use of structures or facilities existing as of April 4, 2005, may be
continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this
chapter; in other words, such structures or facilities may be located within
the distances set forth. However, such structures or facilities not in
conformance with the terms of this chapter may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or substituted subsequent to such date.
TABLE A: SEPARATION DISTANCES
SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS
                        HORIZONTAL ON THE GROUND SURFACE, IN FEET
                       Deep Well1 Shallow Well1
TABLE A: SEPARATION DISTANCES
SOURCE OF     REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS HORIZONTAL ON THE GROUND
CONTAMINATION SURFACE, IN FEET
             Deep Well1                           Shallow Well1
WASTEWATER STRUCTURES:
Point of Discharge to Ground Surface
Sanitary and
industrial    400                                  400
discharges
Water
treatment     50                                   50
plant wastes
Well house    5                                    5
floor drains
Sewers and Drains2
Sanitary and  0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
storm sewers, 25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
drains        75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
              0 – 75 feet: prohibited            0 – 75 feet: prohibited
Sewer force   75 – 400 feet if water main pipe   75 – 400 feet if water main pipe
mains         400 – 1,000 feet if sanitary sewer 400 – 1,000 feet if sanitary sewer main
              pipe                                 pipe
Water plant
treatment
process       0 – 5 feet: prohibited             0 – 5 feet: prohibited
wastes that   5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer pipe 5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
are treated
onsite
Water plant   0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
wastes to     25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
sanitary      75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
sewer
Well house    0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
floor drains  25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
to sewers     75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
Well house    0 – 5 feet: prohibited             0 – 5 feet: prohibited
floor drains  5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer pipe 5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
to surface
Land Disposal of Treated Wastes
Irrigation of 200                                  400
wastewater
Land
application   200                                  400
of solid
wastes3
Other
Cesspools and
earth pit     200                                  400
privies
Concrete
vaults and    100                                  200
septic tanks
Lagoons       400                                  1,000
Mechanical
wastewater    200                                  400
treatment
plants
Soil
absorption    200                                  400
fields
CHEMICALS:
Chemical
application   100                                  200
to ground
surface
Chemical &
mineral       100                                  200
storage above
ground
Chemical &
mineral       200                                  400
storage on or
under ground
Transmission
pipelines
(such as
fertilizer,   200                                  400
liquid
petroleum, or
anhydrous
ammonia)
ANIMALS:
Animal        50                                   50
pasturage
Animal        200                                  400
enclosure
Earthen
silage        100                                  200
storage
trench or pit
Animal Wastes
Land
application   200                                  400
of liquid or
slurry
Land
application   200                                  400
of solids
Solids        200                                  400
stockpile
Storage basin 400                                  1,000
or lagoon
Storage tank  200                                  400
MISCELLANEOUS:
Basements,    10                                   10
pits, sumps
Cemeteries    200                                  200
Cisterns      50                                   100
Flowing
streams or    50                                   50
other surface
water bodies
GHEX loop     200                                  200
boreholes
Railroads     100                                  200
Private wells 200                                  400
Solid waste
landfills and 1,000                                1,000
disposal
sites4
 
1   Deep and shallow wells, as defined in IAC 567-40.2(455B): A deep well is a
well located and constructed in such a manner that there is a continuous layer
of low permeability soil or rock at least five feet thick located at least 25
feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer from which water is
to be drawn. A shallow well is a well located and constructed in such a manner
that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock (or
equivalent retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least five feet
thick, the top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn.
2   The separation distances are dependent upon two factors: the type of piping
that is in the existing sewer or drain, as noted in the table, and that the
piping was properly installed in accordance with the standards.
3   Solid wastes are those derived from the treatment of water or wastewater.
Certain types of solid wastes from water treatment processes may be land-
applied within the separation distance on an individual, case-by-case basis.
4   Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
   5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   22.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of
water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 60 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 150 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice
to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
   The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section
95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                  96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee              96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required        96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations             96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations
 
96.01   PERMIT.  
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit
shall set forth the following information:
   1.   The location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system.
   2.   The purpose for which the sewer is to be used.
   3.   Plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent.
   The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection
of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60 days after the issuance of
the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due
to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period
is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the
provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at
any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02   PERMIT FEE.
   The person who makes the application shall pay a fee to the Clerk in the
amount of $25.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and
$35.00 for an industrial building sewer permit to cover the cost of issuing the
permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
   All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
   All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation
of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
   6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight
line to meet the following:
      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
      C.   Minimum velocity of two feet per second with the sewer half full.
      D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the
written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved
fittings.
   7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code
except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public
sewer, shall be P.V.C. – SDR26 - A.S.T.M. D-3034.
   10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
   11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
   12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and
service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the
“Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer, from the main to the building served, shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
96.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon
the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date
of official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater               97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of
                               Superintendent
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges    97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges    97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
   Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer
may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where
such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but
any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
be in the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes:
         (1)   Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300
parts per million by weight; or
         (2)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids; or
         (3)   Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the
average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of the
Superintendent.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to:
         (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or
         (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
or
         (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
      C.   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C).
   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
   3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C to
65°C).
   4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
   5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
   7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may
be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
   12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
   13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
   4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required               98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required             98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
   When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
98.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.
   No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 15,000 square feet.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
99.01 Rates of Service      99.04 Payment of Bills
99.02 Special Rates         99.05 Lien for Nonpayment
99.03 Private Water Systems 99.06 Special Agreements Permitted
 
99.01   RATES OF SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Line Fee. All parcels shall pay a monthly line fee of $10.00 per parcel
with any structure located on the property. This line fee shall be due and paid
regardless of whether sewer service is provided to the property.
   2.   Sewer Service Fees. In addition to the line fee in Subsection 1, each
customer shall pay to the City the following fees for sewer service furnished
monthly:
 
Gallons Used Per Month Rate
First 1,500            $16.00 (minimum bill)
Next 2000              $2.75 per 1,000 gallons
All over 3500          $2.50 per 1,000 gallons
 
(Section 99.01 – Ord. 2024-7 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
99.02   SPECIAL RATES.
   Where, in the judgment of the Superintendent and the Council, special
conditions exist to the extent that the application of the sewer charges
provided in Section 99.01 would be inequitable or unfair to either the City or
the customer, a special rate shall be proposed by the Superintendent and
submitted to the Council for approval by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.03   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
   Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay
sewer charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense. Any negotiated or agreed-upon sales or charges shall be
subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.04   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued or
disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.05   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and
shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the
same manner as property taxes.
99.06   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
   No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                    105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required
105.02 Definitions                105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard     105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Open Burning Restricted    105.10 Prohibited Practices
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
   2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
   3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving, and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
   6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   9.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-
family dwelling.
   10.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
   11.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   12.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   13.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   14.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
      F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A
of the Code of Iowa.
      G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
         (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
         (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing
to ensure production is not interrupted.
   15.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   16.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all
refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any
such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 14 days
shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in
district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible
materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is
permitted in the following circumstances:
(567 IAC 23.2 and 100.2)
   1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of
any structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“a”)
   2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings
at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in
compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“b”)
   3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“c”)
   4.   Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises. However, the burning of landscape waste produced
in clearing, grubbing, and construction operations shall be limited to areas
located at least one-fourth mile from any building inhabited by other than the
landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used
to ignite landscape waste.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“d”)
   5.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire. All open fires for
recreational purposes shall be within the following guidelines:
      A.   Three foot in diameter;
      B.   One foot in height or higher;
      C.   20 feet from any lot line;
      D.   All fires shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“e”)
   6.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide
training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided
that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by
the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“g”)
   7.   Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning
of paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing
organic forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium, or arsenic) and
seed corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if
burned in accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“h”)
   8.   Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if
in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“i”])
   9.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of
a demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided
that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and
limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“j”)
   10.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[2])
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
   All yard waste shall be separated by the owner from all other solid waste
accumulated on the premises and shall be composted or burned on the premises.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13[2] and 400 IAC 27.14[2])
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with
the following specifications:
      A.   Residential. Residential solid waste containers shall be provided by
the collector.
      B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers is impractical, shall maintain
metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall
be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
   3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily
accessible place by the owner or occupant of the premises served.
   4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not
in compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
   The City shall provide by contract for the collection of solid waste, except
bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only.
The owners or operators of commercial, industrial or institutional premises
shall provide for the collection of solid waste produced upon such premises.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair.
(567 IAC 104.9)
106.03   LOADING.
   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once
each week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
   Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
106.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property
for the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter;
however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other
residential buildings.
106.07   CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City
without first entering into a contract with the City. This section does not
prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises
owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is
not required for the removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material
from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such materials are
conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained
that none of the material being transported is spilled upon any public right-
of-way.
106.08   COLLECTION FEES.
   The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees for the same, in accordance with the
following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449 [Iowa 1970])
   1.   Schedule of Fees. The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, used or available, for each residential premises and for each dwelling
unit of a multiple-family dwelling are:
      A.   Collection Fees. Each household shall be billed at $12.25 per month
per household.
      This collection is for the collection of up to 190 gallons of unsorted
solid waste per week. Any additional containers or bags set out for collection
must have a City tag/sticker attached thereto. The tags/stickers must be
obtained from the Clerk at the cost of $1.00 per tag/sticker per container or
bag; $5.00 per tag/sticker for large items. The collector will not pick up any
additional containers or bags that do not have a tag/sticker attached.
      B.   Landfill Rate. $13.50 per month per household; whether vacated or
occupied.
   2.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
   Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted            110.11 Information
110.02 Rights and Privileges        110.12 Applicable Regulations
110.03 Placement of Structures      110.13 Franchise Fee
110.04 Construction and Maintenance 110.14 Management Fees
110.05 Excavations                  110.15 Franchise Applicable
110.06 Utility Easement             110.16 Termination
110.07 Relocation Not Required      110.17 Validity
110.08 Relocation Reimbursement     110.18 Litigation
110.09 Indemnification              110.19 Assignment
110.10 Removal of Vegetation
 
110.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
   There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
(hereinafter called “Company),” and its successors and assigns, the right and
non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in
the City of Quimby, Iowa, (hereinafter called the “City),” a system for the
transmission and distribution of electric energy and communications signals
along, under, over, and upon the streets, avenues, rights-of-way and alleys to
serve customers within the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the
City and its inhabitants. The Company is granted the right to exercise of
powers of eminent domain, subject to Council approval. This franchise shall be
effective for a 25-year period from and after the effective date of this
chapter.† 5
 
Notes
5 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 2023-03, adopting an electric franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on April 10, 2023
110.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
   The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, 2023, or as subsequently
amended or changed.
110.03   PLACEMENT OF STRUCTURES.
   The Company shall have the right to erect all necessary poles and to place
thereon the necessary wires, fixtures, and accessories as well as to excavate
and bury conduits or conductors for the distribution of electric energy and
communications signals in and through the City, provided the same shall be
placed in accord with this franchise and Code regulations of the City,
regarding the placement of structures, facilities, accessories, or other
objects in the right-of-way, including ordinances which assign corridors or
other placements to users of the right-of-way and requirements which may be
adopted regarding separation of structures, facilities, accessories, or other
objects.
110.04   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements
(whether titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in
accordance with Iowa law including Company’s Tariff on file with and made
effective by the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended
(“Tariff”), at its cost and expense, locate and relocate its existing
installations located in, on, over, or under the right-of-way of any public
street, right-of-way or alley in the City in such a manner as the City may
require for the purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, or repair of the street right-of-way or alley. If the City has a
reasonable alternative route for the street, right-of-way or alley or an
alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of
Company installations or would minimize the cost or expense of relocation of
Company installations, the City and Company shall work together to consider
said alternative route or construction method. The City shall, in the extension
or modification of streets and roads, make provision for the placement of
Company service lines and facilities on City-owned right-of-way without charge
to Company. In planning for the extension or modification of streets, the City
shall, to the extent practicable, design such changes to limit the need for
relocation of Company facilities. The City shall be responsible for surveying
and staking the right-of-way for City projects that require the Company to
relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost
to the Company, copies of the relocation plan and profile and cross section
drawings. If vegetation and tree removals must be completed by the City as part
of the City’s project and are necessary whether or not utility facilities must
be relocated, the City, at its own cost, shall be responsible for said
removals. If the timing of vegetation and tree removals does not coincide with
Company’s facilities relocation schedule and the Company must remove vegetation
and trees that are included in the City’s portion of the project, the City
shall either remove them or reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred to
remove said materials. If project funds from a source other than the City are
available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall use
its best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to
compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
110.05   EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in any streets, avenues, and public places for the
installation, maintenance, or repair of conductor, conduits, or the erection of
poles and wires or other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably
obstruct the use of the streets. The Company in making such excavations shall,
if required by ordinance, obtain a City permit therefore and provide City
representatives with advance notice prior to the actual commencement of the
work, and shall comply with all provisions and requirements of the City in its
regulation of the use of City right-of-way in performing such work. In
emergencies which require immediate excavation, the Company may proceed with
the work without first applying for or obtaining the permit, provided, however,
that Company shall apply for and obtain the excavation permit as soon as
possible after commencing such emergency work. The Company shall comply with
all provisions and requirements of the City in its regulation of the use of
City right-of-way in performing such work. The Company shall comply with all
City ordinances regarding paving cuts, placement of facilities, and restoration
of pavement and other public infrastructure. The Company shall replace the
surface, restoring the condition as existed prior to the Company’s excavation
but shall not be required to improve or modify the public right-of-way,
sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent to the Company project to a condition
superior to its immediate previously existing condition. Company shall complete
all repairs in a timely manner. Company agrees any replacement of road surface
shall conform to current City ordinances regarding its depth and composition.
110.06   UTILITY EASEMENT.
   Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-way
shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities and their replacements on, below, above, or beneath the vacated
property. Prior to the City abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley,
or public ground where the Company has electric facilities, the City shall
grant the Company a utility easement for said facilities.
110.07   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
   The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense,
Company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at
Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous 10 years.
110.08   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
   Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities, if the City orders or requests
the Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order to
directly facilitate a project for the primary benefit of a commercial or
private developer or other non-public entity, the City shall require the
developer or non-public entity to reimburse the Company for the cost of such
relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing facilities or
equipment. The Company shall not be required to relocate in order to facilitate
such private project at its expense.
110.09   INDEMNIFICATION.
   The Company shall indemnify, save, and hold harmless the City from any and
all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the
Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided,
however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save
harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent arising from the
negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.10   REMOVAL OF VEGETATION.
   The pruning and removal of vegetation and trees shall be done in accordance
with current nationally accepted safety and utility industry standards and
federal and State law, rules, and regulations. The Company is authorized and
empowered to prune or remove at Company expense, any tree extending into any
street, avenue, right-of-way, alley, public place, or public grounds to
maintain electric reliability, safety, to restore utility service and to
prevent limbs, branches, or trunks from interfering with the wires and
facilities of the Company. The pruning and removal of vegetation and trees
shall be completed in accordance with nationally accepted safety and utility
standards, NSI Z133.1-2012, American National Standard for Arboricultural
Operations-Safety Requirements, and ANSI A300 (Part 1) - 2008 Pruning,
(Revision of ANSI A300 Part 1-2001) American National Standard for Tree, Shrub,
and other Woody Plant Management - Standard of Practices (Pruning) or
subsequent revisions to these standards, and City ordinances regarding the
pruning of trees that incorporate by reference that standard.
110.11   INFORMATION.
   Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in City right-of-way, including documents, maps and
other information in paper or electronic or other forms (“Information”). The
Company and City recognize the Information may in whole or part be considered a
confidential record under State or federal law or both. Therefore, City shall
not release any Information without prior consent of the Company and shall
return the Information to Company upon request. City recognizes that Company
claims the Information may constitute a trade secret or is otherwise protected
from public disclosure by State or federal law on other grounds, and agrees to
retain the Information in its non-public files. Furthermore, the City agrees
that no documents, maps, or other Information provided to the City by the
Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such
documents or Information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical
Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or
Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes and regulations may be amended
from time to time. In the event any action at law, in equity or administrative,
is brought against the City regarding disclosure of any document which the
Company has designated as a trade secret or as otherwise protected from
disclosure, the Company shall assume, upon request of the City, the defense of
said action and reimburse the City any and all costs, including attorney fees
and penalties to the extent allowed by law.
110.12   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   The Company shall construct, operate, and maintain its facilities in
accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its
successors and Iowa law. During the term of this franchise, the Company shall
furnish electric energy in the quantity and quality consistent with and in
accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board, the
Company’s tariff and made effective by the Iowa Utilities Board or its
successors and Iowa law.
110.13   FRANCHISE FEE.
   There is hereby imposed upon the customers a franchise fee of zero percent
upon the gross revenues, minus uncollectible accounts, generated from sales of
electricity and distribution service, pursuant to the Tariff, by the Company
within the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be remitted by
the Company to the City on or before the last business day of the calendar
quarter following the close of the calendar quarter in which the franchise fee
is charged.
   1.   City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in
any 24-month period.
   2.   Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the first
Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90 days of receipt
of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee, including
the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to or exempted from City
imposed franchise fee.
   3.   City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes
subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The Company
shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in annexed
areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided to the Company by
certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting franchise fees in the
annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving annexation ordinances from
the City.
   4.   Company shall not, under any circumstances be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted
to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.14   MANAGEMENT FEES.
   The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose
or charge right-of-way management fees upon the Company or fees for permits for
Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement cutting, or
inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.
110.15   FRANCHISE APPLICABLE.
   This franchise shall apply to and bind the City and Company and their
successors and assigns.
110.16   TERMINATION.
   Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a longer period for cure. If the
breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching party may
terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in breach of
this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal law. A
party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the alleged
breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other party.
110.17   VALIDITY.
   If any of the provisions of this franchise ordinance are for any reason
declared to be illegal or void, the lawful provisions of this franchise
ordinance, which are severable from said unlawful provisions, shall be and
remain in full force and effect, the same as if the franchise ordinance
contained no illegal or void provisions.
110.18   LITIGATION.
   To the fullest extent permitted by law, each of the parties hereto waives
any right it may have to a trial by jury in respect of litigation directly or
indirectly arising out of, under or in connection with this agreement. Each
party further waives any right to consolidate any action in which a jury trial
has been waived with any other action in which a jury trial cannot be or has
not been waived.
110.19   ASSIGNMENT.
   This chapter and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with Iowa law
and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company with
an original signed and sealed copy of this chapter within 10 days of its final
passage. The Company shall, within 30 days after the Council approval of this
chapter, file in the office of the Clerk, its acceptance in writing of all the
terms and provisions of this chapter. Following Council approval, this chapter
shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The effective date of
this chapter shall be the date of publication. In the event Company does not
file its written acceptance of this chapter within 30 days after its approval
by the Council, this chapter shall be void and of no effect.
CHAPTER 111
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
111.01 Definitions                     111.12 Transfer of Franchise
111.02 Grant of Nonexclusive Authority 111.13 City Rights in Franchise
111.03 Compliance with Laws and        111.14 Maps, Plats, and Reports
Ordinances
111.04 Territorial Area Involved       111.15 Forfeiture of Franchise
111.05 Liability and Indemnification   111.16 City’s Right of Intervention
111.06 Color TV                        111.17 Duration and Acceptance of
                                       Franchise
111.07 Signal Quality Requirements     111.18 Erection, Removal, and Common Use
                                       of Poles
111.08 Operation and Maintenance of    111.19 Number of Channels
Equipment
111.09 Program Alteration              111.20 Rates
111.10 Construction and Maintenance    111.21 Approval of Grantee
Requirements
111.11 Discriminatory Practices        111.22 Modification of Regulations
Prohibited
 
111.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cable television system” (hereinafter referred to as CTV system or
system) means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and
equipment used or to be used primarily to receive radio or television signals
directly or indirectly and transmit them to subscribers for a fee.
   2.   “Grantee” means West Iowa Telephone Company (WesTel Systems) or anyone
who succeeds West Iowa Telephone Company (WesTel Systems), in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
111.02   GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby granted by the City to the Grantee the right and privilege
to construct, erect, operate, and maintain in, upon, along, across, above,
over, and under the streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid
out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City,
poles and wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City
of the system for the interception, sale, and distribution of television and
radio signals. The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways,
and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the
City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public
ways, and places to any person at any time during the period of the franchise.
111.03   COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
   The Grantee shall, at all times during the life of the franchise, be subject
to all lawful exercise of the police power of the City and to such reasonable
regulations as the City shall hereafter provide.
111.04   TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED.
   The franchise relates to the entire present limits of the City as well as to
any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise. Once
original construction is complete, Grantee will build into additional areas as
economic feasibility dictates.
111.05   LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   1.   The Grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise the
Grantee specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which
the City may legally be required to pay as a result of granting the franchise.
These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages
arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the
installation, operation or maintenance of the system authorized herein, whether
or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited
by this chapter.
   2.   The Grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the City in
defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in
Subsection 1 above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses,
such as attorney fees, court costs, and the like, but Grantee shall have the
sole responsibility and authority to elect the attorney who shall handle the
disposition of any litigation or dispute or for whose fee it becomes
responsible under this section.
   3.   The Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise
liability insurance insuring the City and the Grantee with regard to all
damages mentioned in Subsection 1 above in the minimum amounts of:
      A.   $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death of any one person, with the
limit, however, of $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident.
      B.   $100,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident.
      C.   Worker’s compensation coverage covering all of Grantee’s employees.
   4.   A certificate of such insurance coverage shall be provided to the City.
111.06   COLOR TV.
   The facilities used by the Grantee shall be capable of distributing color TV
signals, and when the signals the Grantee distributes are received in color,
they shall be distributed in color where technically feasible.
111.07   SIGNAL QUALITY REQUIREMENTS.
   The Grantee shall:
   1.   Produce a picture, whether in black and white or in color, accompanied
with proper sound on typical standard production TV sets in good repair as
required by the Federal Communications Commission and as good as the state of
the art allows.
   2.   Limit failures attributable to Grantee’s equipment to a minimum by
locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 96
hours after notice with normal failures to be corrected as soon as feasible as
dictated by the availability of necessary replacement equipment where required.
111.08   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT.
   The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the system. The Grantee shall have a listed
telephone, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be received during normal working hours.
111.09   PROGRAM ALTERATION.
   The Grantee shall comply with all Federal Communications Commission
regulations regarding the carriage of the programming of any existing or future
television broadcast, program alteration, advertising, availability of local
origination and such other regulations and provisions as are set down by the
Federal Communications Commission.
111.10   CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   The Grantee shall comply with the following requirements for construction
and maintenance:
   1.   The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install
and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances
to the public.
   2.   The Grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electric
Safety Code as promulgated by the National Bureau of Standards and the National
Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and in such manner
that they will not interfere with any installation of the City or of a public
utility serving the City.
   3.   If at any time during the period of the franchise the City shall
lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or
other public way, the Grantee, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall
remove, relay, and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense.
   4.   Any poles or other fixture placed in any public way by the Grantee
shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on
such public way.
   5.   The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise, or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or
raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the
same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than a one-week advance notice to
arrange for such temporary wire changes.
   6.   The Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of the City so as to
prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the Grantee.
111.11   DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   The Grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities,
rules, regulations, or in any other respect make or grant any undue preference
or advantage to any person or subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage.
111.12   TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   It is understood that the Grantee is a State corporation, but at some time
during the term of the franchise, may organize in a different form of doing
business and in the event of a change in the form of doing business by the
Grantee, the City shall allow the Grantee to assign the franchise to the form
of business chosen as long as the Grantee maintains an ownership interest in
the said form of business, but the Grantee shall not transfer the franchise to
any other person without prior approval of the Council, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld. In the event of such assignment, Grantee shall
forthwith notify the City, in writing, setting forth the name of the business
and the names and addresses of the owners.
111.13   CITY RIGHTS IN FRANCHISE.
   The right is hereby reserved to the City by the Council to adopt, in
addition to the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable
ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of the police power; provided that such regulations, by ordinance or
otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein
granted. The City shall have the right to inspect the maps, plans, and other
like materials of the Grantee at any time during normal business hours. At the
expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its
termination and cancellation, as provided for herein, the City shall have the
right to require the Grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aerial portions
of the system from all public ways within the City.
111.14   MAPS, PLATS, AND REPORTS.
   The Grantee shall file with the City true and accurate as-built plans of its
plant as constructed, including maps and plats of the same, and shall after
initial construction provide to the City copies of said material so as to keep
the City adequately advised as to any extensions or increases in the original
system.
111.15   FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE.
   In addition to all of the rights and powers pertaining to the City by virtue
of the franchise or otherwise, the City reserves the right to terminate and
cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder in
the event that the Grantee:
   1.   Violates any provisions of the franchise or any rule, order or
determination of the City or Council made pursuant to the franchise, except
where such violation, other than of Subsection 2 below, is without fault or
through excusable neglect;
   2.   Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged
as bankrupt;
   3.   Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or practices
any fraud or deceit upon the City; or
   4.   Fails to complete an operational system under the franchise as provided
therein.
   Such termination and cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted after
no less than 45 days’ notice to the Grantee and pursuant to hearing and shall
in no way affect any of the City’s rights under the franchise or any provision
of law.
111.16   CITY’S RIGHT OF INTERVENTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall operate to prevent the intervention by the
City in any suit or proceeding to which the Grantee is a party.
111.17   DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise and the rights, privileges, and authority hereby granted shall
take effect and be in force from and after its publication as provided by law
for a term of 25 years,† 6  subject to its approval by a majority of the legal
electors of the City voting there on as provided by law.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 59 adopting a cable television franchise for the
  City was passed and adopted on August 25, 1982. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2005-
6 03, adopted June 13, 2005, the cable television franchise was transferred to
  Evertek, Inc., and the term of the franchise was extended and will expire on
  December 31, 2020. Pursuant to a motion on May 14, 2012, the Council agreed to
  the transfer of the franchise to West Iowa Telephone Company (WesTel Systems).
111.18   ERECTION, REMOVAL, AND COMMON USE OF POLES.
   Poles shall be erected, removed, and used as follows:
   1.   Approval Required. No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be
erected by the Grantee without prior approval of the City with regard to
location, height, type, and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of
any pole or wire-holding structure of the Grantee shall be vested interest and
such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the Grantee, at its
own expense, whenever the Council determines that the public convenience would
be enhanced thereby.
   2.   Joint Pole Use Required. Where poles or other wire-holding structures
already exist for use in serving the City are available for use by the Grantee,
but the Grantee does not make arrangements for use, the Council may require the
Grantee to use such poles and structures if the Council determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of use available to
the Grantee are just and reasonable.
   3.   Joint Use of Grantee’s Facilities. Where the City or public utilities
serving the City desire to make use of the poles or other wire-holding
structures of the Grantee, but agreement therefor with the Grantee cannot be
reached, the Council may require the Grantee to permit such use for such
consideration and upon such terms as the Council shall determine to be just and
reasonable if the Council determines that the use would enhance the public
convenience and would not unduly interfere with the Grantee’s operations.
   4.   Service Area. The system when completed by Simonsen Propane
Incorporated will be capable of providing service to all residents with the
corporate limits of the City with the exception of those requesting service
further than 600 feet from a customer already connected to the CTV system,
except in cases where not less than six subscribers are within 1,000 feet of
the nearest point of the cable system.
111.19   NUMBER OF CHANNELS.
   The Grantee’s cable distribution system shall be capable of carrying at
least four television channels.
111.20   RATES.
   All rates for service shall be reasonable, compensatory, and
nondiscriminatory. Approval of adjustment in rate shall be freely provided by
the City in order to provide for a fair and reasonable return from the
operation of Grantee’s system and such rates are consistent with the general
welfare of the public.
111.21   APPROVAL OF GRANTEE.
   The Grantee’s qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of the
construction of a system have been approved by the City as part of a full
public proceeding according to due process.
111.22   MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Any modification of the provisions of the applicable rules and regulations
of the Federal Communications Commission resulting from amendment by the
Commission shall be incorporated into this chapter within one year of the
adoption of the modification or at the time of the franchise renewal, whichever
occurs first. It is the intention of this provision to comply fully with said
rules and it is the intention of the City to insure that the franchise conforms
to said rules.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a retail alcohol
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale,
possess, or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code
of Iowa, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail
alcohol license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application,
and shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required,
to the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
   A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or
employees shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   1.   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the
Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except
mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption.
However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not
for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to
rules adopted by the Alcoholic Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement
devices possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa.
(Said devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
      A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also
obtain a retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail
cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the
retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
   A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal
applications shall be filed at least five days prior to the last regular
meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed,
and a special Council meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of
such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
   The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $ 75.00
October, November, or December $ 56.25
January, February, or March    $ 37.50
April, May, or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
   A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
   The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a
copy of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application
for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and
the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
   Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by
the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a
transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of $2.00
shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
   In addition to the application fee identified in Section
122.04 of this chapter, the following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk
prior to the issuance of any license.
   1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of $10.00 per year.
   2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
      A.   For one day               $5.00
      B.   For one week               $25.00
      C.   For up to six months            $100.00
      D.   For one year or major part thereof      $175.00
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
   If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
   All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are
in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
   If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or
the applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
   Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to
a rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it
expires. The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total
license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and then
multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at
least $5.00 of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover
administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the River Valley School District
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
   5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
   7.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally
operated exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional
basis for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[13])
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to
solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of
Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit to the Clerk in writing
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles            
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street
or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed
thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or
member of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
   It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley
for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible
material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
   No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking,
or alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
   5.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
   6.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City
with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is
desired.
   7.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder/property owner.
   8.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   9.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   10.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing insurance
certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be required for
each excavation.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way. † 7
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section
7 136.04 relating to property owner’s responsibility for maintenance of
  sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.13 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required                       136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                    136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade         
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one
or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
   1.   Owner’s Responsibility. The abutting property owner shall remove snow,
ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property owner does not
remove snow, ice, or accumulations within 24 hours, the City may do so and
assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner
as a property tax. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b and e])
   2.   Fee. The fee for removing snow, ice, and accumulations from the
sidewalks shall be $50.00 per occurrence with a $50.00 additional surcharge per
occurrence.
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   The abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause
to be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks
and maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot
and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of a curb, any
sidewalk between the property line and that portion of the public street used
or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner may be liable
for damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d and e])
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such
person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work. A written application for such permit
shall be filed with the City and shall be accompanied by a permit fee of
$15.00.
136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
   Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage
is to be determined by the City.
   4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
   5.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide or match
existing sidewalks, and four inches thick, and each section shall be no more
than four feet in length.
      B.   Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to
the curb, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to
circumstances. Each section shall be four inches thick and no more than six
feet in length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
   6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) on the property line, unless the
Council establishes a different distance due to special circumstances.
   7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street,
which is the established grade.
   8.   Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even
with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half inch above the curb for
each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.
   9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot toward the
curb.
   10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood
float finish.
   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a
street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped
area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street,
road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built
or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed
at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.
Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall
be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12   AWNINGS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above
the surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
   It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing
on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods
or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with
the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for
such purposes.
136.19   SALES STANDS.
   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand
for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of
the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public
grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council.
The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the
time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
   No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
   The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental
body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] and 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED   ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
18            July 1919               
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
 
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
   This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for
the establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the
longitudinal reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which
designate the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
   The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
16            September 28, 1914               
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
   Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Quimby, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.04 Access Controls Imposed
140.02 Definition               140.05 Parking Restricted
140.03 Right of Access Limited
 
140.01   EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City
under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, and safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02   DEFINITION.
   The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any other
reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03   RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.
   No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto
or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
140.04   ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.
   There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within
the City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
   1.   Project No. FN-31-3( )18-01. On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Project No. FN-31-3( )18-01, Primary Road No. Iowa 31, within the
City, described as follows:
   From the south corporate line northeasterly to the east corporate line
   regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in
accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. FN-31-
3( )18-01, on file in the office of the Clerk.
140.05   PARKING RESTRICTED.
   The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access facilities is
restricted as follows:
   1.   Minor Street Approaches. Parking shall be prohibited on all minor
street approaches for a distance of 35 feet in advance of the stop sign.
   2.   Minor Street Exits. Parking shall be prohibited on the exit side of a
minor street for a distance of 35 feet.
   3.   Project No. FN-31-3( )18-01. Parking of any nature is prohibited on
Project No. FN-31-3( )18-01.
 
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
   All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided
with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a
hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose
of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
   “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of
the following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii)
faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion
of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
   The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building
or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such
is found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate. † 8
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
8 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
  procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
   The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF QUIMBY,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
   In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
   Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other
action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property  
 
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
   1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of
land under common ownership upon which 10 or more occupied manufactured homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
   4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
   The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
   A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured
home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being
placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes
except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
   1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private
property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place
for human habitation.
   2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from
the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is
relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 and 414.28)
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
   For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than three (3) inches in height and of
a contrasting color with their background.
(Subsection 2 – Ord. 2025-2 – Dec. 25 Supp.)
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
   Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition          151.04 Trimming Trees To Be Supervised
151.02 Planting Prohibited 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees  151.06 Inspection and Removal
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
   For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING PROHIBITED.
   No tree shall be planted in any parking or street with no exceptions.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d, and e])
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
   Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim
or cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the
supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect
or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
   The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in
the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees
and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
   1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
   2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b and h])
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING PERMITS
 
155.01 Building Permit Required   155.08 Suspension; Revocation
155.02 Required Information and   155.09 Permit Fee
Certification
155.03 Plans and Specifications   155.10 Inspections; Written Approval
Requirements
155.04 Flood Hazard Determination 155.11 Inspections; Concealed Work
155.05 Permit Issuance            155.12 Penalties
155.06 Retention of Plans and     155.13 Fences
Specifications by City
155.07 Expiration                  
 
155.01   BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, or improve
any building, or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, without
first obtaining a separate building permit for each building or structure from
the Building Permit Manager.
155.02   REQUIRED INFORMATION AND CERTIFICATION.
   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefore
in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every application shall:
   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made;
   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract, and the house and street address, or similar description that
will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
   3.   Indicate the use of occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
   4.   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in Section
155.03;
   5.   State the valuation of the proposed work;
   6.   Be signed by the permittee, or authorized agent, who may be required to
submit evidence to indicate such authority;
   7.   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Permit Manager.
155.03   PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIREMENTS.
   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or
cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of
this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The
first sheet of each set of plans shall give the house and street address of the
work and the name and address of the owner and person who prepared them. Plans
shall include a plot plan showing the location of the proposed building and of
every existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed specifications,
the Building Permit Manager may approve references on the plans to a specific
section or part of this chapter or other ordinances or laws.
155.04   FLOOD HAZARD DETERMINATION.
   The Building Permit Manager, when reviewing applications for building
permits, including the plans and specifications for the proposed construction,
will review all building permit applications to determine if the proposed
construction is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage in accordance
with
Chapter 160 of this Code of Ordinances.
155.05   PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The application, plans, and specifications filed by an applicant for a
permit shall be checked by the City. Such plans may be reviewed by other
departments of the City to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under
their jurisdiction. If the City is satisfied that the work described in an
application for permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that
the fee specified herein has been paid, the Building Permit Manager shall issue
a permit therefor to the applicant.
155.06   RETENTION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS BY CITY.
   One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be
retained by the Building Permit Manager for a period of not less than 90 days
from date of completion of the work covered therein.
155.07   EXPIRATION.
   Every permit issued by the Building Permit Manager under the provisions of
this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the
building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 120 days
from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such
permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a
period of 120 days. Before such work can be recommenced a new permit shall be
first obtained to do so, and no fee shall be required for a new permit for such
work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans
and specifications for such work; provided further, that such suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one year.
155.08   SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
   The Building Permit Manager may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued in
error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any
ordinance, regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter.
155.09   PERMIT FEE.
   A fee of $15.00 for each building permit shall be paid to the City at the
time the application for the building permit is submitted to the Building
Permit Manager.
155.10   INSPECTIONS; WRITTEN APPROVAL.
   All construction or work for which a building permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Permit Manager. A survey of the lot may
be required by the Building Permit Manager to verify compliance of the
structure with approved plans. No work shall be done on any part of the
building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection
without first obtaining the written approval of the Building Permit Manager
which approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of
each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the
inspections required in Section
155.11.
155.11   INSPECTIONS; CONCEALED WORK.
   Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or
structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the
approval of the Building Permit Manager. The Building Permit Manager, upon
notification from the permit holder or agent, shall make the following
inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as
completed or shall notify the permit holder or agent wherein the same fails to
comply with this chapter:
   1.   Foundation Inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and
forms erected and when all materials for the foundation are delivered on the
job. Where concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly termed “transit
mixed”) is to be used, materials need not be on the job;
   2.   Frame Inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire-
blocking, and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys and vents are
complete;
   3.   Final Inspection. To be made after building is completed and ready for
occupancy.
155.12   PENALTIES.
   Any person erecting, constructing, expanding or improving any building or
structure in the City, or causing the same to be done, without first obtaining
a separate building permit for each such building, fence or structure from the
City shall be subject to a fine of $50.00. The City may also seek other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
155.13   FENCES.
   All fences shall be constructed of approved new fencing material, shall be
maintained in good condition, and shall not create a harborage for rats. The
permissible height shall be a maximum of eight feet high. For fire protection
purposes, the fence cannot be past the front of the dwelling. The fence must be
20 inches inside the property line or inside edge of existing sidewalk. All
other characteristics of all fences shall conform to the appropriate statutes,
ordinances, and regulations of the City and the State. Wood materials shall be
protected against decay by the use of paint which is not lead-based paint or by
other preservative material. Wherever any egress from the dwelling opens into
the fenced area, there shall be a means of egress from the premises to any
public way adjacent thereto. Fences shall be constructed with the finished
(smooth) side facing the street and adjoining property owner unless there is a
written notarized agreement between the fence builder and adjoining property
owner filed with the Clerk and Building Permit Manager.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
 
160.01 Definitions                            160.06 Variance Procedures
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of Fact, 160.07 Nonconforming Uses
and Purpose
160.03 General Provisions                     160.08 Penalties for Violation
160.04 Administration                         160.09 Amendments
160.05 Floodplain Management Standards         
 
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood”).
   3.   “Base Flood Elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor,
or lowest level, below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Board of Appeals” means the City Council of the City.
   6.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   7.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of Section 160.05(4)(A) of this chapter; and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in this section.
   8.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   9.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   10.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   11.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For purposes of this chapter, factory-built homes include mobile
homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also includes recreational
vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and
not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   12.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   13.   “Five hundred (500) year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which
has a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
or which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500
years.
   14.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   15.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   16.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   17.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   18.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
   19.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   20.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   21.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard
Area outside the floodway.
   22.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   23.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register; or
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; or
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by
either:
         (1)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   24.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building, including a basement, except when the criteria listed in the
definition of enclosed area below lowest floor are met.
   25.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in an emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   26.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   27.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks, accessory
structures) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   28.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   29.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis; and
      B.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; and
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   30.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles, and replacing siding;
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work;
      C.   Basement sealing;
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
   31.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and A99.
   32.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   33.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, or
other similar uses.
   34.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   35.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure taking
place during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which, equals or exceeds
50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
         (1)   Before the “start of construction” of the first improvement of
the structure; or
         (2)   If the structure has been “substantially damaged” and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.
   The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of a historic
structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as a historic structure.
      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   36.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   37.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
   1.   Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in
Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to
exercise any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City or of its residents,
and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by:
         (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
         (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Section
160.02(2)(A) with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands and development which have significant flood hazards. The
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Cherokee County and Incorporated Areas,
City of Quimby, Panels 19035C0244C and 19035C0332C, dated December 2, 2021,
which were prepared as part of the Cherokee County Flood Insurance Study, shall
be used to identify such flood hazard areas and all areas shown thereon to be
within the boundaries of the base flood shall be considered as having
significant flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Study for the Cherokee County is
hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this chapter for the purpose
of administering floodplain management regulations.
   2.   Rules for Interpretation of Flood Hazard Boundaries. The boundaries of
the Special Flood Hazard Areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of a boundary, the Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   3.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   4.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   5.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   6.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Special Flood Hazard Areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
   7.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties, and Responsibilities of Administrator.
      A.   The Mayor is hereby appointed to implement and administer the
provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         (1)   Review all Floodplain Development Permit Applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review Floodplain Development Applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
            a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum
1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures; or
            b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities, counties, and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the Annual Report Form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Appeals of
potential conflicts.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the floodway results in any of the
following:
               i.   An increase in the base flood elevations, or
               ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base flood elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
         Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant
shall submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter
of Map Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
         (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Appeals for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications, as well as any additional information deemed necessary.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988 of
the lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Appeals.
      D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, structure
floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   1.   General Floodplain Standards. All development must be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where base flood elevations have not been provided in the Flood
Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
determine; (i) whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and (ii) the base flood elevation. The applicant
will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources with
sufficient technical information to make such determination. Review by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources is not required for the proposed construction
of new or replacement bridges or culverts where: (i) the bridge or culvert is
located on a stream that drains less than two square miles; and (ii) the bridge
or culvert is not associated with a channel modification that constitutes a
channel change as specified in 567-71.2(2), Iowa Administrative Code.
      A.   All Development. All development within the Special Flood Hazard
Areas shall:
         (1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement.
         (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
         (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage.
      B.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to
favorable consideration by the Board of Appeals, where existing topography,
street grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the
methods used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the
various forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential
structures located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of
surrounding ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be
passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion
shall not apply where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood
warning time for the protection of life and property. When estimating flood
warning time, consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2
(3), Iowa Administrative Code.
      C.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other
factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base
flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
      D.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
         (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the “lowest floor” (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
            a.   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
            b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
            c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access
and low damage potential storage.
         (2)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
         (3)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating,
air conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (4)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed
with plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities, either elevated (or, in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
      E.   Factory-Built Homes.
         (1)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
structure is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (2)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes,
including those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions,
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage
systems may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
      F.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
         (1)   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located
or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
         (2)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment
facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood
protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
         (3)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (4)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
      G.   Storage of Materials and Equipment. Storage of equipment and
materials that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base
flood elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated
or:
         (1)   Not subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent
movement due to flood waters; or
         (2)   Readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
      H.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
      I.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must
be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall
approve structural flood control works.
      J.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
      K.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
         (1)   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are
incidental to a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation
requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
            a.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of
the structure located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
            b.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage
potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure
shall not be used for human habitation.
            c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
            d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
            e.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
            f.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section
160.05(1)(D)(1).
         (2)   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
      L.   Recreational Vehicles.
         (1)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of
Section
160.05(1)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
            a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days; and
            b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
         (2)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than
180 consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy the
requirements of Section
160.05(1)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
      M.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
      N.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact,
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the two-tenths percent
annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the two-tenths percent
annual chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating
the specific elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to
which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
Where two-tenths percent chance flood elevation data has not been provided in
the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
160.06   VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   1.   The Board of Appeals may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
         (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
         (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
      C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that:
         (1)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of
insurance coverage; and
         (2)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
      E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Factors upon Which the Decision of the Board of Appeals Shall Be Based.
In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Appeals shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
      A.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      B.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      C.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      D.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      E.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
      F.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      G.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      H.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      I.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      J.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      K.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      L.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
      M.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   3.   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      A.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      B.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      C.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      D.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      E.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Appeals shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
160.07   NONCONFORMING USES.
   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
      A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
      C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
   2.   Except as provided in Section
160.07(1)(B), any use which has been permitted as a variance shall be
considered a conforming use.
160.08   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy the violation.
160.09   AMENDMENTS.
   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to
time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
165.01 Purpose                         165.10 Class C Business Districts
165.02 Definitions                     165.11 Class M Industrial Districts
165.03 Establishment of Districts      165.12 Administration and Enforcement
165.04 Official Zoning Map             165.13 Permits and Certificates of
                                       Occupancy
165.05 Amending Official Zoning Map    165.14 Board of Adjustment Created
165.06 Replacing Official Zoning Map   165.15 Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
165.07 Application of Regulations      165.16 Abandonment
165.08 Class R-1 Residential Districts 165.17 Amendments
165.09 Class R-2 Residential Districts  
 
165.01   PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate light and air, to prevent
the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to
regulate the use of land, and to promote the health, morals, safety, and
general welfare in the City.
165.02   DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel.”
The words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended,” “designed,” or
“arranged to be used or occupied.”
   1.   “Dwelling” means a building used as the living quarters for one or more
families, not including auto courts, rooming homes, or tourist homes.
      A.   “Multiple dwelling” means a dwelling occupied by more than two
families.
      B.   “Private dwelling” means a dwelling occupied by one family alone.
      C.   “Two-family dwelling” means a dwelling occupied by two families.
   2.   “Structure” means a combination of materials other than a building to
form a construction that is safe and stable and includes, among other things,
stadiums, platforms, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, fences, signs, and
chicken coops.
165.03   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   The City is hereby divided into the following types of districts:
   1.   Class R-l Residential Districts. One- and two-family residential
districts.
   2.   Class R-2 Residential Districts. Multiple family residential districts.
   3.   Class C Business Districts. Main Street retail business district.
   4.   Class M Industrial Districts. Any type of manufacturing or other
similar plant area in the city.
   5.   Class A Agricultural Districts. Any type of agricultural and
horticultural purposes.
165.04   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   As shown by the Official Zoning Map, the City is divided into five classes
of districts. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown
on the Official Zoning Map of the City, and said map and all notations,
references and other information shown thereon shall be and are hereby made a
part of this chapter by reference. The Official Zoning Map, signed by the Mayor
and properly attested by signature of the Clerk and date of adoption, shall be
and remain on file in the office of the Clerk.
165.05   AMENDING OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   Amendments, supplements, or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown
on the Official Zoning Map shall be made by an ordinance amending the zoning
ordinance. The amending ordinance shall refer to the Official Zoning Map and
shall set out the identification of the area affected by legal description and
identify the zoning district as the same exists and the new district
designation applicable to said property. Said ordinance shall, after adoption
and publication, be recorded by the Clerk as other ordinances and a certified
copy thereof be attached to the Official Zoning Map. Such a mandatory ordinance
shall, however, not repeal or re-enact said map, but only amend it. The
Official Zoning Map, together with amending ordinances, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings,
and other structures in the City. † 9
 
Notes
9 †EDITOR’S NOTE: See the Editor’s Note at the end of this chapter for
  ordinances amending the Official Zoning Map.
165.06   REPLACING OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of use, the Council may adopt a new Official
Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or
any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by date and the signature of the Mayor attested by the Clerk, under
the following words: “This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map
supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of
map being replaced) as part of the zoning ordinance of the City.”
165.07   APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Except as hereinafter provided:
   1.   No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
   2.   No building shall hereafter be erected or altered:
      A.   To exceed the height;
      B.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families;
      C.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      D.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, side yards, inner or outer
courts than are specified herein for the district in which such building is
located.
   3.   No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included
as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another
building.
165.08   CLASS R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses of land are permitted in all Class
R-1 Residential Districts:
      A.   Private and two-family dwelling units, provided that mobile homes
will not be permitted.
      B.   Churches and places of worship and parochial schools.
      C.   Public schools, public libraries, parks, playgrounds.
      D.   Greenhouses and customary agricultural operations, but no livestock
or fowl are to be raised in the district.
      E.   Small home occupations, provided that there shall be no signs or
other evidence of such use other than a small announcement or professional sign
not over two square feet in size.
      F.   Other customary accessory uses and buildings provided such uses are
incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity conducted as a
business.
   2.   Height of Buildings. No dwelling or other structure shall be erected to
a height in excess of 35 feet.
   3.   Density of Population. Lot area shall not be less than 5,000 square
feet and lot width not less than 50 feet. There shall be no more than one
dwelling placed on each lot of the above size.
   4.   Percentage of Lot Covered. All dwellings or other structures, including
accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 40 percent of the area of the
lot. If more than one lot is used, the percentage shall be computed on the
combined size of the lots.
   5.   Yards, Courts, and Open Spaces. Each lot shall have front, side, and
rear yards not less than the following depth and width:
      A.   Front yard depth - 25 feet.
      B.   Each side yard width - 5 feet.
      C.   Rear yard depth - 25 feet.
165.09   CLASS R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses of land are permitted in all Class
R-2 Residential Districts:
      A.   All uses permitted in Class R-1 Districts subject to all the
restrictions specified in Class R-1 Districts.
      B.   Multiple dwelling units, including rooming and boarding houses and
tourist homes.
      C.   Mobile homes, or “home trailer” dwellings, will be permitted as a
conditional use upon securing a special permit from the Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Hospitals and sanitariums.
      E.   Cemetery and the necessary incidental structures with the approval
of the Board of Adjustment and subject to such conditions as are deemed
appropriate by such Board.
      F.   Customary agricultural operations including a garden, nursery,
greenhouse, and usual farm buildings, subject to the following restrictions:
         (1)   No building in which farm animals are kept shall be closer than
200 feet to any adjoining lot line.
         (2)   No storage of manure or odor or dust-producing substance or use
shall be permitted within 100 feet of any adjoining lot line.
         (3)   No greenhouse heating plant shall be operated within 75 feet of
any adjoining lot line.
         (4)   No products shall be publicly displayed or offered for sale from
the roadside.
      G.   Public utility structures necessary for the service of the area.
      H.   One sign advertising the sale or rent of building upon which it is
located. Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall be
distant from the street line not less than one-half the front yard depth.
      I.   Fraternity and sorority houses.
      J.   Other customary accessory uses and buildings, provided such uses are
incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity commonly
conducted as a business, unless otherwise provided for.
   2.   Height of Buildings. No dwelling or other structure shall be erected to
a height in excess of 50 feet or exceed four stories, unless hereinafter
provided.
   3.   Density of Population. Lot area for private and two-family dwelling
units shall not be less than 5,000 square feet and lot width not less than 50
feet, plus an additional 1,000 square feet for each unit over two.
   4.   Percentage of Lot Covered. All dwellings or other structures, including
accessory buildings, shall not cover more than 40 percent of the area of the
lot. If more than one lot is used, the percentage shall be computed on the
combined size of the lots.
   5.   Yards, Courts, and Open Spaces. Each lot shall have front, side, and
rear yards not less than the following depth and width:
      A.   Front yard depth - 25 feet.
      B.   Each side yard width - 5 feet.
      C.   Rear yard depth - 25 feet.
   6.   Required Court Dimensions.
      A.   The width of any outer court shall not be less than two-thirds the
height of any opposing wall forming said court, and the depth shall not be
greater than one and one-half times the width.
      B.   The least dimension of an inner court shall be not less than the
full height of the walls forming such court, but in no case less than 50 feet.
   7.   Distance Between Buildings on Same Plot. No principal building shall be
closer to any other principal building than the average of the heights of said
buildings.
   8.   Automobile Storage or Parking Space. In connection with every multiple-
family dwelling, fraternity or sorority house, there shall be provided
automobile storage or parking space equal to not less than 40 square feet for
each family unit in such structure, provided, however, that no front yard shall
be used for the open air parking or storage of any motor vehicle.
165.10   CLASS C BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following regulations and uses permitted shall
apply to all general business districts, otherwise known as Class C Business
Districts:
      A.   All the uses permitted in any residential district subject to all
the provisions specified for such residential districts.
      B.   Stores and shops for the conducting of any lawful retail business.
      C.   Personal service shops.
      D.   Banks, theatres, offices, restaurants.
      E.   Garages and filling stations upon the approval of the Board of
Adjustment and subject to such conditions and safeguards as deemed appropriate
by such Board and upon the securing of a permit therefor, subject to the
following provisions:
         (1)   Pumps, lubricating, or other devices are located at least 20
feet from any street line or highway right-of-way.
         (2)   All fuel, oil or similar substances are stored at least 35 feet
distant from any street or lot line.
      F.   Wholesale Businesses Allowed. Allowed uses: storage in bulk of, or
warehouses for, such materials as building material, contractors’ equipment,
farm equipment and implements, clothing, drugs, food, and hardware.
      G.   The wholesale or bulk storage of petroleum and other explosive or
combustible mixtures is permitted, subject to conformance with all Iowa
Departmental Rules, local fire or safety ordinances, and such other regulations
issued by the Fire Chief pertinent to the storage of such products.
      H.   Other Uses Permitted:
         (1)   Advertising signs and billboards.
         (2)   Amusement places.
         (3)   Apartment houses.
         (4)   Auction rooms.
         (5)   Bakeries.
         (6)   Electric repair shops.
         (7)   Freight stations.
         (8)   Hotels.
         (9)   Laundries.
         (10)   Blacksmith and locksmith shops.
         (11)   Telegraph service stations.
         (12)   Painting and decorating shops.
         (13)   Photographic galleries.
         (14)   Plumbing shops.
         (15)   Police and fire department stations.
         (16)   Post offices.
         (17)   Printing shops.
         (18)   Railroad passenger station.
         (19)   Recreation buildings and structures.
         (20)   Roofing or plastering shops or both.
         (21)   Sales and/or showrooms.
         (23)   Shoe repair shops.
         (24)   Undertaking establishments.
         (25)   Other uses which in the opinion of the Board of Adjustment are
of the same general character as those listed above as permitted uses and which
will not be detrimental to the district in which they are located.
   2.   Height of Buildings. No building or other structure shall be erected to
a height in excess of 50 feet.
   3.   Required Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall be not less than 50 feet in
width and 50 feet in depth.
   4.   Yards Required.
      A.   Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 10 percent of
the depth of the lot.
      B.   Side yard. A side yard, if provided, shall not be less than three
feet wide.
   5.   Percentage of Lot Covered. No building with its accessory buildings, to
be used for said commercial purposes, shall occupy in excess of 90 percent of
the area of the lot. Any building used for residence purposes shall have a lot
area and lot width equal to that required in the least-restricted residence
district for the same type of dwelling.
165.11   CLASS M INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   1.   Permitted Uses. The following regulations and uses permitted shall
apply in all Class M Industrial Districts: All uses not otherwise prohibited by
law except any residential use or uses otherwise prohibited by ordinance.
   2.   Uses Prohibited. All use of land, buildings and structures or
industrial processes that may be noxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas, fumes, noise,
vibration, or similar substances or conditions. Junk yards or automobile
wrecking yards, commercial scrap iron, scrap paper, or rag storage operations.
Prohibited uses shall include, but not be limited to, those which have been
declared a nuisance in any court of record, or which may be unreasonably
obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust,
smoke, or noise.
   3.   Review by Board of Adjustment. The above prohibitions are subject to
review by the Board of Adjustment and such uses may be permitted if approved by
the Board and subject to the securing of a permit therefor and to such
conditions, restrictions and safeguards as may be deemed necessary for the
purpose of protecting the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the
community.
   4.   Buildings Height Limit. No building in this district shall exceed three
stories in height or 45 feet.
   5.   Yard Required. Each lot shall have a front yard not less than 25 feet
in depth.
165.12   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the Clerk. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Clerk except where the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
165.13   PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   No land shall be used or occupied, and no building hereafter erected,
altered, or extended shall be used or changed in use, until a certificate of
occupancy and a building permit shall have been issued by the Clerk in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
165.14   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT CREATED.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby created. The Board of Adjustment shall
consist of five members, each to be appointed by the Council for overlapping
terms of five years. The Board shall elect a Chairperson from its membership
and appoint a Secretary. Matters of procedure, powers, and judicial review
relating to this Board are regulated by statute.
165.15   NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES.
   The lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of the enactment
of this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter.
165.16   ABANDONMENT.
   Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year,
such use shall not thereafter be re-established, and any future use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
165.17   AMENDMENTS.
   The boundaries of districts as now established and the regulations thereof
may be amended, supplemented, or changed, or repealed by the City Council from
time to time, either upon its own motion, or upon a petition as herein provided
for, or upon recommendation of Planning and Zoning Commission, provided:
   1.   No such amendment, supplement, or change shall be adopted until after a
notice thereof is duly published as provided by the law of this State.
   2.   When a proposed amendment, supplement, or change does not originate
with the Planning and Zoning Commission, the same shall be submitted to said
Commission 30 days in advance of the date on which action is to be taken for
its recommendation thereon.
   3.   This requirement shall not act as a stay upon the proposed action by
the Council where said Commission fails to submit its recommendation to the
Council within 30 days after receiving written notice requesting the same.
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Section 165.05 of this chapter and have not been included as a
part of this Code of Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal
and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED
 
 
