Code of Ordinances
of the
CITY OF
Sanborn, Iowa
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
 
Adopted October 10, 2022, by Ordinance No._228
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date     Subject
Apr-23    Ch. 101                 229      12-12-22 Storm Water Drainage
                                                    Utility
Mar-24    92.02;                  230      7-10-23  Water Rates
          92.03
          92.03                   231      3-11-24  Water Rates
Nov-24    27.02                   231.1    6-10-24  Park and Recreation Board
          41.14(3)                232      8-12-24  Discharging Fireworks
          99.07                   233      8-12-24  Sewer Use Charges
          110.02                  234      10-14-24 Natural Gas Charges
Nov-25    110.02                  235      3-10-25  Natural Gas Utility
          110.04                  236      3-10-25  Natural Gas Utility
          65.03(37-38)            237      11-10-25 Stop Required
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
 
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Sanborn, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code
of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council
or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2.   “City” means the city of Sanborn, Iowa.
3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Sanborn, Iowa.
4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sanborn,
Iowa.
6.   “Council” means the city council of Sanborn, Iowa.
7.   “County” means O'Brien County, Iowa.
8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
9.   “May” confers a power.
10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
11.   “Must” states a requirement.
12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Sanborn, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of
the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council
or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not
specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00. The court may order imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine.† 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 3.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Sanborn, Iowa. † 2
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 93 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
2 approved by the Council on June 11, 1973, and was published in the Sanborn
  Register on June 14, 1973.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is the Mayor-Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
BOUNDARIES
3.01   CORPORATE LIMITS.
The corporate limits of the City are described as follows:
All of Section Thirty-five (35) and the South One-half (S½) of Section Twenty-
six (26) all in Township Ninety-seven (97) North Range Forty-one (41) West of
the Fifth (5th) P.M. in O’Brien County and State of Iowa; and commencing at a
point S 0° 20’ 30” W 100 feet of the NW corner of Section Thirty-six (36),
Township Ninety-seven (97) North of Range Forty-one (41) West of the 5th P.M.,
O’Brien County, Iowa, at a point beginning, thence east 40 feet, thence
northeasterly 154.8 feet to the south right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 18,
thence east along said right-of-way line a distance of 317.19 feet, thence S 0°
20’ 30” W 466.69 feet, thence west 506.69 feet to the section line on the west
side of the NW¼ of said Section 36, thence N 0° 20’ 30” E 426.69 feet along
said section line to the point of beginning, containing 5.32 acres.
and
That part of the East Half (E½) of Section Thirty-four (Sec. 34), Township
Ninety-seven North (T97N), Range Forty-one West (R4IW) of the Fifth Principal
Meridian (5th P.M.), O’Brien County, Iowa, lying south of the right­ of-way of
the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway, EXCEPT a 4.32-acre parcel of land
described as: commencing at the northeast corner (NE Cor.) of said Section
Thirty-four (Sec. 34); thence due south a distance of two thousand three
hundred seven and nine tenths feet (2307.9 ft.) to a point of beginning; thence
due south a distance of four hundred twenty-two and thirty-five hundredths feet
(422.35 ft.); thence due west a distance of four hundred fifty and forty-two
hundredths feet (450.42 ft.); thence due north a distance of four hundred
thirteen and sixteen hundredths feet (413.16 ft.) to the south right-of-way
line of the Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul Railway; thence north eighty­eight
degrees fifty-one minutes east (N88° 51’E) along said south right-of-way a
distance of four hundred fifty and fifty-one hundredths feet (450.51 ft.) to
the point of beginning. The East Line of said Section Thirty-four (Sec. 34) is
assumed to bear due north, as annexed by Resolution 80-2 approved January 28,
1980.
and
A tract of land in the West Half of the Northwest Quarter (W½NW¼) of Section
Thirty-six (36) in Township Ninety-seven (97) North of Range Forty­ one (41)
West of the Principal Meridian (5th P.M.), referred to as Tract A of said NW¼,
containing 2.50 acres, more or less, according to the plat of James R. Blum,
L.S., recorded in Plat Book 2 on Page 871, of the records of the O’Brien County
Recorder’s Office.
and
All that part of the West Half of the Northwest Quarter (W½ NW¼) of Section 36
in Township 97 North of Range 41 West of the 5th P.M., in O’Brien County and
State of Iowa, lying north of the right-of-way of the Soo Line Railroad Company
(formerly the right-of-way of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific
Railroad Company); except that part thereof described in Warranty Deed recorded
in Land Deed Record 76 on Page 6; except that part thereof described in Plat of
Arthur D. Burr, P.E. & L.S. recorded in Plat Book 1 on Page 99; except that
part thereof described in Plat of James R. Blum, Registered Land Surveyor
recorded in Plat Book 2 on Page 871; and except that part thereof conveyed to
the State of Iowa in Warranty Deed recorded in Land Deed Book 68 on Page 366,
subject to all other established highways, zoning and other ordinances, any
covenants of record and easements of record for public utilities, roads and
highways
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
4.01 Municipal Infraction    4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties               4.06 Alternative Penalties
 
4.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted
by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or
a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.† 3
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
3 Ordinances, see Section
  1.14.
4.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa
or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of
Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City
has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03   PENALTIES.
A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
   A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00
   B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
2.   Special Civil Penalties.
   A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user
is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation
exists or continues.
   B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
      (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the time
that the violation begins.
      (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
4.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue
a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1.   The name and address of the defendant.
2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
3.   The location and time of the infraction.
4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6.   The time and place of court appearance.
7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
4.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation
for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by
criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
 
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
Sanborn as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
   A.   Mayor
   B.   City Clerk
   C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[1a] and [3])
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
1.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes
shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and
in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6.   Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical
and then only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was
elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section,
for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee,
if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative
total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City
utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 10 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The
petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5, and 45.6)
6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity
thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of
such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such
petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the
appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the
ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose         7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control    7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control    7.08 Financial Reports
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is responsible
for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall
apply:
1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, and 12C.1)
3.   Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery
transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of
rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some
form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such
time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall
draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures
and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a
claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and
accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services
or personal expenses.
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5[2])
4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[3])
5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[4])
6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
   A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
   B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5[5])
7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each
month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation of
the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by
the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must
submit their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the
proposed City budget at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
4.   Resolution Establishing Maximum Property Tax Dollars. The Council shall
adopt a resolution establishing the total maximum property tax dollars that may
be certified for levy that includes taxes for City government purposes under
Code of Iowa Section 384.1, for the City’s trust and agency fund under Code of
Iowa Section 384.6, Subsection 1, for the City’s emergency fund under Code of
Iowa Section 384.8, and for the levies authorized under Code of Iowa Section
384.12, Subsections 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 21, but excluding additions
approved at election under Code of Iowa Section 384.12, Subsection 19.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.15A)
   A.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
resolution before the date for adoption of the resolution and shall publish
notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
   B.   If the City has an internet site, the notice shall also be posted and
clearly identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on
the date of the newspaper publication or public posting, as applicable.
Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on one or more
social media applications, the public hearing notice or an electronic link to
the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such account on the same day
as the publication of the notice. All of the following shall be included in the
notice:
      (1)   The sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property taxes
certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection and the
current fiscal year’s combined property tax levy rate for such amount that is
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
      (2)   The effective tax rate calculated using the sum of the current
fiscal year’s actual property taxes certified for levy under the levies
specified in this subsection, applicable to taxable property in the City other
than property used and assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
      (3)   The sum of the proposed maximum property tax dollars that may be
certified for levy for the budget year under the levies specified in this
subsection and the proposed combined property tax levy rate for such amount
applicable to taxable property in the City other than property used and
assessed for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
      (4)   If the proposed maximum property tax dollars specified under
Subparagraph (3) exceed the current fiscal year’s actual property tax dollars
certified for levy specified in Subparagraph (1), a statement of the major
reasons for the increase.
Proof of publication shall be filed with and preserved by the County Auditor.
The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the public hearing
notice for cities and the form for the resolution to be adopted by the Council
under Paragraph C of this subsection.
   C.   At the public hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written
objections from any resident or property owner of the City. After all
objections have been received and considered, the Council may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed maximum property tax dollar amount for inclusion in the
resolution and shall adopt the resolution and file the resolution with the
County Auditor as required under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3.
   D.   If the sum of the maximum property tax dollars for the budget year
specified in the resolution under the levies specified in this subsection
exceeds 102 percent of the sum of the current fiscal year’s actual property
taxes certified for levy under the levies specified in this subsection, the
Council shall be required to adopt the resolution by a two-thirds majority of
the membership of the Council.
   E.   If the City has an internet site, in addition to filing the resolution
with the Auditor under Code of Iowa Section 384.16, Subsection 3, the adopted
resolution shall be posted and clearly identified on the City’s internet site
for public viewing within 10 days of approval by the Council. The posted
resolution for a budget year shall continue to be accessible for public viewing
on the internet site along with resolutions posted for all subsequent budget
years.
5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make
any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until adoption of the resolution
required under Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and
place for public hearing on the budget to be held before March 31 and shall
publish notice of the hearing not less than 10 nor more than 20 days before the
hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure
for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection and a copy of the resolution adopted under Subsection 4 of this
section must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that the
budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of
copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing or the applicable amount specified in the resolution adopted
under Subsection 4 of this section. Two copies each of the detailed budget as
adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to
adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books
of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the the Clerk and Mayor
following Council approval, except as provided by Subsection 5 hereof.
4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the
Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed
with the Auditor of State not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions                    8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption    8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
 
8.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate.
8.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by improvements
to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined by the local
assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is received.
2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store
goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage
of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement
of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City
Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.
4.   “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new machinery
and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1[1e] of the
Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal
replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational
status.
5.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not
limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
6.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for
the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa,
except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store
raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers, and the acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment
assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a partial exemption from
taxation for a period of five years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from taxation,
shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
8.05   LIMITATIONS.
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06   APPLICATIONS.
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property
with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value
added is first assessed for taxation.
2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
8.07   APPROVAL.
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council
resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public
hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the City
Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new
construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such
prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the
new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            NAME OF AREA
131           October 28, 1991   Sanborn Northeast Urban Renewal Area
187           November 24, 2008  2008 Addition to the Sanborn Northeast Urban
                                 Renewal Area
209           September 11, 2017 2017 Addition to the Sanborn Northeast Urban
                                 Renewal Area
214           December 10, 2018  2018 Addition to the Sanborn Northeast Urban
                                 Renewal Area
215           February 11, 2019  2019 Addition to the Sanborn Northeast Urban
                                 Renewal Area
 
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED          NAME OF AREA
164           October 25, 2004 Sanborn Urban Revitalization Area
 
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of two years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give
direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records, and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons
for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into
in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City
where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance,
or Council direction.
7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of
the City.
8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such
specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In
executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with this
Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been granted
by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by
another municipal officer.
10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
The Mayor shall appoint the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1.   Mayor Pro Tem
2.   Police Chief
3.   Peace Officers
4.   Library Board of Trustees
5.   Park and Recreation Board
6.   Golf Course Board
7.   Electric and Telecommunications Utility Board of Trustees
8.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is $100 per month. Effective January 1, 2024, the
salary of the Mayor shall be $3,000.00 annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38[1])
4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected
City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become
effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall
not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer
during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City
election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for
all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected
at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective
in one of the following ways:
   A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
   B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
   C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
   D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution,
a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the
ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section
5.06 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council
meetings are the following:
1.   Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the
Council shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
1.   City Clerk
2.   City Attorney
3.   City Administrator
4.   Planning and Zoning Commission
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is $20.00 for each meeting of the Council
attended. Effective January 1, 2024, the salary of each Council member shall be
$1,200.00 annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification                18.14 City Funds
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Clerk (or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk)
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances,
and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting, the Clerk shall cause
the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall
include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall
show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances
or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse
thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices
in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, and contains the words
“INCORPORATED 1880, CITY OF SANBORN, IOWA.”
18.14   CITY FUNDS.
The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to City funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the
City in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom and for what
purpose received.
4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received from
special assessments.
6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Clerk’s custody
and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the
Council.
7.   Debt Service. Keep register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
CHAPTER 19
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
19.01 Creation of Office            19.04 Powers and Duties
19.02 Administrative Responsibility 19.05 Compensation
19.03 Resignation
 
19.01   CREATION OF OFFICE.
There is hereby created the office of City Administrator, to be appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council. The City Administrator shall hold office at
the discretion of the Council, and shall be subject to removal by majority vote
of the Council.
19.02   ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.
The City Administrator is responsible for carrying out the directives and
policies of the Mayor and Council, subject to statutory limits which may apply.
It is the intent of this chapter that the City Administrator shall have clear
authority to administer the day-to-day operations of the municipal government,
subject only to the restrictions noted above.
19.03   RESIGNATION.
The appointment may be terminated by the City Administrator upon 60 days
written notice to the Mayor and Council.
19.04   POWERS AND DUTIES.
In addition to the general duties and responsibilities previously set forth
herein, the powers and duties of the City Administrator shall be as follows:
1.   Administration. Carry out all directives of the Council which require
administrative implementation, reporting promptly to the Mayor any difficulties
encountered herein.
2.   Annual Budget. Be responsible for preparation of the annual City budget in
accordance with such guidelines as may be provided by the Council; and in
coordination with all department heads, the committee on finance, and the
Mayor.
3.   Administrative Improvements. Keep informed concerning current developments
in the field of municipal administration, and, from time to time, submit
recommendations or suggestions to improve the municipal government.
4.   Federal and State Legislation. Keep informed concerning current State and
federal legislation affecting the City, and submit appropriate reports and
recommendations to the Council.
5.   Federal and State Programs. Keep informed concerning the availability of
State and federal funds for local programs, and assist department heads and the
Council in procuring such funds.
6.   Supervision of Personnel. Be responsible for the training, direction, and
supervision of all personnel assigned to the municipal government; and for
making recommendations to the Council on appointments and promotions of key
personnel.
7.   Personnel Officer. Serve as the personnel officer for the City. As such,
the City Administrator shall see that complete and up-to-date personnel
records, to include specific job descriptions for all City employees, are kept.
The City Administrator, in conjunction with department heads, shall evaluate
personnel performances on a regular basis; recommend salary and wage scales for
City employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements; develop and
enforce high standards of performance by City employees; assure that all City
employees have proper working conditions; work closely with department heads to
promptly resolve any personnel problems or grievances.
8.   Training. Work closely with all department heads to assure that such
personnel and other City employees receive adequate opportunities for training
to improve their knowledge and skills; and act as the approving authority for
all requests by City employees to attend conferences, meetings, training
schools, etc. pertaining to their employment.
9.   Attend Council Meetings and Assist Mayor. Attend all meetings of the
Council, assisting the Mayor as required in the performance of the Mayor’s
duties.
10.   Keep Mayor Informed. Meet regularly with the Mayor to keep the Mayor
currently informed about the activities of the City Administrator’s office.
11.   Keep Council Informed. Keep the Council currently informed about the
activities of the City Administrator’s office, either by written report or oral
briefings at regular meetings of the Council.
12.   City Planning and Industrial Development Boards. Keep informed concerning
current developments pertinent to the responsibilities of the City Planning and
Zoning Commission and Industrial Development Commission, advise the Mayor and
the Council on matters before those bodies; and serve as Secretary to both
bodies.
13.   Purchasing Agent. Serve as purchasing agent for the City, supervising all
purchasing and contracting for supplies and services, and instituting such
procedures as may be required that whenever possible purchases are made using
the services of the O’Brien County central purchasing organization, or by bid.
14.   Citizen Communications. Establish procedures to facilitate communications
between citizens and the municipal government to assure that complaints,
grievances, recommendations, and other matters receive prompt attention by a
responsible official; and to assure that all such matters are expeditiously
resolved.
15.   Press Officer. Act as press officer for the City. As such, the City
Administrator shall be the principal spokesperson on all matters within the
authority and responsibility of the City Administrator; and shall assure that
the news media are kept fully informed about the operations of the City
government.
19.05   COMPENSATION.
The City Administrator shall be paid such compensation as specified by
resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.02 Attorney for City            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.08 Prepare Documents
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.05 Review and Comment
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Mayor. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor, Council, or City Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms,
and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09   REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee
before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of said officer or
employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the Council, appear
to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or
in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office or
employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CHAPTER 25
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
25.01 Public Library                   25.07 Nonresident Use
25.02 Library Trustees                 25.08 Expenditures
25.03 Qualifications of Trustees       25.09 Annual Report
25.04 Organization of the Board        25.10 Injury to Books or Property
25.05 Powers and Duties                25.11 Theft
25.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 25.12 Notice Posted
 
25.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The public library for the City is known as the Sanborn Public Library. It is
referred to in this chapter as the Library.
25.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members. One of the members may be a nonresident
with a Sanborn mailing address. All members are to be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council.
25.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City,
except that one member may be a nonresident who has a mailing address within
the City. Members shall be over the age of 18 years.
25.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident Trustee
shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or into the
City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such member is
absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case
of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in the
Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that
the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is
made.
3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
25.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary.
2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees
for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject however, to the
provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents
and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for
the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the business of
the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of
the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
25.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of
free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
25.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
25.08   EXPENDITURES.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
25.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
25.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface,
mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical,
book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to the Library
or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
25.11   THEFT.
No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the
intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
25.12   NOTICE POSTED.
There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing
the public of the following:
1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
26.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 26.04 Compensation
26.02 Term of Office                 26.05 Powers and Duties
26.03 Vacancies
 
26.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
26.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
26.03   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as
the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
26.04   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
26.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related
matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivisions
or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or
plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be
dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission
and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 27
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
 
27.01 Park and Recreation Board Created 27.03 Powers and Duties
27.02 Organization                      27.04 Open Meetings
 
27.01   PARK AND RECREATION BOARD CREATED.
A Park and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the
needed open-space facilities such as parks, playgrounds, and community
facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also plan and oversee City
programs and encourage other programs to enhance the leisure time activities of
the City’s residents of all ages.
27.02   ORGANIZATION.
The Board shall consist of seven members, all residents of the City, appointed
by the Mayor with the approval of the Council, for overlapping terms of five
years. The Board shall choose its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson every two
years. Members shall serve without compensation, but may receive their actual
expenses. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment.   
(Section 27.02 – Ord. 231.1 – Nov. 24 Supp.)
27.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Park and Recreation Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1.   Advise the Council on park and recreation matters.
2.   Plan and manage City recreation programs.
3.   Have authority over personnel and property belonging to parks and
recreation.
4.   Be limited by the annual budget designated for parks and recreation by the
Council.
5.   Make written activity reports to the Council when requested and as the
Board deems advisable. Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly
by the Clerk, and a copy is to be provided to each Board member and in the
Clerk’s report to the Council.
6.   Make rules and regulations governing the use of park and other
recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs, with
approval by the Council. The rules shall be posted or publicized for adequate
public notice.
27.04   OPEN MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Park and Recreation Board shall comply with the regulations
stated in Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 28
UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
28.01 Purpose                             28.07 Powers and Duties of the Board
28.02 Electric Utility Board Established  28.08 Control of Funds
28.03 Cable Communications System Utility 28.09 Accounting
Established
28.04 Appointment of Trustees             28.10 Discriminatory Rates Illegal
28.05 Compensation                        28.11 Discontinuance of Board
28.06 Vacancies                           28.12 Rules and Regulations
 
28.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally
owned electric utility and the municipally owned broadband cable communications
system utility by a board of trustees.
28.02   ELECTRICITY UTILITY BOARD ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to an election held June 10, 1947, the management and control of the
municipally owned electric utility were placed in the hands of a Board of
Trustees.
28.03   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM UTILITY ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to an election held November 4, 1997, a municipally owned broadband
cable communications system utility was formed. The Sanborn Cable
Communications System Utility is hereby placed under the control of the Board
of Trustees of the Sanborn Municipal Light and Power Plant, which shall operate
the Cable Communications System Utility as a separate City utility. The
municipal electric utility and the municipal cable communications system
utility shall not be a combined utility system. The name of the Board of
Trustees is the Board of Trustees, Sanborn Electric and Telecommunications
Utility in order that it be appropriate to the City utilities administered by
the Board. All provisions of this Code of Ordinances in regard to the
municipally owned electric utility shall include the broadband cable
communications system utility and the Board of Trustees shall have the same
authority in regard to the cable communications system as it has over the
electric utility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
28.04   APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES.
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, three persons
to serve as trustees for staggered six-year terms. No public officer or
salaried employee of the City may serve on a utility board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
28.05   COMPENSATION.
The Council shall set the compensation of Board members by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
28.06   VACANCIES.
An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall be made in the
same manner as an original appointment except that such appointment shall be
for the balance of the unexpired term.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.3)
28.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of the City in relation to the
City utilities it administers, with the following exceptions:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4)
1.   Taxes, Ordinances, and Bonds. The Board may not certify taxes to be
levied, pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[1])
2.   Property. Title to all property must be in the name of the City but the
Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[2])
3.   Reports to Council. The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the
Council, including a complete financial statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[3])
4.   Proceedings Published. Immediately following a regular or special meeting,
the Board Secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings, including
a list of all claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.4[4])
28.08   CONTROL OF FUNDS.
The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as well as all moneys
derived from operations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
28.09   ACCOUNTING.
Utility moneys are held in a separate utility fund, with a separate account for
each utility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.5)
28.10   DISCRIMINATORY RATES ILLEGAL.
The utility may not provide use or service at a discriminatory rate, except to
the City or its agencies, as provided in Section 384.91 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.6)
28.11   DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD.
A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to
discontinue the Utility Board is subject to the approval of the voters of the
City, except that the Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council
when the utilities it administers are disposed of or leased for a period of
over five years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 388.2)
28.12   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The Board shall be empowered to make rules and regulations for the control of
and governance of the utilities it controls, by resolution of the Board.
Resolutions establishing, imposing, adjusting, and providing for collection of
rates, charges, or connection fees shall be published in the same manner as an
ordinance. The utilities board is empowered to adopt rules and regulations as
stated above concerning Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) orders.
CHAPTER 29
GOLF COURSE BOARD
 
29.01 Sanborn Golf Course Board  29.06 Course Open to Public; Rules
                                 Published
29.02 Board Organization         29.07 Use of Revenues
29.03 Duties of the Board        29.08 Arbitration Over Disputed Charges
29.04 Authority of Board Without 29.09 Compensation
Council Review and Approval
29.05 Communication with Council
 
29.01   SANBORN GOLF COURSE BOARD.
The Sanborn Golf Course Board is hereby created to administer and control the
City’s golf course, clubhouse, equipment, personnel, and related facilities.
29.02   BOARD ORGANIZATION.
The Board shall consist of seven members, who shall all be annual members at
the golf course under the bylaws of the Board contemplated in this chapter. It
is not required that a Board member live within the City limits. Board members
shall be nominated through a duly conducted election by the annual members at
the golf course, which nominations shall be approved by the Mayor and the
Council for overlapping three year terms. The Council and Mayor are required by
this chapter to approve the Board members so nominated. Vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
29.03   DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
The Board shall be required to perform the following duties.
1.   Finance and Personnel. The Board shall have authority over the personnel,
contracts, and real personal assets of the Sanborn Golf Course, subject to the
limitation of expenditures for salaries, supplies, contracts, and capital
outlays set forth in the annual budget approved by the Council and subject to
the terms of this chapter.
2.   Future Development. The Board shall plan for the future development of the
golf course.
3.   Budget. The Board shall prepare and submit annual budgets to the Council.
4.   Disbursements. The Board shall review and approve all bills as required by
law; and submit bills to the Clerk under procedures established for all
departments of the City, for payment by warrant check in the usual fashion.
29.04   AUTHORITY OF BOARD WITHOUT COUNCIL REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, so long as financial
obligations incurred remain within limits established by the annual budget
previously approved by the Council, or the required procedures to amend said
budget have been fulfilled, the Board shall have the authority without Council
review and approval, to:
1.   Approve contracts of employment with personnel, and approve related
expenditures for salary, FICA, IPERS, insurance, or other employee benefits.
2.   Establish and collect membership dues, green fees, and other charges
related to golf course operations.
3.   Approve for payment any bills related to the course operation.
4.   Lease the clubhouse to a manager or other suitable person for a term not
to exceed one year. However, no lease may contain an automatic renewal
provision. Further, all leases shall contain provisions requiring proof of
indemnity, liability, and dram shop insurance, indemnifying and holding
harmless the Board, its members, and the City against claims, in such adequate
amounts to protect the City as the Board may determine.
5.   Elect officers of the Board, designate what offices will exist on the
Board, and establish duties of officers consistent with this chapter.
6.   Adopt bylaws establishing rules for meetings of the Board, rules for
filling unexpired terms on the Board, qualifications for membership at the
course, classification of members, annual dues, rules for meetings of members,
committees, conduct of the election of Board members, and related matters.
7.   Adopt rules and regulations for use of the golf course.
8.   Schedule dates and times for tournaments or other similar activities to be
held on the golf course and/or in the golf course.
Any other actions of the Board require Council review and approval. The Board
may take action subject to later Council review and approval.
29.05   COMMUNICATION WITH COUNCIL.
The Board shall file copies of its minutes with the Clerk and shall meet with
the Council from time to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request.
Its revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the
manner of other departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each
member of the Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
29.06   COURSE OPEN TO PUBLIC; RULES PUBLISHED.
The golf course shall be operated as a public course open to anyone, upon
payment of a reasonable green fee, who is willing to abide by the rules of the
course. In this regard, no distinction shall be made in user fees, rules, or
regulations between those who are or are not annual dues-paying members. All
rules and regulations for use of the course shall be posted at the club house
or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using
public.
29.07   USE OF REVENUES.
All revenues from the golf course and gifts to the golf course shall be used
only for operating expenses, debts, obligations, capital improvements, or other
expenditures for recreational purposes which are related to the golf course.
Such expenditures may include reasonable charges from other City departments
for expenses directly attributable to irrigation of the golf course or for
other expenses related to the golf course.
29.08   ARBITRATION OVER DISPUTED CHARGES.
In the event that the Board and any other City department disagree about the
reasonableness of proposed charges to the course by a City department, the
matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration by three persons, one of whom
shall be the Mayor, one being the Board President, and one mutually chosen by
the Mayor and the Board President.
29.09   COMPENSATION.
The Golf Course Board members shall serve without compensation but may receive
their actual expenses.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
30.01 Department Established       30.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
30.02 Organization                 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.04 Required Training            30.10 Taking Weapons
30.05 Compensation                 30.11 Contract Law Enforcement
30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
 
30.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
30.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief subject to the consent of
a majority of the Council. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of
the Council, the other members of the department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
30.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the
State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and
materials of the department.
30.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be necessary for
the operation of the department.
30.09   SUMMONING AID.
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items that
are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within
such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
30.11   CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.
In lieu of the appointment of a Police Chief by the Mayor as provided by
Section
30.06, the Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other qualified
lawful entity to provide law enforcement services within the City and in such
event the Sheriff or such other entity shall have and exercise the powers and
duties of the Police Chief as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Organization              35.09 Constitution
35.03 Approved by Council       35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Training                  35.11 Liability Insurance
35.05 Compensation              35.12 Calls Outside Fire District
35.06 Election of Officers      35.13 Mutual Aid
35.07 Duties of Fire Chief      35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish
fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there
is no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel
as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03   APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
No person having otherwise qualified shall be appointed to the department until
such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the Council
members.
35.04   TRAINING.
All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06   ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The department shall elect a Fire Chief and such other officers as its
constitution and bylaws may provide, but the election of the Fire Chief shall
be subject to the approval of the Council. In case of absence of the Fire
Chief, the officer next in rank shall be in charge and have and exercise all
the powers of Fire Chief.
35.07   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to the
Fire Department.
8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10
days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire
incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and
as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09   CONSTITUTION.
The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
35.10   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61, and Sec. 410.18)
35.11   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
35.12   CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT.
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.13   MUTUAL AID.
Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department may enter into
mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.14   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa
may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the Code of Iowa, for
violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
CHAPTER 36
AMBULANCE SERVICE
 
36.01 Purpose                 36.07 Ambulance Fees
36.02 Members                 36.08 Insurance
36.03 Election of Officers    36.09 Ambulance Service
36.04 Duties of Clerk         36.10 Payment
36.05 Duties of Director      36.11 Enforcement
36.06 Compensation of Members
 
36.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the Sanborn Ambulance Department to
provide ambulance service for Sanborn and the Sanborn-Melvin area, by use of
equipment furnished by the City; to provide for the appointment of a Director
of the department and an Assistant Director to act in the Director’s absence;
and to provide a method for administration of the department and its services;
and to provide a method of enforcement of collection of fees.
36.02   MEMBERS.
The department shall consist of no less than five or more than 25 members, who
shall be appointed by the Director subject to approval of the Council.
36.03   ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
The department shall elect a Director and an Assistant Director to act in the
absence of the Director, but the election shall be subject to the approval of
the Council.
36.04   DUTIES OF CLERK.
The Clerk shall keep all records or logs necessary or as required by law; shall
make all reports necessary or as required by law; and shall complete all
Medicare or welfare claims as required by law.
36.05   DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
The Director shall cooperate with the authorized agents of the City, the City
Administrator or the Clerk in the financial administration of the department.
The Director shall also coordinate all departmental activities with the Council
as may be required by the rules and regulations of the Council and perform the
following duties:
1.   Be presiding officer of departmental meetings;
2.   Make records of all ambulance runs and provide the Clerk with copies;
3.   Determine that the ambulance is properly dispatched and properly completes
all runs;
4.   Arrange for backup ambulance service in event the ambulance is out of
service;
5.   Be responsible for the training of all department personnel and the
efficient operation of the department; and
6.   Perform any other duties designated by the Council.
36.06   COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
The members shall be compensated for their services by the City according to
rates which will be established by the Council and which rates may be subject
to adjustment by the Council from time to time at its discretion.
36.07   AMBULANCE FEES.
The department shall charge such rates for services to Sanborn and the Sanborn-
Melvin area including contiguous counties, as may be fixed or required from
time to time by the Council.
36.08   INSURANCE.
Sufficient insurance shall be carried to protect the members and the City
against loss from damages or public liability, in the amount determined by the
Council.
36.09   AMBULANCE SERVICE.
Emergency ambulance service or non-emergency ambulance service shall be given
outside the City limits in accordance with rules and regulations as provided by
the Council, provided, however, that emergency calls shall have priority over
ambulance transfers of a non-emergency nature. The Director or the Assistant
Director, acting in the absence of the Director, shall make the final
determination as to priority of calls or whether a non-emergency transfer will
be made.
36.10   PAYMENT.
All ambulance fees and charges are due upon presentation of a statement by the
City for said fees and charges and shall be paid to the City.
36.11   ENFORCEMENT.
The City may cause a suit to be brought for the collection of any fees or
charges due it for ambulance services provided in good faith.
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Window Peeping
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
No person shall commit harassment.
1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
   A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law enforcement
authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing that the
information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal act,
knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate, or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall do any of the following:
1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in
or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic
contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to
disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a
report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report
to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
   A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
   B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
   C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
   D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
   E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
   F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
   A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
   B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the person
knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction by
another.
   C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   WINDOW PEEPING.
It is unlawful for any person to look, gaze, or peer into the window of any
room, house, or apartment not occupied by the person so doing or by said
person’s immediate family while not in a position on a public street, alley, or
sidewalk.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.10 Barbed Wire and
Safety Entities                                          Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Failure to
Device                                                   Assist
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive,
caustic, poisonous, or other injurious substance unless the person delivers
such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable
precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from
the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a
law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A of
the Code of Iowa, medical examiner, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer,
or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the
Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the
lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner, or firefighter, or person performing bailiff
duties, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1.   It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by
written consent of the Council.
2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns, or
other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building, without written
consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
1.   Definition. For purposes of this section, definitions enumerated in the
Iowa Code Section 727.2, which definitions incorporated herein by reference.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
2.   Sales – General Requirements.
   A.   Prior to any person engaging in the sale of consumer fireworks, the
following shall be provided to the City Administrator:
      (1)   License: Proof of valid license issued from the State Fire Marshal.
      (2)   Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance separate from the
building property insurance specifically showing coverage of fireworks sales
for an aggregate amount of $2,000,000.00.
   B.   Dates of Sale. Consumer firework sales shall only be conducted in
accordance with the dates and times designated by Section 727.2 of the Code of
Iowa. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks without meeting the
requirements specified in this chapter, or to sell fireworks outside of the
dates specified.
      (1)   Approved consumer firework sales meeting requirements of the Code
of Iowa shall be allowed from any permanent structure or building June 1 until
July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
      (2)   Approved consumer firework sales meeting the requirements of the
Code of Iowa shall be allowed in an approved temporary structure from June 13
until July 8.
   C.   Limitations on Sales.
      (1)   Consumer firework sales shall only be allowed in the area zoned for
commercial use pursuant to the City Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.
      (2)   No person shall sell a DOT 1.4 class consumer firework to the
person under the age of 18.
      (3)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to an intoxicated person or to
any person whom a reasonable person would believe may be impaired by any other
substance.
3.   Discharging Fireworks – General Requirements.
   A.   No person under the age of 18 shall discharge a DOT 1.4 class consumer
firework without parental supervision.
   B.   A person shall only discharge a consumer firework device on real
property they own or on property where consent has been given. Novelties,
including snakes, sparklers or caps, can be discharged on a public place so
long as all trash, wrappers, and wires are properly disposed of.
   C.   Consumer fireworks shall not be discharged by persons showing visible
signs of, or determined to be, intoxicated or under the influence of a drug or
narcotic.
   D.   Any person discharging a consumer firework devise assumes all
responsibility for its operation and the consequences thereof. No person shall
discharge a consumer firework devise in a reckless manner or manner likely to
cause death, injury, fire or property damage.
   E.   No person shall discharge a consumer fireworks device outside the
following dates and hours:
      (1)   July 1 through July 7 from the hours of 9 A.M. until 10 P.M.
Exception: discharge hours are extended to 11pm on July 4th only.
      (2)   December 28 through January 3 from the hours of 9 A.M. until 10
P.M. Exception: discharge hours are extended to 12:30am on January 1.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to alter, remove, or discharge components of a
consumer fireworks device from its intended method of discharging.
   G.   The City may, upon application in writing, grant a permit for the
display of display fireworks on public property by a City agency, fair
associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by City authorities when such display fireworks display will be
handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless
the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of
insurance in the following amounts:
      (1)   Personal Injury: $250,000.00 per person.
      (2)   Property Damage: $50,000.00.
      (3)   Total Exposure: $1,000,000.00.
(Subsection 3 – Ord. 232 – Nov. 24 Supp.)
4.   Violations. All violations of any provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared a simple misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $250.00. Violations of
this chapter will also be reported to the State Fire Marshal.
5.   Exceptions. This section does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer,
manufacturer, or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of
any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of state; or the sale or
use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal purposes in
athletic sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a
recognized military organization. This section does not apply to any substance
or composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
41.15   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.12)
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                       42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief                 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Unauthorized Computer Access
42.04 Unauthorized Entry                42.08 Other Public Property Offenses
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
   A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle,
or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
   B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the
Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of the
Code of Iowa.
   C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
   D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person owning,
leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
   E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property owned,
leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
   F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
      (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
      (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
      (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of
unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
      (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom,
altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate
or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession.
      (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
      (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
   A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
   B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.05   FRAUD.
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06   THEFT.
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07   UNAUTHORIZED COMPUTER ACCESS.
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and without authorization access a
computer, computer system, or computer network.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.6B)
42.08   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
1.   
Chapter 25 – Library
   A.   Section
25.10 – Injury to Books or Property
   B.   Section
25.11 – Theft of Library Property
2.   
Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
   A.   Section
105.07 – Littering Prohibited
3.   
Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
   A.   Section
135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
   B.   Section
135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
   C.   Section
135.03 – Placing Debris On
   D.   Section
135.04 – Playing In
   E.   Section
135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
   F.   Section
135.08 – Burning Prohibited
   G.   Section
135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4.   
Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
   A.   Section
136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
   B.   Section
136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
   C.   Section
136.16 – Defacing
   D.   Section
136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
   E.   Section
136.18 – Merchandise Display
   F.   Section
136.19 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
43.01 Purpose                      43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   43.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
43.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term
“controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed
for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity
of controlled substances.
5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
7.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use,
or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining marijuana.
8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used,
intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
   A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
   B.   Water pipes;
   C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a
marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
   F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
   G.   Chamber pipes;
   H.   Carburetor pipes;
   I.   Electric pipes;
   J.   Air driven pipes;
   K.   Chillums;
   L.   Bongs;
   M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the
Code of Iowa.
4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate
a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code
of Iowa.
7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
explaining or depicting its use.
10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control
of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.
14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[3])
2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any
retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
   A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa
and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
   B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
   C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
   D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor
in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol license. A
person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public
school property or while attending any public or private school-related
function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication
under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person
may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a
person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section
62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this Section shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01   CURFEW.
A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced as follows:
1.   Definition. The term “minor” means any unemancipated person below the age
of 18 years.
2.   Time Limits
   A.   It shall be a violation of this section for any minor who has not
attained the age of 16 years to be or remain on the alleys, streets, or public
places of the City or within any business establishments of the City between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday-Thursday and between the hours of
12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Friday-Saturday, except as provided in Subsection
46.01(3).
   B.   It shall be a violation of this section for any minor who has attained
the age of 16 years, but has not attained the age of 18 years, to be or remain
on the alleys, streets, or public places of the City or within any business
establishments of the City between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Sunday-Thursday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Friday-
Saturday, except as provided in Subsection 46.01(3)
3.   Exceptions. The prohibition of the preceding subsection shall not apply in
the following circumstances:
   A.   To a minor who is under the supervision and control of a guardian or
parent.
   B.   To a minor who is attending a church, municipal, or school activity, or
who is engaged in lawful employment activities, or who is participating in a
meeting, gathering, or assembly for the purpose of exercising rights and
privileges granted to all citizen, including minors, under the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution.
   C.   To a minor who is traveling, by any means, from his or her place of
employment or an activity described in the preceding sentence, to his or her
place of residence.
4.   Responsibility of Adults. It shall be a violation of this section for any
parent or guardian charged with the care and custody of any minor to allow or
permit such minor to violate the provisions of this section.
5.   Responsibility of Business Establishments. It is a violation of this
section for any person, firm, or corporation operating a place of business to
allow or permit any minor to be in or upon any such place of business in
violation of provisions of this section.
6.   Enforcement. Any peace officer of the City while on duty is hereby
empowered to arrest any minor who violates any of the provisions of Subsections
46.01(2) and (3). Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of
the parent, guardian, or other person charged with the care and custody of the
minor.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age to
commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                      47.07 Littering
47.02 Use of Drives Required       47.08 Control of Animals
47.03 Parking                      47.09 Removing Plants, Flowers, or Fruit
47.04 Prohibited Areas             47.10 Parks Closed
47.05 Fires                        47.11 Camping
47.06 Use of Firearms, Explosives, 47.12 Swimming Pool
Weapons, and Fireworks Prohibited
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any car, cycle, or other vehicle, or ride or lead any
horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or roadways
therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the City.
47.03   PARKING.
All vehicles shall be parked in designated parking areas, and no vehicle shall
be left unattended on any park drive, road, or highway except in the case of an
emergency.
47.04   PROHIBITED AREAS.
No person shall enter upon portions of any City park in disregard of official
signs forbidding same except by permission of the Park and Recreation Board or
a Park and Recreation Board representative.
47.05   FIRES.
No fires shall be built, except in a place provided therefor, and such fire
shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be immediately
used by some other party.
47.06   USE OF FIREARMS, EXPLOSIVES, WEAPONS, AND FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
The use of firearms, explosives, and weapons of all kinds by any person is
prohibited in all City parks. The Park and Recreation Board may establish, by
rule, the City parks or parts of City parks where firearms may be discharged
during special events, festivals, and educational programs. The use of
fireworks in City parks is prohibited except as authorized by a permit issued
by the Council.
47.07   LITTERING.
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.08   CONTROL OF ANIMALS.
No privately owned animal shall be allowed to run at large in any City park or
upon lands or in waters owned by or under the jurisdiction of the Park and
Recreation Board except by permission of the Park and Recreation Board. Every
such animal shall be deemed as running at large unless the owner carries such
animal or leads it by a leash or chain not exceeding six feet in length or
keeps it confined in or attached to a vehicle or has verbal control of the
animal. No horse or other animal shall be hitched or tied to any tree or shrub
or in such a manner as to result in injury to City property.
47.09   REMOVING PLANTS, FLOWERS, OR FRUIT.
No person shall in any manner remove, destroy, injure, or deface any tree,
shrub, plant, or flower or the fruit thereof, or disturb or injure any
structure or natural attraction, except upon written permission of the Park and
Recreation Board certain specimens may be removed for scientific purposes. This
section shall not apply to activities of the Park and Recreation Board or its
officers or an employee when caring for and managing City-owned land and waters
under the jurisdiction of the Park and Recreation Board.
47.10   PARKS CLOSED.
No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain
within any park between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
47.11   CAMPING.
No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or
designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause. The Park and Recreation Board
is hereby authorized to fix fees for camping and other special privileges,
which shall be in such amounts as may be determined by the Park and Recreation
Board. Any person who camps in any City park shall register the person’s name
and address on the registration form provided at the camping registration
booth.
Sanborn Campground Rules Miller Park
1.   Quiet Hours. 11:00 p.m. - 7:30 a.m. No excessive noise will be tolerated
at any time. Violators will be asked to leave.
2.   Site Rental. Sites must be paid for within 30 minutes of occupation. Camp
in designated sites only. One family and one camping unit per site (based on
six people). Tents/carpets must be moved to new locations every seven days.
3.   Vehicles. Limit two per campsite. Vehicles must be parked on campsite pad.
No parking on grass or in adjoining campsites. Vehicles that do not fit on
camping pad must be parked in the designated overflow parking area.
4.   Speed Limit. 5 MPH in campground area. All driving is confined to
designated roadways and parking areas.
5.   Pets. Must be leashed at all times. Owners are responsible for the
sanitary disposal of pet waste. No pets allowed in buildings. Loud or vicious
pets are not allowed. Violators will be asked to leave.
6.   Garbage. Must be bagged or securely wrapped and deposited in provided
dumpsters.
7.   Fires. Allowed in fire rings only. Fires must be extinguished when site is
vacated.
8.   Trees and Shrubs. Defacing, damaging, or destroying of any tree, shrub,
flower, or plant is prohibited. No gathering of live wood for fires. Violators
will be assessed for damages and asked to leave.
9.   Alcohol. Alcohol to be consumed at campsites only. No kegs.
10.   Fireworks. No fireworks allowed.
11.   Vehicle Maintenance. No major repairing of RV's, trucks or cars. No
washing of vehicles at campsites.
12.   Propane Tanks. No propane tanks over 100 pounds are allowed.
13.   Smoking. No smoking in any building.
14.   Littering. Campsites should be kept clean and tidy at all times.
Littering is not allowed in any Sanborn park. Construction of permanent
structures such as decks is not allowed.
15.   Eviction. The Park Board or designated representative reserves the right
to evict any camper in violation of the above stated campground rules.
16.   Liability. All facilities are used at your own risk. The equipment,
apparatus, and facilities are furnished solely for the convenience of the
registered campers and guests only. All persons using the same will do so at
their own risk. The City, Park Board members, and designated representatives
will not be responsible for accidents, injuries or loss of property by fire,
theft, wind, or act of God.
47.12   SWIMMING POOL.
No person shall enter or remain in the swimming pool at any time other than
when such pool is open for use and properly supervised.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated   50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions       50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
6.   Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected
and constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof. (See also Section
62.06) 
7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such
as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also
Chapter 51) 
8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
9.   Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation
in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard.
10.   Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
11.   Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within 1,000
feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or landing
place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off and
landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment
of the land on which the same is located.
12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
13.   Trash Piles. Accumulation of rubbish or trash tending to harbor vermin or
rodents and creating the hazard of fire.
14.   Septic Effluent. Effluent from a septic tank or drainage field running or
ponding on the ground in the open, including in ditches.
15.   Ponding Water. An accumulation of water until it becomes stagnant.
50.03   OTHER CONDITIONS.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See
Chapter 51)
2.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See
Chapter 105)
3.   Dangerous Buildings (See
Chapter 145)
4.   Trees (See
Chapter 151)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that a nuisance exists, such
officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to
utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section
50.06 of this chapter or the municipal infraction procedure referred to in
Section
50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall contain: †
4   
   A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
   B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
   C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
   D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
   E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time
prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the property
owner.
2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or sent
by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a
hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time
stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance
exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before the Council
at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated
within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required
action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The
itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the
notice to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid
within one month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and
such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the assessment
to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same manner and
with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
8.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall
fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required
and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
4 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section
50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures
applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 3 of this Code of
Ordinances.
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
   A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window,
headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
   B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
   C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
   D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
   E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
   F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of its
defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following:
1.   A vehicle in an enclosed building.
2.   A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a district
properly zoned therefor, as authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of the City,
when necessary to the operation of said business enterprise, but not including
dismantled vehicles, machinery, and appliances, or parts of such vehicles,
machinery, or appliances, or cargo boxes removed from trucks.
3.   A vehicle in an appropriate storage space or depository maintained in a
lawful place and lawful manner by the City.
4.   A display of an antique automobile, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
   A.   Fore purposes of this subsection, an “antique automobile” is one
manufactured more than 20 years prior to the date of display.
   B.   The property owner shall apply for permission from the City
Administrator for the display prior to putting up the display, and shall pay a
one-time fee of $100.00 if the display is approved. The City Administrator is
authorized to require such documentation of intended display as deemed
appropriate by the City Administrator and is also authorized to accept after-
the-fact applications for any display which exists as of the date of the
ordinance codified herein.
   C.   The vehicle shall be displayed and maintained in an aesthetically
pleasing manner, and continues to be so displayed.
   D.   The vehicle shall be displayed together with a sign identifying the
vehicle and providing suitable information about the vehicle for those viewing
the display.
   E.   The display shall be located in a commercially zoned district of the
City (Districts AG, CGB, HSB, ML).
   F.   No more than one such display shall exist on the property.
   G.   All other applicable zoning requirements shall be met.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section
51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement procedures as
outlined in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.10 Owner’s Duty
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.11 Confinement
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.12 At Large: Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.13 Disposition of Animals
55.05 Livestock                    55.14 Impounding Costs
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.15 Restrictions for Feeding of Stray and
                                   Abandoned Cats and Dogs
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.16 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.17 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.09 Rabies Vaccination           55.18 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium, including
(but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag, or
articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain dogs
or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in a
veterinary hospital or kennel.
5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
   B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
   C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
   D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
   C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
8.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section
99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
9.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an animal’s
health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or organ, or
the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
10.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
11.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
12.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
13.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
14.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine, veterinary
medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital, diagnostic
or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific establishment
situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or instruction
concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the cause,
prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human beings
or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
15.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169 of
the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
   A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
   B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably sufficient
to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy this
requirement.
   C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
   D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate protection
from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age, species, and
physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of
good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is endangered. The
shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun and have adequate
bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and dampness. A shelter
may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
   E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent adverse
health effects or suffering.
   F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
      (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s welfare
as described in this section.
      (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal to
suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
      (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part of
the commercial establishment’s operation.
      (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as described
in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care requirements
provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any applicable
rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship applying
to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section 162.10A
[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant to
Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or renewed
a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions within the
scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the research
facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to
fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept ownership
and custody of the cat or dog.
2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or that has been issued
or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by written
consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning
regulations.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles.
55.09   RABIES VACCINATION.
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is
unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept
in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not
subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.10   OWNER’S DUTY.
It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten or
attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.11   CONFINEMENT.
If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.12   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
Animals found at large in violation of this chapter shall be seized and
impounded at the Hartley Veterinarian Clinic or, at the discretion of the peace
officer, the owner may be served a summons to appear before a proper court to
answer charges made thereunder.
55.13   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
given in not less than two days to the owner, if known. Impounded animals may
be recovered by the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an
unvaccinated dog, by having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner does not
redeem the animal within seven days of the date of notice, or if the owner
cannot be located within seven days, the animal may be humanely destroyed or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.14   IMPOUNDING COSTS.
Impounding costs include a City impound fee of $25.00 plus kennel costs that
are charged directly by the clinic to the owner when the animal is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
55.15   RESTRICTIONS FOR FEEDING OF STRAY AND ABANDONED CATS AND DOGS.
It shall be unlawful for a person to feed stray, feral, abandoned, or
uncontrolled cats and dogs. Any person violating this section shall be fined
not less than $50.00 and not more than $150.00.
55.16   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
   A.   A prize for participating in a game.
   B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
   C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
   D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
   A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
   B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.17   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag if
all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies vaccination
tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
   B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.18   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
   A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
   B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached to
an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness, or
vest.
2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
   A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized to
take action by the owner.
   B.   A peace officer.
   C.   A veterinarian.
   D.   An animal shelter or pound.
CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
56.01 Definitions                  56.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited
56.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 56.04 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition
Prohibited
 
56.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Dangerous animal” means the following animals: † 5
   A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk and mink.
   B.   Raccoons.
   C.   Bats.
   D.   Scorpions.
   E.   Pit bull terriers, including the following:
      (1)   The bull terrier breed of dog.
      (2)   The Staffordshire bull terrier breed.
      (3)   The American Staffordshire terrier breed.
      (4)   The American pit bull terrier breed.
      (5)   Dogs of mixed breed or other breeds which are known as pit bulls,
pit bulldogs or pit bull terriers.
      (6)   Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier,
American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, any other breed
commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers or a
combination of any of these breeds.
2.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se,
as listed above, that has bitten or clawed a person or persons while running at
large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious
tendencies in present or past conduct, including such that said animal (i) has
bitten or clawed a person or persons on two separate occasions within a 12-
month period; or (ii) did bite or claw once causing injuries above the
shoulders of a person; or (iii) could not be controlled or restrained by the
owner at the time of the attack to prevent the occurrence; or (iv) has attacked
any domestic animal or fowl on three separate occasions within a 12-month
period.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Certain other dangerous animals, listed in Chapter 717F.1,
5 Paragraph 5a, of the Code of Iowa, are specifically prohibited and regulated by
  the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship.
56.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act
as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter or harbor such
animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
56.03   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the Mayor or peace officer that a
guard dog is on duty at said premises.
56.04   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.
1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at large
and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to persons
or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or peace officer,
be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or vicious
animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such
animal prior to its destruction.
2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering
or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in the City, the
Mayor or peace officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and if after
investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in the City, the
Mayor or peace officer shall order the person named in the complaint to safely
remove such animal from the City or destroy the animal within three days of the
receipt of such an order. Such order shall be contained in a notice to remove
the dangerous or vicious animal, which notice shall be given in writing to the
person keeping, sheltering, or harboring the dangerous animal or vicious
animal, and shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such order and
notice to remove the dangerous animal or vicious animal shall not be required
where such animal has previously caused serious physical harm or death to any
person, in which case the Mayor or peace officer shall cause the animal to be
immediately seized and impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not
possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to any person.
3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
Mayor or peace officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such
order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or
vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute
a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the Mayor or peace officer.
4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or peace officer. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with
the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor or peace officer, the
Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering,
harboring or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from
the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon
the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice of removal.
If the original order of the Mayor or peace officer is not appealed and is not
complied with within three days or the order of the Council after appeal is not
complied with within three days of its issuance, the Mayor or peace officer is
authorized to seize, impound or destroy such dangerous or vicious animal.
Failure to comply with an order of the Mayor or peace officer issued pursuant
to this chapter and not appealed (or of the Council after appeal) constitutes a
simple misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters
60 through
70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the “Sanborn Traffic
Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
Main Street between First Street and Seventh Street
2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
3.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
4.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
5.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
6.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
7.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
8.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
9.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or
traffic control sign or signal.
10.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school, or residence districts.
11.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
12.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or
emergency or temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency
or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide or
warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control
devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices at intersections where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places
as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Sections 321.231
and 321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.05 Quiet Zones
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.07 Golf Carts
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle      62.08 Engine Brakes and Compression Brakes
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial vehicles.
15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits, and
chauffeur’s instruction permits.
17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle rental.
30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals; unlawful
possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited; vehicle
damage only; removal of vehicles.
40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal injury
accident.
41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
60.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
61.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
62.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
63.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
64.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
65.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
66.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
67.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
68.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
69.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
70.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
71.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
72.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
73.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
74.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
75.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
76.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
77.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
78.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
79.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
80.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
81.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
82.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
83.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
84.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
85.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
86.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
87.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
88.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
89.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
90.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
91.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
92.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
93.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
94.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
95.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access facilities.
96.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
97.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
98.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
99.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
100.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
101.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements; penalties.
102.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
103.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
104.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
105.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
106.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
107.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
108.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all-terrain vehicles.
109.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
110.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
111.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
112.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
113.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
114.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
115.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
116.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
117.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
118.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
119.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
120.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
121.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
122.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
123.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
124.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
125.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
126.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
127.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
128.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
129.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
130.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
131.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
132.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
133.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
134.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
135.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
136.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns and bells prohibited.
137.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
138.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
139.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
140.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
141.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
142.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
143.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
144.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
145.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
146.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
147.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
148.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
149.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
150.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while operating a
commercial motor vehicle.
151.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
152.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
153.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
154.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
155.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
156.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
157.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
158.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
159.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
160.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
161.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
162.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
The Police Chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway
indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are
erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall
drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and
then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   GOLF CARTS.
Golf carts may be operated on City streets by persons possessing a valid motor
vehicle operator's license. However, a golf cart shall not be operated upon a
City street which is a primary road extension through the City but shall be
allowed to cross a City street which is a primary road extension through the
City. The most direct route to the golf course and back to the operator's
residence must be used. The golf carts shall be equipped with a slow moving
vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag and shall be operated on streets only
from sunrise to sunset. Golf carts operated on City streets shall be equipped
with adequate brakes and shall meet any other safety requirements imposed by
the Council. Golf carts are not subject to registration provisions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.247)
62.08   ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the excessive, loud,
unusual, or explosive use of engine and compressed air-braking devices within
designated areas in the City.
2.   Definition. For the purposes of this section, “engine retarding brake”
means a “dynamic brake,” “Jake brake,” “Jacobs brake,” “C­brake,” “Paccar
brake,” transmission brake, or any other engine retarding brake system that
alters the normal compression of the engine and subsequently releases that
compression.
3.   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or
operate or cause to be used or operated within designated areas in the
unincorporated areas of the City any engine brake, compression brake, or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any
vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such
vehicle, unless such use is necessary to avoid imminent danger. Such
prohibition shall be applicable only to those public highways or portions
specifically identified in this section.
4.   Areas of Prohibition. The prohibition set forth herein shall apply to
stretches of all public highways in the City that are within one mile of any
incorporated municipality in the City.
5.   Signage. Signs stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” or “ENGINE BRAKE
ORDINANCE ENFORCED” may be installed at locations deemed appropriate by the
City Council to advise motorists of the prohibitions contained in this
ordinance, except that no sign stating “VEHICLE NOISE LAWS ENFORCED” or “ENGINE
BRAKE ORDINANCE ENFORCED” shall be installed on a state highway without a
permit from the Iowa Department of Transportation. The provisions of this
section shall be in full force and effect even if no signs are installed.
6.   Exceptions. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the application of
this section.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1.   Business District – 20 MPH.
2.   Residence or School District – 25 MPH.
3.   Suburban District – 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1.   Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 25 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   Western Street from south corporate line to a point 630 feet south of
the centerline of Sanborn Street;
2.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   U.S. Highway 18 (Seventh Street) between Western Street and 150 feet
east of Carroll Street;
   B.   Eastern Avenue from south corporate line to the north corporate line;
3.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 45 MPH is unlawful on any
of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
   A.   U.S. Highway 18 (Seventh Street) from 50 feet east of Carrol Street to
50 feet west of Ida Street.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District at the following
designated intersections and at intersections where there are automatic traffic
signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
1.   At the intersection of Main Street and Second Street;
2.   At the intersection of Main Street and Third Street;
3.   At the intersection of Main Street and Fifth Street;
4.   At the intersection of Main Street and Sixth Street;
5.   At the intersection of Main Street and 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18);
6.   Any intersection with Seventh Street (U.S. Highway 18).
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Vehicles Entering Stop  65.06 School Stops
Intersection
65.02 Through Streets         65.07 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.03 Stop Required           65.08 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.04 Vehicles Entering Yield 65.09 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
Intersection
65.05 Yield Required
 
65.01   VEHICLES ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop
sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop
line, or before entering the crosswalk, or before entering the intersection.
Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on
the intersecting roadway which is approaching so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.322[1])
65.02   THROUGH STREETS.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop, unless a yield is permitted by this
chapter, before entering an intersection with the following designated through
streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   Main Street, between First Street and 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18).
2.   Prospect Street, between First Street and 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18).
3.   East First Street, between Carroll Street and Main Street.
4.   West First Street, between Main Street and Western Street.
5.   320th Street (U.S. Highway 18), between Western Street and Eastern Avenue.
65.03   STOP REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   O’Brien Street. Vehicles traveling north on O’Brien Street shall stop at
West Second Street.
2.   Angie Street. Vehicles traveling south on Angie Street shall stop at the
railroad crossing.
3.   Walnut Street. Vehicles traveling west on Walnut Street shall stop at
Western Street.
4.   West Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling west on West Fifth Street shall stop
at Western Street.
5.   West Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling west on West Fourth Street shall
stop at Western Street.
6.   West Third Street. Vehicles traveling west on West Third Street shall stop
at Western Street.
7.   West Second Street. Vehicles traveling west on West Second Street shall
stop at Western Street.
8.   West First Street. Vehicles traveling west on West First Street shall stop
at Western Street.
9.   Miller Park Driveway. Vehicles traveling east on Miller Park Driveway
shall stop at Western Street.
10.   Walker Street. Vehicles traveling west on Walker Street shall stop at
Western Street.
11.   Valleau Street. Vehicles traveling west on Valleau Street shall stop at
Western Street.
12.   Sanborn Street. Vehicles traveling west on Sanborn Street shall stop at
Western Street.
13.   Sunrise Street. Vehicles traveling east on Sunrise Street shall stop at
Eastern Avenue.
14.   Petrich Street. Vehicles traveling east on Petrich Street shall stop at
Eastern Avenue.
15.   First Street. Vehicles traveling east on East First Street shall stop at
Eastern Avenue.
16.   First Street. Vehicles traveling west on West First Street shall stop at
Western Street.
17.   Sunrise Street. Vehicles traveling west on Sunrise Street shall stop at
Eastern Avenue.
18.   East Fourth Street. Vehicles traveling on East Fourth Street shall stop
at Carroll Street.
19.   O’Brien Street. Vehicles traveling on O’Brien Street shall stop at West
Fifth Street.
20.   West Fifth Street. Vehicles traveling on West Fifth Street shall stop at
O’Brien Street.
21.   Western Street. Vehicles traveling north on Western Street shall stop at
the railroad crossing.
22.   Westview Street. Vehicles traveling west on Westview Street shall stop at
Western Street.
23.   Prairie View Drive. Vehicles traveling on Prairie View Drive shall stop
at Eastern Avenue.
24.   Petrich Street. Vehicles traveling on Petrich Street shall stop at Willis
Street.
25.   East Third Street. Vehicles traveling on East Third Street shall stop at
Eastern Avenue.
26.   Petrich Street. Vehicles traveling west on Petrich Street shall stop at
Joyce Street.
27.   Sunrise Street. Vehicles traveling west on Sunrise Street shall stop at
Joyce Street.
28.   Summit Street. Vehicles traveling north and south on Summit Street shall
stop at West Fourth Street.
29.   Main Street. Vehicles traveling north and south on Main Street shall stop
at West Fifth Street.
30.   Main Street. Vehicles traveling south on Main Street shall stop at First
Street.
31.   Angie Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on Sanborn Street shall
stop at Angie Street.
32.   Sanborn Street. Vehicles traveling north or south on Angie Street shall
stop at Sanborn Street.
33.   Shay Avenue. Vehicles traveling north on Shay Avenue shall stop at 330th
Street.
34.   Shay Avenue. Vehicles traveling west on Shay Avenue shall stop at Western
Avenue.
35.   Profit Street. Vehicles traveling east on Sunrise Avenue shall stop at
Profit Street.
36.   Franklin Street. Vehicles traveling north or south on Franklin Street
shall stop at East Fourth Street.
37.   East 3rd Street. Vehicles traveling east or west on East 3rd Street shall
stop at Carrol Street.   
(Subsection 37 – Ord._237 – Nov. 25 Supp.)
38.   Carroll Street. Vehicles traveling north or south on Carroll Street shall
stop at East 3rd Street.   
(Subsection 38 – Ord._237 – Nov. 25 Supp.)
65.04   VEHICLES ENTERING YIELD INTERSECTION.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop
at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line, or before
entering the crosswalk, or before entering the intersection, or at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which
has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection.
(Code of Iowa, 321.322[2])
65.05   YIELD REQUIRED.
Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.345)
1.   East Second Street. Vehicles traveling east on East Second Street shall
yield at Carroll Street.
2.   East Third Street. Vehicles traveling east on East Third Street shall
yield at Carroll Street.
3.   Franklin Street. Vehicles traveling north on Franklin Street shall yield
at East Second Street.
4.   Joyce Street. Vehicles traveling west on Joyce Street shall yield at
Carroll Street.
5.   Petrich Street. Vehicles traveling west on Petrich Street shall yield at
Joyce Street.
6.   Angie Street. Vehicles traveling south on Angie Street shall yield at Shay
Avenue.
65.06   SCHOOL STOPS.
At the following school crossing zones every driver of a vehicle approaching
said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have
passed through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
1.   Main Street at Fifth Street.
2.   Prospect Street at West Second Street.
65.07   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.08   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.09   YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Routes
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Police Chief may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a
special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the
maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the
City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
1.   Five ton limit per axle on Walker Street from Angie Street to Western
Street, excluding Angie/Walker intersection.
2.   Five ton limit per axle on Angie Street from Walker Street to Sanborn
Street, excluding Angie/Walker intersection.
3.   Five ton limit per axle on Angie Street from Sanborn Street to Western
Street.
4.   Five ton limit per axle on Angie Street from Valleau Street to Western
Street.
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Police Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said
bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers
of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1.   Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing six tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no
scheduled or definite stops within the City for the purpose of loading or
unloading shall travel over or upon the following streets within the City and
none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   A.   U.S. Highway 18. U.S. Highway 18 from west corporate limits.
   B.   Western Street. Western Street from Orange Street to south corporate
limits.
   C.   First Street. First Street between Western Street and Eastern Avenue.
   D.   Eastern Avenue. Eastern Avenue from south corporate limits to north
corporate limits.
   E.   320th Street (U.S. Highway 18). 320th Street from Eastern Avenue to
east corporate limits.
   F.   Alleyway. Alleyway between O’Brien Street and Main Street from First
Street to Fourth Street.
   G.   Alleyway. Alleyway between Main Street and Franklin Street from First
Street to Fourth Street.
2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing six tons or more,
when loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite
stop within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over
or upon the designated routes set out in this section to the nearest point of
its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and
return by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated
route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner or any other person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate
signs are in place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
– NONE –
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb                69.09 All Night Parking Prohibited
69.02 Parking on One-Way Streets           69.10 Truck Parking Limited
69.03 Angle Parking                        69.11 Parking Limited to Ten Minutes
69.04 Manner of Angle Parking              69.12 School Loading Zone
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.13 Snow Removal
69.06 Parking Prohibited                   69.14 Snow Routes
69.07 Persons with Disabilities Parking    69.15 Fire Lanes
69.08 No Parking Zones
 
69.01   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1.   Main Street, on both sides, between First Street and Fifth Street.
2.   Main Street, on the east side, between Fifth Street and 320th Street (U.S.
Highway 18).
3.   East Second Street and West Second Street, on both sides, between Main
Street to the alleyway east and west of Main Street.
4.   East Third Street and West Third Street, on both sides, between Main
Street to the alleyway east and west of Main Street.
5.   East Fifth Street, on the north side, between Main Street and Franklin
Street.
6.   East First Street, on the south side, between Main Street and the alleyway
east of Main Street.
69.04   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 72 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.06   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part
of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
69.07   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
   A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
   B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
   C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8
of the Code of Iowa.
3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
   A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply
with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when utilizing
a wheelchair parking cone.
   B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.08   NO PARKING ZONES.
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically
designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic
control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   West Fifth Street, on the north sided, between Main Street and O’Brien
Street.
2.   Main Street, on the west side, between Seventh Street and Fifth Street.
3.   On the east side of any street which runs north and south or on the north
side of any street that runs east and west, except on O’Brien Street between
320th Street and Brady Street and except those areas listed in Section
69.03 of this chapter.
4.   Any place on Western Street.
5.   Any place on Eastern Avenue.
6.   Any place on Profit Street.
7.   Any place on East First Street.
69.09   ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a
vehicle on any of the following named streets for a period of time longer than
30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Main Street, between First Street and 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18).
69.10   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
Excepting only when such vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery or
receiving of merchandise or cargo within the prohibited area, no person shall
park or leave standing a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached on any street, alley, public or private parking lot, or drive
of any service station between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the
engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment, or other
device in operation giving off audible sounds excepting only the drive of a
service station when actually being serviced and then in no event for more than
30 minutes. The provisions of this section do not apply to pick-up, light
delivery, or panel delivery trucks.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.11   PARKING LIMITED TO TEN MINUTES.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than 10
minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. upon the following
designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1.   Main Street, on the east side, in front of City Hall.
69.12   SCHOOL LOADING ZONE.
No person, except drivers of authorized school buses, shall park any vehicle on
the north side of Fifth Street from Main Street to O’Brien Street. Drivers of
authorized school buses shall not leave the buses unattended while parked in
this zone.
69.13   SNOW REMOVAL.
No person shall park or permit to be parked a vehicle, including non-self-
propelled vehicles, on any street from November 1 through March 31 of the
following year between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day until
the snow removal operations have been completed and the snow has been plowed
from said street, alley, or parking area, except that this provision shall not
apply to vehicles parked immediately adjacent upon the place of employment of
the operator thereof, and said operator is then engaged in such employment and
except disabled vehicles and emergency vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1], [1a], and Sec. 321.358[14])
69.14   SNOW ROUTES.
The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.15   FIRE LANES.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a fire lane that is either
marked by an official sign or temporarily designated by the Fire Chief. This
provision does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk. The fine for each violation charged under a simple
notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $20.00 for all violations except
snow route parking violations and improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit. If such fine is not paid within 30 days, it shall be increased
by $5.00. The fine for snow route parking violations is $25.00 and the fine for
improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose                  75.05 Operation of ATVs and UTVs
75.02 Definitions              75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations      75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles 75.08 Towing
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
   B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than Type
1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
   C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48
inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed
for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle
that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or
treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the City except
the following designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
   A.   Any street having a ditch parallel to either side thereof.
   B.   All streets immediately adjacent to any nursing home or home for the
elderly.
   C.   All streets adjacent to the public and private schools of Sanborn
during school days from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   D.   On 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18) within the City limits as prohibited
by State law.
   E.   Any street immediately adjacent to any church on Sunday.
   F.   Main Street from First Street to 320th Street (U.S. Highway 18).
2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under
the following circumstances:
   A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency
during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
   B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited
street provided all of the following occur:
      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
      (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad
right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other
provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   A.   Snowmobiles may be operated on private property of the operator or
owner of the snowmobile on any private property in the City with the consent of
the property owner.
   B.   Snowmobiles may be operated in public areas specifically provided by
the Council by resolution. Such resolutions shall limit snowmobile operation on
such public areas to no more than 30 days at one time, and shall designate the
hours during which snowmobiles may be operated in the area and shall provide
that the areas be posted notifying the public of these requirements.
6.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
75.05   OPERATION OF ATVS AND UTVS.
The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 and 3])
2.   ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a railroad
right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other
provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
5.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
6.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
   A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
   B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
   C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
   D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
   E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV or UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which
such vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.06   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage
only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate
the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
75.08   TOWING.
No item shall be towed by a snowmobile unless coupled to said snowmobile by a
rigid tow bar.
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations            76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies            76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted        76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit               76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed                           76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging From Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or
by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Whenever
such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article that
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
1.   Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within
the Business District, as defined in Section
60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   TOWING.
It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other
vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for
such use.
76.10   IMPROPER RIDING.
No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.11   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a distance of at
least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light
visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except that a red reflector on
the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a
motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.13   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] and Sec. 321.90)
1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
   A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
   B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours.
   C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property
without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more
than 24 hours.
   D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
   E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to
create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
   F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of
any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may
employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or
disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the
abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police
authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police
authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the
registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been taken
into custody, no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle. Notice
shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant
to the vehicle.
2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all of
the following:
   A.   A description of the year, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
   B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
   C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
   D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
   E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property is
deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the vehicle
at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to dispose of
the personal property by sale or destruction.
3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or
by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police
authority or private entity, or of the assessment of fees and charges provided
by this section, may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters.
5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their
right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day reclaiming
period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have any right,
title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property.
6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right, title,
claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the expiration
of the 10-day reclaiming period.
7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identities
and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one
publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice
under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain multiple
listings of abandoned vehicles, but shall be published within the same time
requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice
in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
80.04   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received (or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received)
notice under Section
80.03 shall present to the police authority or private entity, as applicable,
the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of financial liability coverage
as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.05   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay $3.00 if claimed within five days
of impounding, plus $1.00 for each additional day within the reclaiming period
plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or towing and storage fees, if
stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released. The amount
of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages,
shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of
the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the
amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
 
81.01 Definitions         81.03 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Obstructing Streets
 
81.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other
association that owns, operates, drives, or controls a railroad train.
2.   “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02   OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner as to prevent vehicular
use of any highway, street, or alley for a period of time in excess of 10
minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1.   Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the
safety of the movement of trains.
2.   Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on
the track.
3.   Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4.   Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
5.   In Motion. When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching
operations.
6.   No Traffic. When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s
action was necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a
railroad corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad
corporation.
81.03   CROSSING MAINTENANCE.
Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient, and safe crossings
over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago and N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                   90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties     90.12 Responsibility for Water Service
                                    Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections         90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections         90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit                        90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Permit and Connection 90.16 Inspection and Approval
Charge
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required              90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations                   90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from
the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
3.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or any
duly authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and
their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to
water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall
apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new
ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
All residences and business establishments within the City limits intended or
used for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be connected to the public
water system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not
furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new
tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off
at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the permit
is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an
extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit
may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
Before any permit is issued the person who makes the application shall pay
$10.00 to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition there shall be a connection
charge in the amount of $150.00 paid before issuance of a permit to reimburse
the City for costs borne by the City in making water service available to the
property served.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises shall
be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the
Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or
premises may be shut off independently of the other.
2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter shall
receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six inches
in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall
be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall be Type K copper.
The use of any other pipe material for the service line shall first be approved
by the Superintendent. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such
depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement or freezing.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.14   CURB VALVE.
There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve
on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The
shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or
ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours after
the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner
or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs
before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of
any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the
curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall
open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Meter Installation Fee
91.05 Meter Setting                     91.10 Meter Accuracy and Tests
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by the City.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of
a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER COSTS.
The City will furnish and install up to one and one-half inch diameter water
meters for all new installations where City water service is provided. All
water meters exceeding that diameter shall be owned by the property owners and
not by the City and repaired and replaced at the owner’s expense at the
direction of the Superintendent.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter for a water line of up to one and one-half inch diameter
is found to be out of order, the Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it
is found that damage to the meter has occurred due to the carelessness or
negligence of the customer or property owner, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer at
any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09   METER INSTALLATION FEE.
The property owner shall pay an installation fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the Council, for each new installation of a water meter.
91.10   METER ACCURACY AND TESTS.
All water shall be supplied through meters that accurately measure the amount
of water supplied to any building. The Superintendent shall make a test of the
accuracy of any water meter when requested in writing. If it is found that such
meter overruns to the extent of two percent or more, the cost of the tests
shall be paid by the City, and the City will credit on the next bill the
overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy, not to exceed 30
months. If the meter is found slow, the customer shall pay the reasonable costs
of the tests.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Rates Outside the City    92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.09 Customer Deposits
92.05 Service Discontinued      92.10 Temporary Vacancy
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in
Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
Water service shall be furnished to the following monthly rates within the
City, in addition to a monthly service charge of $25.00 per month and an
irrigation monthly service charge of $8.00 per month:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
 
Gallons used per month            Rate
Irrigation Charge                 $5.25 per 1,000 gallons
Water charge                      $5.25 per 1,000 gallons
Residential and Commercial Charge
 
(Section 92.02 – Ord._230 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
92.03   RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the corporate
limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve at the following rates,
in addition to a service charge of $30.00 per month:
 
                           Rate
Residential and Commercial $6.60 per 1,000 gallons
 
However, rates shall not be charged to a customer in excess of the allowable
rates under any written contract, which legally obligates the City to charge
rates different than those provided in this chapter.
No such consumer, however, will be served unless he/she shall have signed a
service contract agreeing to be bound by the ordinances, rules and regulations
applying to water service established by the Council.
(Section 92.03 – Ord._231 – Mar. 24 Supp.)
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined service
accounts on or before five days before the end of the month.
2.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk by the 15th day of the following month.
3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A one-time late payment penalty of 18 percent per annum shall be
added to each delinquent bill.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Notice. The City Administrator shall notify each delinquent customer that
service will be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service
account, including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified
in the notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut
off, the City Administrator shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a
determination as to whether the discontinuance or disconnection is justified.
The customer has the right to appeal the City Administrator’s decision to the
Council, and if the Council finds that discontinuance or disconnection is
justified, then such discontinuance or disconnection shall be made, unless
payment has been received.
4.   Fees. A fee of $20.00 during regular working hours or $35.00 during non-
working hours shall be charged before service is restored to a delinquent
customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the
regular changes in occupancies of property.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to
the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for nonpayment
of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall not
be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured
home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is owned by a
tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and
the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the
account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is
responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the
account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.
A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
There shall be required from every customer a $5.00 deposit and from every
renter a deposit in amount equal to an estimated typical month’s water bill
(not less than $5.00) intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
A property owner may request water service be temporarily discontinued and shut
off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant for an
extended period of time. There shall be a fee of $20.00 for restoring service
during regular working hours and a fee of $35.00 for restoring service during
non-working hours. During a period when service is temporarily discontinued as
provided herein there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not
drain pipes or pull meters for temporary vacancies.
CHAPTER 93
WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
 
93.01 Purpose              93.04 Construction by Owner
93.02 Definitions          93.05 Connection Charge
93.03 Construction by City 93.06 Rights of City
 
93.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means and method for the extension
of water mains to serve property not served by an existing water line so as to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of the residents of the City.
93.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Builder” means the owner of land who causes a water main to be installed
under the provisions of this chapter. Such term includes the heirs, successors,
or assigns of such owner.
2.   “Estimated cost” means a cost estimate prepared by a registered
professional engineer or qualified contractor experienced in the installation
of water main pipe and appurtenances. All such estimates are subject to the
approval of the Council and in the event of any disagreement as to the amount
of estimated costs, the materials to be used, or installation methods, the
determination of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
93.03   CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.
An owner of land abutting or adjoining a property or a public street where no
water main has been installed may make application to the Council for the
installation of a water main along such property and in the street for the
purpose of serving the property in accordance with the following:
1.   Application and Deposit. A written request for such installation, and a
sum equal to the total estimated cost of the installation from the point where
the water main is presently installed and terminates to the point where the
most distance boundary of the owner’s lot abuts an adjoining property or the
public street, shall be submitted to the Council.
2.   Construction. Upon receipt of the deposit, the City shall construct the
water main for the purpose of serving the property of the applicant (builder),
as soon as such construction can reasonably be accomplished.
3.   Additional Costs. In the event the actual cost to the City of installation
of the water main is in excess of the estimated cost, the builder agrees to
reimburse the City for the actual additional cost within 30 days after the
presentation of a bill for such additional cost.
4.   Lien Authorized. In the event of the failure of the builder to reimburse
the City, as specified in Subsection 3 above, the total of the additional cost
shall be certified to the County Treasurer as a special assessment lien against
the builder's real estate. In the written request for installation of the water
main, the landowner shall waive all objections to jurisdiction and rights to
notice and consent to the entry of such a special assessment lien against the
real estate.
5.   Maximum Cost. The additional cost of installation, as contemplated in
Subsections 3 and 4 above, shall not exceed 110 percent of the estimated cost.
6.   Connecting Property. The expense of connecting the property of the builder
to the water main shall be borne by the builder, in addition to the cost of
constructing said water main, but such connection shall be under the
supervision of the City.
93.04   CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
In the event an owner of land abutting or adjoining a property or public street
in which no water main has been previously installed desires to construct said
water main at the owner's own expense, the owner may do so, after making proper
application to the City and receiving a permit to install such a water main, in
accordance with the following:
1.   City Supervision. The installation of such a water main by a landowner at
the owner's expense shall be under the strict supervision of the City and
shall, in all ways, conform to the requirements and specifications of the City.
2.   Surety Bond. When making application to the City for a permit to install
such a water main, the applicant shall post with the City a surety bond, in an
amount to be set by the Council and made a matter of record in the minutes of
the Council, which shall be in an amount equal to but not less than 110 percent
of the total estimated cost of the installation for the full distance from the
termination point of the presently existing water main to the point where the
farthest boundary of the applicant's land abuts the property or street, and the
bond shall guarantee the installation of the water main in as short a time as
reasonably possible and shall further indemnify the City for the cost of
completing the project in the event the applicant fails to complete the project
within a reasonable time, and shall further indemnify the City for all damages
to public property incurred in the installation, and shall further hold the
City harmless for any and all other damages arising from the installation of
the water main.
3.   Ownership of Water Main. After the water main has been installed, it shall
become the property of the City.
4.   Cost Approval. For purposes of determining connection charges under
Section
93.05 below, costs incurred by the owner shall be certified by the City and
only so much of said costs as are approved by the City shall be used in
determining connection charges as provided hereafter.
93.05   CONNECTION CHARGE.
Following the installation of an extension to the water system under the
provisions of this chapter, there shall be paid to the City a connection charge
in an amount equal to one-half the lineal construction cost for the full width
of any lot, tract, or parcel of ground to be served by a connection to such
water main. Such connection charge shall be paid to the City prior to making
any connection to said water main.
93.06   RIGHTS OF CITY.
All decisions in connection with the manner of installation of any extension
and maintenance thereof shall remain in the exclusive control of the City and
such extension shall be the property of the City and no other person shall have
any right, title, or interest therein.
CHAPTER 94
WATER CONSERVATION
 
94.01 Water Shortages         94.08 Base Allocation
94.02 Conditions              94.09 Appeal and Adjustment of the Base
                              Allocation
94.03 Water Watch             94.10 Premium Rate for Imprudent Consumption
94.04 Water Warning — Tier I94.11 Adjustment of Premium Rate Charge
94.05 Water Warning — Tier I94.12 Water Appeal Board
94.06 Water Emergency         94.13 Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person
94.07 Penalties
 
94.01   WATER SHORTAGES.
A water shortage exists whenever, for reasons of drought conditions, consumer
demand, or treatment plant or distribution systems operation or maintenance,
water quantity and quality cannot be maintained at a level sufficient to meet
the demands of the customers using the system. Whenever, in the opinion of the
Public Works Director, conditions exist which create a water shortage, the
Public Works Director or designee shall have the authority to declare a public
Water Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency, during which time the following
measures and provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable
reduction of water consumption. Whenever the Public Works Director finds that
the conditions which gave rise to the Water Emergency no longer exist, said
officer is authorized to either declare the termination of the Water Emergency
or reduce the type of emergency conditions as set forth in Section
94.02 hereof. The City Manager shall, at the next meeting of the Council
following the declaration of Water Emergency, present a resolution to the
Council for its affirmation of such declaration and the conditions thereunder.
94.02   CONDITIONS.
1.   Water Watch. A Water Watch may be declared when a water shortage or
equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system
to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future.
Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch include:
   A.   System operating at 75 percent of pumping capacity;
   B.   Moderate decrease in the pumping water level of wells or moderate
decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells;
   C.   Moderate decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet below
spillway or number of feet above intake.
2.   Water Warning. A Tier I or Tier II Water Warning may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of
the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the
foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a Tier I Water Warning
include:
   A.   System operating at 85 percent of pumping capacity;
   B.   Significant decrease in the pumping water level of wells or significant
decrease in recovery rate of water level in wells;
   C.   Significant decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet
below spillway or number of feet above intake.
Indicators of the need to impose a Tier II Water Warning include severe system
emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in feeder mains or
treatment plant.
3.   Water Emergency. A Water Emergency may be declared when a water shortage
or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the ability of the
water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of the need to
impose a Water Emergency include:
   A.   System operating at 95 percent of pumping capacity;
   B.   Serious decrease in the recovery rate of water level in wells;
   C.   Serious decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet below
spillway or number of feet above intake.
94.03   WATER WATCH.
Under a Water Watch, all customers of the municipal water service are
encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to
conserve precious water resources during the time of shortage. Customers may be
encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards:
1.   No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:30 p.m.
2.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children's wading
pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
3.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
4.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
5.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
94.04   WATER WARNING — TIER I.
Under a Tier I Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.
2.   Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. daily.
3.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees, and shrubs
less than four years old and new seedling or sod is permitted once per week
with an application not to exceed one inch.
4.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that provide
that service.
5.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children's wading
pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
6.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
7.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
8.   Water shall be served in restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
9.   Use of water-consuming comfort air conditioning equipment which consumes
in excess of five percent of the water circulating in such equipment is
prohibited.
10.   Tankload water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that
has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction.
Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City water utility,
such as water condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected
from rain or snow, may be used without restriction.
94.05   WATER WARNING — TIER II.
Under a Tier II Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is
prohibited.
2.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing
products or services is prohibited.
3.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
4.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and golf course
watering and other incidental or recreational uses, is prohibited.
5.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited.
94.06   WATER EMERGENCY.
Under a Water Emergency, Tier II Water Warning use restrictions shall be in
effect and, in addition, each customer will be limited to a monthly base
allocation of water.
94.07   PENALTIES.
The following penalties shall apply for violation of Water Warning or Water
Emergency use restrictions imposed under this chapter.
1.   First Violation. For a first violation, the utility shall issue a written
notice of violation to the water user violating the water use restrictions
imposed during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
2.   Second Violation. For a second violation within a 12-month period, a
surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 16.7 percent of the customer's
highest monthly bill during the last 12 months.
3.   Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violations within a 12-month
period, a surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 33.4 percent of the
customer's highest monthly bill during the last 12 months.
Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency
use restrictions may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board. The Water
Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or that the
circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or partial
mitigation of the penalty.
94.08   BASE ALLOCATION.
The base allocation of water for residential use shall be 3,000 gallons per
household per month. For commercial, industrial, or institutional use, the base
allocation shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the average
water used during the previous winter (November through April).
94.09   APPEAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF THE BASE ALLOCATION.
Any person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board to adjust the base
allocation amount. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the
appellant based upon the following criteria:
1.   For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be increased by
1,000 gallons per person per month for all individuals residing at the
appellant's residence for a period of more than 30 days.
2.   For commercial, industrial, institutional, or other residential uses, the
base allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the individual
customer; such as usage, production, service and occupancy data provided by the
customer.
94.10   PREMIUM RATE FOR IMPRUDENT CONSUMPTION.
In addition to the water rates duly enacted by the Council, all persons shall
pay a premium rate of $1.00 per 100 gallons of water consumed in excess of the
base allocation.
94.11   ADJUSTMENT OF PREMIUM RATE CHARGES.
Any person may file for adjustment of the premium rate charges for imprudent
water consumption with the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may grant
an adjustment of the premium rate charges in accordance with the following
criteria:
1.   Adjustments may be granted for overconsumption due to mechanical failures
such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures but not for overconsumption due to
human carelessness.
2.   The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was repaired
promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber’s invoice or
statement or a materials receipt.
3.   The adjustment shall be granted only for the month prior to the correction
of the failure.
4.   For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate charges, the
minimum adjusted rate shall be 40 percent of the actual bill which shall
include the premium rate charges and sales tax.
94.12   WATER APPEAL BOARD.
A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or Water
Emergency. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the
Superintendent of the Water System, and three representatives of the community
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The Water
Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a Water Warning
or Water Emergency, except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal
infraction relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be conducted
pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
94.13   REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON.
The Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for
hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any
person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this
chapter during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required 95.10 Abandoned Sewer Lines
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.
7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial
waste.
14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
22.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water
pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or
in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 60 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 100 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice
to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section
95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of
this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
95.10   ABANDONED SEWER LINES.
When an existing sanitary sewer service is abandoned or a service is renewed
with a new connection in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains
shall be capped off and made absolutely watertight.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                           96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required                 96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations                      96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements          96.10 Abatement of Violations
 
96.01   PERMIT.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall
set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60 days after the
issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient
showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship,
such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to
comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit
may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02   PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount of $10.00 to
the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating,
and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a connection charge in the
amount of $150.00 paid to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in
making sewer service available to the property served.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall
be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of
Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and
applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line
to meet the following:
   A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
   B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
   C.   Minimum velocity of two feet per second with the sewer half full.
   D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written
approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved fittings.
7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain
shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits,
or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code except
that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall
comply with the current edition of one of the following:
   A.   Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
   B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
   C.   Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
   D.   P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any residence,
business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the
basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl
space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to the
foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service
stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as
specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all
times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of
official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater               97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of
                               Superintendent
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges    97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges    97.08 Testing of Wastes
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to be
in the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
   A.   Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more than 350
parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an average
daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the City,
shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
   B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C).
2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°C to
65°C).
4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such
a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
   A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
   B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
   C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
   D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs”
as defined herein.
11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
97.04 and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious
effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of
Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or
flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
the owner’s expense.
97.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required               98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required             98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate, or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile, or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
98.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.
No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 1,500 square feet.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER USE CHARGES
 
99.01 Purpose                99.08 Special Rates
99.02 Definitions            99.09 Responsibility for Increased Costs
99.03 Use of Funds           99.10 Application
99.04 Accounts Designated    99.11 Payment of Bills
99.05 Year-end Balances      99.12 Lien for Nonpayment
99.06 Charges Based on Usage 99.13 Review of User Charge System
99.07 Minimum Charge         99.14 Notification of Rate Change
 
99.01   PURPOSE.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection
of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the City to collect
charges from all users who contribute wastewater to the City's treatment works.
The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purpose of
operating, maintaining, and retiring the debt for such public wastewater
treatment works.
99.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “BOD” (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/1).
2.   “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD concentration
of not more than 240 mg/1, a suspended solids concentration of not more than
320 mg/1.
3.   “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the useful life
of the wastewater treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other
items which are necessary for the management and maintenance of the sewer works
to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed.
4.   “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
replacement.
5.   “Residential contributor” means any contributor to the City’s treatment
works whose lot, parcel of real estate or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only.
6.   “SS” (suspended solids) means solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
7.   “Treatment works” means any devices and systems used for the storage,
treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or
liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers,
sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power, and other
equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling,
additions, and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable
recycled supply system such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be
an integral part of the treatment process or used for ultimate disposal of
residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting sludge,
temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated
wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other
method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating,
separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including
waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems.
8.   “Useful life” means the estimated period during which the wastewater
treatment works will be operated.
9.   “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.
10.   “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by the City or furnished and/or installed by a user
and approved by the City.
99.03   USE OF FUNDS.
The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs of
annual operation and maintenance including replacement and costs associated
with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment
works which the City may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge
system. That portion of the total user charge which is designated for operation
and maintenance including replacement of the treatment works shall be
established by this chapter.
99.04   ACCOUNTS DESIGNATED.
That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for
operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as established in this
chapter shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the
Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Fund and will be kept in three primary
accounts as follows:
1.   Operation and Maintenance Account. An account designated for the specific
purpose of defraying operation and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of
the treatment works.
2.   Replacement Account. An account designated for the specific purpose of
ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works.
Deposits in the Replacement Account shall be made at least annually, from the
sewer Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Fund in the amount of $11,340
annually.
3.   Debt Service Account. An account designated for ensuring the retirement of
bonded indebtedness of the treatment works. Deposits in the debt service
account shall be made monthly in an amount designated by the bond covenants.
99.05   YEAR-END BALANCES.
Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation and Maintenance Account, the
Replacement Account and Debt Service Account shall be carried over to the same
accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes
than those designated for these accounts. Moneys which have been transferred
from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance,
and Replacement Fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance, and
replacement. The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred
moneys will be returned to their respective accounts within one year of the
fiscal year in which the moneys were borrowed.
99.06   CHARGES BASED ON USAGE.
Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on said user’s
use of the treatment works as determined by water meters acceptable to the
City, as follows:
1.   Normal Domestic Users. For residential contributors and other “normal
domestic users” monthly user charges shall be based on water used during the
current month.
2.   Industrial and Commercial Use. For industrial and commercial contributors,
user charges shall be based on water used during the current month. If a
commercial or industrial contributor has a consumptive use of water, or in some
other manner uses water which is not returned to the wastewater collection
system, the user charge for that contributor may be based on a wastewater meter
installed and maintained at the contributor’s expense, and in a manner
acceptable to the City.
99.07   MINIMUM CHARGE.
The minimum charge per month per user shall be $15.08. In addition, each
contributor shall pay a user charge rate for operation and maintenance
including replacement and debt service of $3.87 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater
as determined in the preceding section.   
(Section 99.07 – Ord. 233 – Nov. 24 Supp.)
99.08   SPECIAL RATES.
For those customers who contribute wastewater, the strength of which is greater
than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge
will be collected. The minimum charge/meter charge of $50.00 will be collected.
The surcharge for operation and maintenance including replacement and debt
retirement is $.1474 per pound BOD and $.2311 per pound SS/suspended solids and
$1.80 per 1,000 gallons of flow. In the event that an extra-strength
contributor, whose waste discharge is regulated by a treatment agreement
between that contributor and the City, discharge effluent in excess of the
parameters established in the agreement, the fine/penalty will be set out in
the treatment agreement between the City and the contributor.
99.09   RESPONSIBILITY FOR INCREASED COSTS.
Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the City’s treatment works or
any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with
other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased
costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible
plant operating personnel and approved by the Council.
99.10   APPLICATION.
The user charge rates established in this chapter apply to all users of the
City’s treatment works, regardless of their location.
99.11   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
99.12   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for sewer
service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and
delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be
certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
99.13   REVIEW OF USER CHARGE SYSTEM.
The City shall review the user charge system at least every two years and
revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including
replacement, and debt service, if any, and that the system continues to provide
for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including
replacement costs and debt service among users and user classes.
99.14   NOTIFICATION OF RATE CHANGE.
The City will notify each user initially and when there is a change in the
amount of rates being charged for operation, maintenance, including replacement
of the treatment works, and debt retirement.
CHAPTER 100
SEWER EXTENSIONS
 
100.01 Purpose              100.04 Construction by Owner
100.02 Definition           100.05 Others Required to Connect
100.03 Construction by City 100.06 Building Sewers Installed
 
100.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means and method for the extension
of sewers to serve property not served by an existing sewer line so as to
preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of the residents of the City.
100.02   DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, “builder” means the owner of land who causes a
sanitary sewer to be installed under the provisions of this chapter. Such term
includes the heirs, successors, or assigns of such owner.
100.03   CONSTRUCTION BY CITY.
An owner of land abutting or adjoining a public street where no sanitary sewer
has been installed may make application to the Council for the installation of
a sanitary sewer in said street for the purpose of serving the property in
accordance with the following:
1.   Application and Deposit. A written request for such installation, and a
sum equal to the cost as estimated by the City of construction from the point
where the sanitary sewer is presently installed and terminates to the point
where the most distant boundary of the owner’s lot abuts the said public
street, shall be submitted to the Council.
2.   Construction. Upon receipt of the deposit, the City shall construct the
sanitary sewer for the purpose of serving the property of the applicant
(builder), as soon as such construction can reasonably be accomplished.
3.   Additional Costs. In the event the actual cost to the City of installation
of the sanitary sewer is in excess of the estimated cost, the builder agrees to
reimburse the City for the actual additional cost within 30 days after the
presentation of a bill for such additional cost.
4.   Lien Authorized. In the event of the failure of the builder to reimburse
the City, as specified in Subsection 3 above, the total of the additional cost
shall be certified to the County Treasurer as a special assessment lien against
the builder’s real estate. In the written request for installation of the
sanitary sewer, the landowner shall waive all objections to jurisdiction and
rights to notice and consent to the entry of such a special assessment lien
against the real estate.
5.   Connecting Property. The expense of connecting the property of the builder
to the sanitary sewer laid in the public street shall be borne by the builder,
in addition to the cost of constructing said sewer, but such connection shall
be under the supervision of the City.
100.04   CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER.
In the event an owner of land abutting or adjoining a public street in which no
sewer has been previously installed desires to construct said sewer at the
owner’s own expense, the owner may do so, after making proper application to
the City and receiving a permit to install such a sewer, in accordance with the
following:
1.   City Supervision. The installation of such a sewer by a landowner at the
owner's expense shall be under the strict supervision of the City and shall, in
all ways, conform to the requirements and specifications of the City.
2.   Surety Bond. When making application to the City for a permit to install
such a sewer, the applicant shall post with the City a surety bond, in an
amount to be set by the Council and made a matter of record in the minutes of
the Council, which shall be in an amount equal to but not less than 110 percent
of the total estimated cost of the installation for the full distance from the
termination point of the presently existing sewer to the point where the
farthest boundary of the applicant’s land abuts the public street, and the bond
shall guarantee the installation of the sewer in as short a time as reasonably
possible and shall further indemnify the City for the cost of completing the
project in the event the applicant fails to complete the project within a
reasonable time, and shall further indemnify the City for all damages to the
public street incurred in the installation, and shall further hold the City
harmless for any and all other damages arising from the installation of the
sanitary sewer.
3.   Ownership of Sewer Line. After the sewer has been installed, it shall
become the property of the City.
100.05   OTHERS REQUIRED TO CONNECT.
Following the installation of a sanitary sewer under the provisions of this
chapter, owners of land abutting or adjoining a public street in which such
sewer has been installed, being persons other than the builder, shall be
obliged to connect any sewage generating facilities into said sanitary sewer,
as required by
Chapter 95.
100.06   BUILDING SEWERS INSTALLED.
Each sanitary sewer constructed in a public street or right-of-way, whether
constructed by the City or by a private party, shall include a stub to each
abutting or adjoining lot line of the street or right-of-way on which the sewer
is installed. Each party responsible for installing such sewer shall provide
the City with an accurate map showing the location of each of such stubs within
30 days of the completion of the installation.
CHAPTER 101
STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY
 
101.01 Purpose and Establishment of Storm Water 101.04 Amount of Charge
Drainage Utility
101.02 Definitions                              101.05 Exempt from Charges
101.03 Charges and Fees in General               
 
101.01   PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF STORM WATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
1.   Pursuant to 384.84 Code of Iowa, the City Council finds, determines and
declares it to be conducive to the health, welfare, safety and convenience of
the City and its residents that a storm water drainage utility, to be known as
the Sanborn Storm Water Drainage Utility, is established, and it is ordained
and declared that the property located within the City limits of the City of
Sanborn shall be and constitute the storm water drainage utility, and that the
utility shall compromise and include elements of the City’s storm water
drainage and flood protection systems which provide for the collection,
treatment and disposal of storm water, surface water, and groundwater.
It is further found, determined, and declared that the elements of the storm
water drainage utility are of benefit and provide services to all real
properties within the incorporated City limits, including property not directly
served by the storm water drainage system, and that such benefits and services
may include but are not limited to the provision of adequate systems of
collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and release of storm water; the
reduction of hazard to property and life resulting from storm water runoff and
flooding; improvement in general health and welfare through reduction of
undesirable storm water conditions and flooding; and improvement to the water
quality in the storm water and surface water system and its receiving waters.
2.   It is further determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, welfare, safety and convenience of the City
and its residents that charges be levied upon and collected from the owners or
occupants of all lots, parcels of real estate, and buildings that discharge
storm water or surface or subsurface waters, directly or indirectly, to the
City storm water drainage system, and that the proceeds of such charges so
derived be used for the purposes of operation, maintenance, repair, replacement
and debt service for construction of the storm water drainage and flood
protection improvements comprising the storm water drainage system.
3.   The City Council finds, determines, and declares it the purpose of this
ordinance is to establish the Storm Water Drainage Utility, authorize charges,
rates and fees for use of, and discharge to, the storm and surface water
drainage system.
4.   The City Council finds that the construction, operation and maintenance of
the City’s storm water drainage system should be funded through user charges
imposed for the discharge of storm and surface water to the storm water
drainage system, thereby charging those persons and activities using or
receiving service from that system.
5.   The City may be required to provide increased quantity or quality controls
to mitigate those impacts of pollutants from discharging storm and surface
waters into the storm water system. Therefore, it is appropriate to impose a
storm and surface water user charge upon all users of property which may
discharge, directly or indirectly, into the storm water system.
101.02   DEFINITIONS.
The following words shall have the following definitions when used in this
ordinance, and any resolution and order adopted pursuant hereto, unless the
context requires otherwise or unless such word is expressly defined otherwise:
1.   All other properties. Shall mean churches, schools, daycares, commercial
or industrial businesses and all other nonresidential property.
2.   City. Shall mean the City of Sanborn, O’Brien County, Iowa, and shall
include any representative or employee of the City authorized to act, in its
behalf.
3.   Condominium. Shall mean individual dwelling units contained within a
single structure with multiple owners. Each dwelling unit of the condominium
shall be charged one fixed rate per month.
4.   Council. Shall mean the City Council of Sanborn, Iowa.
5.   Connection. The physical act or process of directing or allowing the flow
of storm and surface waters to the storm sewer or drainage line, or joining on
to a private storm sewer, for the purpose of connecting private impervious
surface or other storm and surface water sources or systems to the public storm
and surface water system.
6.   Duplex. Shall mean two or more dwelling units joined to each other with a
common wall, or one above the other, on one or two parcels. The units may be
under one ownership or owned separately. Each dwelling unit of the duplex shall
be charged one fixed rate per month.
7.   Mobile home parks. Shall include mobile homes on a single tax lot (even if
there are more than two per tax lot) under one ownership, where spaces are
leased or rented for a mobile home or trailer to be placed. Each space in a
mobile home park shall be charged one fixed rate per month.
8.   Occupant. Shall mean the person residing or doing business on the
property. In a family or household situation, the occupant(s) responsible for
the obligation herein imposed shall be the adult head(s) of the household,
jointly and severally. In a dwelling or office sharing situation, the adult
occupant legally responsible for the management of condition of the property
shall be responsible.
9.   Owner. Shall mean the legal owner(s) of records as shown on the tax rolls
of O’Brien County, or where there is a recorded land sale contract, the
purchaser thereunder.
10.   Person. Shall mean any individual, public or private corporation,
political subdivision, governmental agency, municipality, partnership,
association, firm trust, or any other legal entity whatsoever.
11.   Rule. Shall mean any written standard, directive, interpretation, policy,
regulation, procedure or other provision, adopted by the City Council as a
resolution and order to carry out the provisions of this ordinance.
12.   Storm and surface water drainage system. Means any combination of
publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and quality facilities,
pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and culverts, curb
and gutter, open channels, creeks and rivers, force mains, laterals, manholes,
catch basins and inlets, including the grates and covers thereof, detention and
retention facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and any other
publicly owned facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and
disposal of storm and surface water system within the City, to which sanitary
sewage flows are not intentionally admitted.
13.   Unit. Unit is defined as one living unit (each apartment, trailer,
condominium, mobile home, one apartment in a duplex and multi-family complex).
Each dwelling unit shall be charged one fixed rate per month.
14.   User. Shall mean any person who uses property which either connects or
discharges to the City’s storm and surface water system or otherwise receives
services from the City for surface water management. The occupant of occupied
property is deemed the user. If the owner of an apartment, duplex or multi-
family unit pays the utilities on behalf of the tenants of the complex, the
landlord/owner will be billed per unit. If the property is not occupied, the
person who has the right to occupy it shall be deemed the user.
15.   Single family residence. Shall mean a residential structure not attached
to another residential structure on one or more parcels of land, providing
there are not more than two residential structures on one parcel. This
definition also includes trailers, mobile homes, and manufactured homes, if on
separate parcels.
16.   Residential vacant lot. Shall be a bare lot which is located in any
residential district without any utility service being provided thereto.
17.   Residential lot with accessory building. Shall mean a residential lot
with a garage, shed, or other storage building located thereon and no persons
living therein.
101.03   CHARGES AND FEES IN GENERAL.
The Council may adopt by rule, charges, rates, and fees for the use of the
City’s storm and surface water system, and for services provided by the City
relating to that system. Such rules may include delinquency and interest
charges and penalties. Such charges and fees shall be just and equitable based
upon the actual costs of operation, maintenance, acquisition, extension and
replacement of the City’s system, the costs of bond repayment, regulation,
administration, and services of the City, except as specifically provided in
this ordinance or by resolution and order. All charges and service fees shall
be due and payable in advance of provision of service. The utility clerk and
City Administrator have the right to customize rates in situations that the
existing charges don’t cover.
101.04   AMOUNT OF CHARGE.
Except as hereinafter noted, each customer, whose property lies within the
corporate limits of the City, shall pay a fixed monthly rate to the City. Other
properties that have multiple utility bills will pay the fee per utility bill.
If a customer owns more than one (1) lot and the lots are not adjoining, there
will be a separate charge for each lot or location. This charge, which shall be
part of each customer’s combined service account with the Sanborn Municipal
Utility Billing Department, shall be due and payable at the same time that the
customer is making payment for the other City utilities. The amount of the
charge shall be as follows:
1.   Single-family residential, duplex unit, apartment unit, condominium unit,
townhome unit: $2.50 per month.
2.   All other properties: $4.50 per month. The properties that fall into this
category that have multiple utility bills will pay the fee per bill.
The foregoing charges shall be applicable to all of the above-described
properties which are receiving any City utility services, except as shown below
in
Section 101.05. In the event that City utility services are being provided to a
property and the owner thereof elects to disconnect all of those basic
services, said property shall still be subject to the applicable charge for the
storm water drainage utility. Payment of the appropriate fixed rate shall be
paid by the customer of record on a monthly basis to the City.
101.05   EXEMPT FROM CHARGES.
The following properties shall be exempt from any charges hereunder:
1.   All property owned by either the City or the Sanborn Improvement
Corporation.
2.   In a single-family residential district, a garage or accessory building
which is located on a separate lot that is owned by the same owner or owners of
the adjoining property.
3.   Lots with no buildings, pavement or other permanent structures located
thereon.
(Chapter 101 – Ord._229 – Apr. 23 Supp.)
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                       105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required        105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted           105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from
all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing
in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in any
premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
9.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple-
family dwelling.
10.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
11.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
12.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
13.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
14.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of
Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
   B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
   C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
   D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
   E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
   F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A of
the Code of Iowa.
   G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
      (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
      (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing to
ensure production is not interrupted.
15.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
16.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse
accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such
accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days shall
be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
circumstances listed in the following subsections, provided that no premises
fire shall be kindled or maintained on any private land unless (i) the location
is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to
prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure, or (ii) the
fire is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than 15
feet from any structure. Such fires shall be constantly attended by a competent
person until such fire is extinguished. The person shall have a garden hose
connected to the water supply or shall have other fire extinguishing equipment
readily available for use. The Fire Chief is permitted to prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous.
(567 IAC 23.2[455B] and 100.2)
1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any
structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“a”)
2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at
a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance
with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“b”)
3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“c”)
4.   Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises or deposited thereon by the elements shall only be
permitted during the months of April and October. However, the burning of
landscape waste produced in clearing, grubbing, and construction operations
shall be limited to areas located at least one-fourth mile from any building
inhabited by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. No
person shall burn landscape waste on any street, alley, or City-owned property.
Rubber tires shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“d”)
5.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“e”)
6.   Back Yard Burning. Back yard burning is prohibited unless the burning is
landscape waste and being burned during the months of April and October.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“f”)
7.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training
of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“g”)
8.   Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning of
paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing organic
forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium, or arsenic) and seed corn
bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if burned in
accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“h”)
9.   Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if in
accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“i”])
10.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of a
demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided
that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and
limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“j”)
11.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[2])
Burning Prohibited. The City Fire Chief is permitted to prohibit any or all
bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires during the permitted months of April and
October, when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires
hazardous. During this period, dUmping of landscape waste may be permitted at
the City tree dump.
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid
waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted, burned on the
premises in accordance with Section
105.05, or hauled (except for grass clippings) to the City’s tree dump site.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13[2] and 400 IAC 27.14[2])
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
1.   Containers. Solid waste containers shall be provided by the collector.
Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential
premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private
property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City to
use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained
and fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel, and fire
inspection personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall
be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent
materials from being blown or scattered around neighboring yards and streets.
2.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid
waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily accessible
place by the owner or occupant of the premises served.
3.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers
not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such
containers.
2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for
high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
105.11   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Northwest Iowa Solid Waste
Association are hereby designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal
Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the
City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
The City shall provide by contract for the collection of all solid waste except
bulky rubbish as provided in Section
106.05 within the City.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned
to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be maintained in
good repair.
(567 IAC 104.9)
106.03   LOADING.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid
waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss
of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least once each
week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as frequently
as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner
of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request; however,
if it exceeds the volume specified in the schedule of fees, the City shall
determine the fair and reasonable amount of the fee and shall bill the resident
for the same, all as provided in the schedule of fees provisions in this Code
of Ordinances.
106.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for
the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter; however,
solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.07   CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing,
or disposing of solid waste for the City without first entering into a contract
with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid
waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied, or used by such owner,
provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal
project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or
disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities,
provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks, or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being
transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.08   COLLECTION FEES.
The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and a
mandatory fee shall be levied and collected in accordance with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449 [Iowa 1970])
1.   Schedule of Fees. The fees for solid waste collection and disposal
service, used or available, are:
   A.   Contract Prices:
 
2020 $14.60
2021 $14.90
2022 $15.20
2023 $15.50
2024 $15.85
2025 $16.20
2026 $16.55
 
The above prices are for one 65 gallon tote. The second 65 gallon tote would be
an additional $11.60.
   B.   A tonnage fee of $0.10 per residence for every $1.00 per ton increase
at the Northwest Iowa Landfill & Recycling Center.
   C.   Fuel surcharge shall be $0.10 per stop for every $0.25 increase of fuel
starting at $3.50:
 
$3.50-$3.75 $0.10 increase
$3.76-$4.00 $0.10 increase
$4.01-$4.25 $0.10 increase
$4.26-$4.50 $0.10 increase
$4.51-$5.00 $0.10 increase
 
   D.   Brommer Sanitation will continue to promote recycling within the
community.
   E.   City charges for billing and tree dump costs for residential only will
result in a charge of $2.00 per month. An additional $2.00 per month will be
charged per container; for instance if a residential customer wants two 64
gallon containers, the city charge would be an additional $2.00 per month.
2.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.07 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any
lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for solid
waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS UTILITY
 
110.01 Purpose                       110.03 Tariff on File
110.02 Service Rules and Regulations 110.04 Rates
 
110.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the terms and conditions of
natural gas service provided by the municipally owned gas utility.
110.02   SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The fules and regulations for service to be rendered by the Municipal Gas
Utility are contained in the Gas Tarrif on file with the Utilities Division of
the Iowa Department of Commerce.
(Section 110.02 – Ord._235 – Nov. 25 Supp.)
110.03   TARIFF ON FILE.
An official copy of the City’s Municipal Gas Tariff is on file in the office of
the Clerk and with the Utilities Division of the Iowa Department of Commerce.
110.04   RATES.
1.   Firm Residential and Commercial Service
   Meter Charge   $10.00
   Utility Charge   $.330 per CCF
   Transportation Charge   $ Northern Natural Gas Transport Charge
   Gas Purchase Charge   $Commodity Charge Per Month
2.   Interruptible Customer Class #1
   Meter Charge   $10.00 Minimum
   Utility Charge   $.330 per CCF
   Transportation Charge   $Northern Natural Gas Transport Charge
   Gas Purchase Charge   $Commodity Charge Per Month
3.   Interruptible Customer Class AMPI
   Meter Charge   $225.00
   Utility Charge   $.065 per CCF
   Transportation Charge   $Northern Natural Gas Transport Charge
   Gas Purchase Charge   $Commodity Charge Per Month
4.   Meter charges for a standard AC -250 meter (Standard Residential/
Commercial Meter) $10.00.
5.   Meter charges for a 425 meter will be an additional $3.00 per month.
6.   Meter charges for a AC -630 meter will be an additional $7.00 per month.
7.   Larger meters over the AC -630 meter will be charged a meter charge to be
determined by City staff and approved by the City Council.
(Section 110.04 – Ord._236 – Nov. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 111
FRANCHISE REQUIRED
 
111.01 Franchise          111.04 Prohibited Acts
111.02 User Fee           111.05 City’s Right of Action
111.03 Grant of Franchise
 
111.01   FRANCHISE.
No person or other entity shall erect, maintain, and operate plants and systems
for electric light and power, heating, telephone, telegraph, cable television,
district telegraph and alarm, cable communication system of any type, motor
bus, trolley bus, street railway or other public transit, waterworks, or
gasworks within the City without a franchise from the City.
111.02   USER FEE.
Any person or other entity operating in violation of Section
111.01 shall pay a user fee to the City based on the gross revenue derived from
any sales through the distribution system within the City. Said payment is a
form of rent and grants no rights to any person or other entity. Any person or
other entity, whether paying a user fee or not, may be ejected from public
property if operating without a franchise, and in addition, the City reserves
to itself all rights and remedies it may have at law, in equity, or otherwise
against such persons or other entities.
111.03   GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
A city ordinance is required to give any person the right or privilege to
erect, construct, operate, or maintain or use any natural gas pipeline, plant,
or system or gasworks, or electric light and power system or works or water or
telephone or cable communications systems of any type within the City in order
to sell or distribute or provide non-municipal natural gas or electrical power
and energy to any user or consumer within the City or to use the streets or
alleys of the City for such purpose or to interconnect any building, structure,
or facility of any kind to any natural gas pipeline or system, or electrical
line or system other than to the natural gas or electrical system of the City.
No such ordinance shall be considered until after the question of the granting
of the franchise necessary for such purpose shall be submitted to and approved
by a majority of the qualified electors of the City at an election held for
such purposes at the expense of the applicant for such franchise.
111.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
Unless a franchise has been granted under provisions of Section
111.03 above, no person shall erect, construct, operate, or maintain or use any
natural gas pipeline, plant, or system or gasworks, or electric light and power
system or works within the City in order to sell or distribute or provide non-
municipal natural gas or electrical power and energy to any user or consumer
within the City or use the streets or alleys of the City for such purpose or
interconnect any building, structure, or facility of any kind to any natural
gas pipeline or system or electrical line or system other than to the natural
gas or electrical system of the City.
111.05   CITY’S RIGHT OF ACTION.
If any person, firm, or corporation constructs, operates, or maintains any
natural gas pipeline, plant, or system or gasworks, or electric light and power
system or works, or sells or distributes any natural gas or electricity within
the City, or makes any connections with gas or electric lines or systems
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the City may commence an action for
suitable and appropriate legal, equitable, or other relief.
CHAPTER 112
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY
112.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation 112.09 Construction and Excavation by
                                          Holders of a License
112.02 Definitions                        112.10 City Construction and Paving
112.03 License Required                   112.11 Design Notice to City
112.04 Compensation Required              112.12 Assignment
112.05 Limit on Term                      112.13 Forfeiture
112.06 Placement of Facilities            112.14 Application
112.07 Indemnification                    112.15 Home Rule
112.08 Regulation by the City
 
112.01   PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION.
The City Council finds it necessary for the City to establish uniform rules and
controls to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of services by
the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for
the delivery of utility services. This is necessary in order to protect public
and private investment, ensure orderly use of public property and ensure the
health, safety, and welfare of the population; to provide for the regulation
and administration of public streets and other public property; and to secure
the rights of the City to a return on its investment in public property. This
chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the
public and users of the streets and other public property.
112.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Operator” means the person or entity who owns a relevant utility service.
2.   “Utility Service” means the distribution, transmission or sale of
television, electricity, internet, video, audio, telephone, telecommunications,
and/or gas services via any material or non-material medium, where some portion
of City right-of-way or other public property is physically involved at some
point in the delivery process.
112.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
No operator shall use the public right-of-way or other public property for
utility service without first obtaining a license from the City. Licenses shall
be issued per utility service. That is, a separate license is required for each
utility service even though the same medium or public property is used to
transmit more than one service. Each license issued shall designate the service
to which it relates. An application for a license shall be filed with the City
Manager on a form provided by the City and shall include at a minimum the
following information: the name, address, and telephone number of a person whom
the City may notify or contact at any time concerning the license; an
acceptable site plan showing the proposed location of the utilities including
any manholes, the size, type, and proposed depth of any conduit or other
enclosures; the type of utility service to which the license pertains; and any
additional information the City may require. All licenses required by this
section shall be approved by the City Council.
112.04   COMPENSATION REQUIRED.
All licensees shall pay reasonable and competitively neutral compensation for
the non-exclusive use of public right-of-way or other public property.
Therefore, a one-time license charge will be assessed on all licenses for the
term of the license. Payment is due when the license is issued; however, a
payment schedule may be agreed upon between the City and the licensee. If the
license is renewed, a new license charge shall be assessed and paid. The fee is
based on administrative and development costs for issuing licenses, and costs
for the use and maintenance of public grounds, and is established at $500.00.
112.05   LIMIT ON TERM.
No license or lease for use of the public right-of-way or other public property
shall be granted for a term exceeding five years.
112.06   PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES.
The facilities, fixtures, and equipment for the distribution, transmission or
sale of any utility service shall be placed and maintained so as not to
unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with travel on the streets, highways,
avenues, alleys, bridges, and public places in the City, nor shall such
facilities, fixtures, and equipment interfere with the proper use of the same,
including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning of sewers,
underground pipe, or other property of the City. In the event that facilities,
fixtures, and equipment of any person or other entity located within a public
right-of-way must be relocated because of paving, road construction or road
reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer reconstruction, or the construction
or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar public works, or the
construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City owned utility,
such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be completed by the
owner of such facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall upon request of
any person or other entity holding a license review any plans for the
construction of facilities, fixtures, and equipment within the public right-of-
way and advise the person or other entity of any conflict such construction may
have with planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the City
to so advise such person or other entity will not relieve the operator of its
obligations under this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager
or designee may require that placement of equipment or utilities belonging to
any operator be limited to locations designated by the City Manager, if such
limitation is deemed to be necessary to protect the integrity of use of present
and future users of the public rights-of-way or other public property. In
addition, all excavation or areas disturbed shall be brought back to original
condition or better as determined by the City representative.
112.07   INDEMNIFICATION.
The operator shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City harmless at all times
during the term of the license from and against all claims for injury or damage
to any person or property, including payments under workers’ compensation laws,
caused by the construction, erection, operation, or maintenance of facilities,
fixtures, or equipment, or the negligence of its contractors or its employees.
In case of any suit or action at law being commenced against the City, upon any
claim arising out of any loss, injury, or damage claimed to have been caused by
any installation, improvement, obstruction, or excavation made or left in,
under, or upon such street, sidewalk, alley, or public place by the operator,
or by its agents, contractors, or employees, then the holder, upon being
notified in writing by the City of such action or proceeding, shall undertake
its defense at its cost. If any judgment or decree shall in any such case be
rendered against the City, the operator shall assume, pay, and satisfy such
judgment or decree, with the cost thereof. Immediately upon issuance of the
license, the operator shall purchase general liability insurance. The amount of
insurance shall be a minimum of $500,000.00 with a maximum deductible of
$5,000.00 and provide the City with a 30-day notice of cancellation of this
policy. The operator shall file with the City Manager a certificate of
insurance which clearly discloses on its face coverage in conformity with these
requirements. Upon request of the City, the holder of the license shall submit
a certified copy of the policy.
112.08   REGULATION BY THE CITY.
The City reserves the right to make reasonable general regulations for the use
of streets and other public property which unless otherwise specifically
provided shall apply to any operator.
112.09   CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS OF A LICENSE.
In making excavations in the streets, right-of-way, or public grounds, the
operator shall properly protect according to safety standards generally
accepted at the time of placement, as may be determined from time to time by
the City representative, all excavations and obstructions by proper placement
of shoring, surface plates, barricades, warning lights, and such other or
additional devices as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the City
representative such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely
protected, the City representative shall notify such operator who shall
immediately comply with such reasonable instructions. Immediately after use,
any trenches for excavations which the operator has opened shall be filled.
However, no trench or excavation in the streets, right-of-way, or public
grounds shall be filled or covered without giving the City the right and
opportunity to inspect it. If excavation is in a grassed area, sod replacement
will be required unless seeding is acceptable as determined by the City
representative. All backfilling in streets/sidewalks will be according to City
specifications of at least 95 percent compaction. Temporary street surfacing
will be placed in such excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled.
Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or other portions of streets and
right-of-ways or public places opened, disturbed, or damaged shall be promptly
restored by saw cutting the edges of the existing surfaces and replaced with
like materials at the expense of the operator and left in as good condition or
better than before the opening, disturbance, or damage occurred. In the event
like replacement materials are not available, the operator shall notify the
City representative who must approve the use of any alternate materials. In the
event that the operator fails to comply with the provisions of this section,
after having been given reasonable notice, the City may do such works as may be
needed to properly repair such pavements, sidewalk, curbs and gutters, or other
portions of streets and public places and the cost thereof shall be repaid to
the City by the operator. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a
section of street paving or sidewalk but causes greater disturbance than to
just the area cut, then, rather than replace only the area cut, the operator
shall replace that area within 30 days, which in no event shall exceed the
panel or panels disturbed.
112.10   CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING.
Whenever the City shall pave or repave any street or sidewalk or shall change
the grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or reconstruct
any conduit, water main service or water connection, sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, or other City-owned public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the
duty of the operator when so ordered by the City, to relocate its service lines
and other property in the streets or other public places at its own expense so
as to conform to the established grade or line of such street or public place
and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so constructed or
reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including but not
limited to urban renewal projects, the City may require the operator to
relocate its service lines and appurtenances in the streets at the operator's
expense. The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of
excavation and related work being performed by the operator. Should the
operator fail or refuse to perform the requirements of this section, the City
may, after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge the expense thereof
to the operator and the operator shall promptly pay said charges.
112.11   DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY.
The operator shall promptly, upon request, furnish the City representative a
detailed map or maps including but not limited to dimensions of its
distribution system and facilities both within the City limits and the area
within two miles surrounding the City, unless that area is within another city.
The operator shall thereafter update the map or maps at least annually or upon
request, showing all subsequent additions or deletions to the distribution
system. Prior to any excavation by the City or its agents, a representative
must contact the operator regarding current information on the location of
underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to
contact the operator under this section shall be satisfied if contact is made
with a corporation organized pursuant to Code of Iowa Chapter 480 or an entity
with a similar function utilized by both the City and the company, currently
the Iowa One-Call System.
112.12   ASSIGNMENT.
No sale or assignment of any license shall be effective until it is approved by
the City Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the
City Clerk written notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition, or
assignment. Such notice shall clearly summarize the proposed procedure and the
terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by the City shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee, or lessee shall similarly
file a duly executed document, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of
the license, and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof.
112.13   FORFEITURE.
The violation of any material portion of a license by the operator or its
successors or assigns, or its failure promptly to perform any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of the license and the
termination of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished by
ordinance of the City after written notice to the operator and a continuation
of the violation, failure, or default specified on the notice for at least 30
days from the date the notice was served.
112.14   APPLICATION.
This chapter shall apply to all operators who currently have a utility service
or in the future establish a utility service.
112.15   HOME RULE.
This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end any limitations on
the power of the City contained herein is to be liberally construed and the
City reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to
regulate and control its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of
the City shall be enforceable against any operator.
CHAPTER 115
CEMETERY
 
115.01 Definition                115.04 Records
115.02 Trusteeship               115.05 Sale of Interment Rights
115.03 Operation of the Cemetery 115.06 Rules and Regulations
 
115.01   DEFINITION.
The term “cemetery” means the Roseland Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery
under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall be
operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
115.02   TRUSTEESHIP.
Pursuant to Section 523I.502 of the Code of Iowa, the City Council hereby
states its willingness and intention to act as the trustee for the perpetual
maintenance of the cemetery property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.502)
115.03   OPERATION OF THE CEMETERY.
The Council shall operate the cemetery in accordance with the rules and
regulations therefor.
115.04   RECORDS.
It is the duty of the Clerk to make and keep complete records identifying the
owners of all interment rights sold by the cemetery and historical information
regarding any transfers of ownership. The records shall include all of the
following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.311)
1.   Sales or Transfers of Interment Rights.
   A.   The name and last known address of each owner or previous owner of
interment rights.
   B.   The date of each purchase or transfer of interment rights.
   C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space sold by the cemetery.
2.   Interments.
   A.   The date the remains are interred.
   B.   The name, date of birth, and date of death of the decedent interred, if
those facts can be conveniently obtained.
   C.   A unique numeric or alphanumeric identifier that identifies the
location of each interment space where the remains are interred.
115.05   SALE OF INTERMENT RIGHTS.
The sale or transfer of interment rights in the cemetery shall be evidenced by
a certificate of interment rights or other instrument evidencing the conveyance
of exclusive rights of interment upon payment in full of the purchase price.
The agreement for interment rights shall disclose all information required by
Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa. The payment of all fees and charges shall be
made at the office of the Clerk where receipts will be issued for all amounts
paid. Said fees and charges shall be based upon the charges as established by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.310)
115.06   RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Rules and regulations for the cemetery may be adopted, and may be amended from
time to time, by resolution of the Council and may cover such things as the
use, care, control, management, restrictions and protection of the cemetery as
necessary for the proper conduct of the business of the cemetery. The rules
shall specify the cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces,
memorials, or memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism. Any
veteran, as defined in Section 35.1 of the Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or
who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an interment space and
to be interred within the cemetery. In addition, any veteran who purchases an
interment space within the cemetery shall be allowed to purchase an interment
space for interment of the spouse of the veteran if such a space is available,
and the surviving spouse of a veteran interred within the cemetery shall be
allowed to purchase an interment space and be interred within the cemetery if
such a space is available.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the Alcoholic Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a liquor license or retail wine or beer permit and the
person’s agents or employees shall not do any of the following:
1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b)
3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide
credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to retail sales
by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing
or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic liquor
in any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic
Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks
or cocktails mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed
drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not for immediate
consumption may be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted
by the Alcoholic Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle
used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original
package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to
use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of
a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the
age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective
of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed
with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper
or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be construed to include
cigars.
3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of
the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other
chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to
be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing
and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the
required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed
at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $ 75.00
October, November, or December $ 56.25
January, February, or March    $ 37.50
April, May, or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within 30
days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in
the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this
subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
14 days.
2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit
shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in
violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of $2.00
shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
In addition to the application fee identified in Section
122.04 of this chapter, the following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk
prior to the issuance of any license.
1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of $10.00 per year.
2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
   A.   For one day   $5.00
   B.   For one week   $10.00
   C.   For up to six months   $20.00
   D.   For one year or major part thereof   $25.00
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in
force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order,
or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part
of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a
rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires.
The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee
by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the
result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least $5.00 of
the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
4.   Students. Students representing the Hartley-Melvin-Sanborn School District
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
7.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally operated
exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional basis
for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[13])
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit to the Clerk in writing
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application         123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee          123.12 Overhead Wires
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or
any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 100 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk on
a form provided by the City.. The application shall include:
1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police CHief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the
shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of
the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT FEE.
A permit fee of $25.00 shall be payable at the time of filing the application
with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved.
123.07   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08   PUBLIC SAFETY.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons
at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the
sides, behind, and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.09   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours without
having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section
123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12   OVERHEAD WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable
television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 124
JUNKYARDS AND JUNK DEALERS
 
124.01 Purpose                    124.08 Screening Requirements
124.02 Definitions                124.09 General Operating Requirements
124.03 License Required           124.10 Requirements
124.04 License Application        124.11 License Renewal
124.05 Processing of Licensing    124.12 License Suspension or Revocation
Application
124.06 License Fee                124.13 Appeals
124.07 License Issuance and Terms
 
124.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens and safety of property of the City by providing for the licensing
and inspection of junkyards and the elimination of the open storage of junk
except in authorized places.
124.02   DEFINITIONS.
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions
shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
1.   “Business premises” or “premises” means the area of a junkyard as
described in a junk dealer’s license or application for license, as provided in
this chapter.
2.   “Inoperable motor vehicle” means any motor vehicle which lacks (i) current
registration; or (ii) two or more wheels or other component parts, the absence
of which renders the vehicle totally unfit for legal use on the highways.
3.   “Junk” means old or scrap copper, brass; rope, rags; batteries; paper;
trash; rubber debris; waste; or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts of automobiles; or iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material; old bottles or other glass; bones, tinware, plastic, or
discarded household goods, or hardware; and other waste or discarded material
that might be prepared to be used again in some form; but “junk” does not
include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste or
scraps from the operation of the person’s own business or materials or objects
held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of its own manufacturing
processes.
4.   “Junk dealer” means any person who buys, sells, transfers, delivers, or
stores junk, including all persons who carry on such business at the junk shop
or junkyard or as a peddler, and any person who by advertisement, sign, or
otherwise holds himself or herself out as a junk dealer, or dealer in the
articles described in Subsection 3 of this section, including a person engaged
in the activity known as “auto salvage,” but “junk dealer” does not include
businesses engaged in the towing, repairing, or storing of wrecked motor
vehicles where sales of such wrecked motor vehicles is only incidental to the
collection of repair and storage charges.
5.   “Junkyard” means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or
in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occurs
one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or
offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or
commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be
used for charity, or any place where more than two inoperable motor vehicles,
or used parts and materials thereof, when taken together equal the bulk of two
motor vehicles are stored or deposited, and the term includes garbage dumps,
sanitary fills, and automobile graveyards.
124.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to act as a junk dealer in the City, whether
personally, by agents or employees, singly, or in connection with some other
business or enterprise, without first having obtained a license in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
124.04   LICENSE APPLICATION.
An applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the Clerk a
written application signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all partners,
if a partnership; or by the president or chief officer of a corporation or
other organization; together with four copies of such application and a fee as
hereinafter prescribed. The application shall include the following:
1.   Name, residence address, and telephone number of each individual owner,
partner, or, if a corporation or other organization, each officer and director.
2.   Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each
person signing the application, and the locations of prior establishments.
3.   The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which application
is made and its telephone number.
4.   Exact address or location of the place where the business is or is
proposed to be carried on, and a sketch of the actual premises to be used in
connection with the business, showing adjoining roads, property lines,
buildings, and uses.
124.05   PROCESSING OF LICENSING APPLICATION.
Upon receipt of a completed application for license, the Clerk shall forward
one copy to each of the following City officials: City Administrator, Fire
Chief, Police Chief, and Zoning Officer.
1.   Upon receipt of said copy, the Fire Chief shall cause an inspection to be
made of the premises described in the application where the activities of the
junk dealer are proposed to be conducted to determine whether or not said
premises meet the requirements of all City and State fire regulations and
whether or not any conditions exist thereon that would constitute a fire hazard
or public nuisance.
2.   Upon receipt of a copy of said application, the Zoning Officer shall cause
an inspection to be made of the premises described in the application to
determine whether or not the premises meet the requirements of the building
code then in effect in the City, and whether or not the activities of the junk
dealer are permitted by and are proposed to be conducted in compliance with all
zoning ordinances then in effect and whether or not said premises meet all
other requirements of this chapter.
3.   Each inspector, after examination of the premises, shall submit an
inspection report to the Clerk indicating whether or not the premises inspected
is approved. If the premises is disapproved, the inspector shall set forth in
the report the reasons for disapproval. If the premises is disapproved and the
unlawful conditions reported can be corrected, the inspector shall so state in
the report and grant the applicant a reasonable but specific time to correct
the condition. Final action on the application shall then be postponed until
receipt of a supplementary report from the inspector after the specified date.
124.06   LICENSE FEE.
The application for a junk dealer's license shall be accompanied by an annual
license fee of $100.00 to be paid to the Clerk. All licenses issued hereunder
shall be effective from the date of issuance to and including the 30th day of
June next succeeding the date of issuance. The license fee set forth above
shall be prorated on a quarterly basis from the date of issuance to the time of
expiration. If an application for license or renewal of license is denied, the
license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
124.07   LICENSE ISSUANCE AND TERMS.
After approval of said application by the Fire Chief and Zoning Officer and
receipt of the required license fee, the Clerk shall issue to the applicant a
junk dealer’s license and the Clerk shall also notify the Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Zoning Officer, and City Administrator of the issuance of the license,
the person to whom the same was issued, the effective dates thereof, and the
address of the licensed premises. All licenses issued hereunder shall be
numbered serially in the order issued, and they shall set forth the following
information:
1.   The name of the licensee.
2.   The street address and an accurate description of the business premises or
proposed business premises where junk dealer’s activities will be conducted.
3.   The fee paid.
4.   The expiration date.
The licensee shall post the license in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable, and a separate
license shall be required for each business premises.
124.08   SCREENING REQUIREMENT.
Except in those instances described in Subsections 1 through 3 below, a
junkyard as defined in this chapter must be surrounded by a solid opaque fence
or wall, of uniform design and color, and not less than six feet high, which
substantially screens the area in which junk is stored or deposited. The fence
must be kept in good repair and shall not be used for advertising displays or
signs. Suitable gates, likewise opaque, are required, which shall be closed and
locked after business hours or when the junkyard is unattended. A portion of
any gate, not to exceed 10 feet in length, may be constructed of a non-opaque
material to permit observation of the fenced premises. No junk shall be
permitted to be stored or deposited outside the fence, nor may junk be stacked
higher than the fence within 30 feet of the fence. The Zoning Officer shall
inspect the fences and gates of all junkyards on an annual basis. Variations
from the requirements of this section may be granted as follows:
1.   If the perimeter of the junkyard is effectively blocked from public view
by natural terrain features or is substantially lower in elevation than the
surrounding terrain in a manner which renders the opacity requirements hereof
ineffective, the Zoning Officer may, upon application, allow the substitution
of a suitable fence in place of the solid opaque fence required herein.
2.   If two or more junkyards which otherwise meet the standards of this
chapter abut each other, the fencing requirement of this chapter shall be
waived by the Zoning Officer for such common boundary so long as the common
boundary continues to exist.
3.   If the junkyard that is the subject of the application abuts against an
opaque fence which meets the fencing requirements, or an opaque structure which
is not less than six feet high, the fencing requirement of this section shall
be waived by the Zoning Officer for such common boundary.
124.09   GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
The following general operating requirements apply to all junk dealers in the
City limits:
1.   The junkyard, and all things kept therein, shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition.
2.   No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such
manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
3.   No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin
shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the
premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in the
licensed business.
4.   No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street,
walkway, or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises.
5.   Junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit easy access to all such
junk for fire-fighting purposes.
6.   No combustible material of any kind not necessary to the licensed business
shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a
fire hazard.
7.   Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on
the premises.
8.   No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in
connection with the licensed business on a Sunday, any legal holiday, or at any
time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
9.   No automobile or part thereof shall be burned for wrecking or salvage
purposes in or on premises occupied as a junkyard unless the same is burned in
a manner that has been approved by the Fire Chief, and all motor vehicle
gasoline and fuel tanks shall be separated and removed from motor vehicles
intended for salvage purposes prior to cutting, stacking, or burning such
vehicles.
124.10   REQUIREMENTS.
The following shall apply to the license for junk dealers:
1.   Record Book. Every junk dealer shall maintain a permanent record book that
shows a description of each item received, the name and address of the person
from whom it was received, the quantity or weight of each item, the amount
paid, and the time and date of the transaction.
2.   Segregate Collection. Upon written order of the Police Chief or the
designated representative, each junk dealer shall segregate specific items or
categories of items and hold such items until authorized to dispose of the
items by the police department. The holding period shall not exceed 45 days.
3.   Receive Junk From Minor. A junk dealer shall not purchase or receive junk
from a minor unless said junk dealer first receives the written consent of the
minor’s parent or guardian. Such consent shall be attached to the record book
as a part of the permanent record.
4.   Inspection. Health officers and peace officers shall be permitted at all
times to inspect the junk dealer’s premises for the existence of materials or
conditions dangerous to the public health. No person shall prevent, hinder, or
obstruct or attempt to prevent, hinder, or obstruct any City inspector or
police officer in the performance of duties set forth in this chapter.
5.   Not Conceal Articles. No junk dealer shall conceal, secrete, or destroy
for the purpose of concealing any article purchased or received by the dealer
for the purposes of preventing identification thereof by any officer or any
person claiming the same. No junk dealer shall sell, melt up, break up, or
otherwise dispose of any article the dealer has reason to believe has been
stolen, or which is adversely claimed by any person, or which the dealer has
been notified not to sell or otherwise dispose of by any sheriff, deputy
sheriff, or police officer, without first obtaining a permit in writing from
the Police Chief.
124.11   LICENSE RENEWAL.
Licenses may be renewed in the same manner and under the same conditions as
originally issued hereunder. Applications for renewal of junk dealer’s licenses
shall be submitted to the Clerk at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the
license then in effect. Applications for renewal of junk dealer’s licenses
shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section
124.05 of this chapter. When renewal of a license is denied, the junk dealer
previously licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have a period of
six months immediately after such denial in which to conclude the business and
dispose of the junk during which time the junk dealer shall be required to
comply with all the terms and conditions of the ordinances of the City except
the licensing requirements of this chapter. If litigation is pending contesting
the denial or revocation of a license, the Clerk may grant an extension of time
during which the junk dealer may operate pending the final outcome of such
litigation.
124.12   LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
The Clerk may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for any of the
following reasons:
1.   The licensee, an agent, or employee has been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter.
2.   The Fire Chief, the Zoning Officer, or the Police Chief has found that the
licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the provisions of this
chapter or the licensed premises fail to comply with one or more of the
provisions of this chapter or of some other regulation, ordinance, or statute,
and the licensee has failed to correct such condition within the reasonable
time specified by the inspector in accordance with the report the inspector has
submitted under Section
124.05(3) of this chapter.
124.13   APPEALS.
Any applicant who has been denied a license or renewal under this chapter or
any licensee under this chapter whose license has been suspended or revoked may
appeal to the Council by filing with the Clerk, within seven days after the
aggrieved party receives notice of the adverse administrative decision, a
written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. The Council shall, within 15 days after the filing of said notice of
appeal, fix a time and place of hearing on the appeal. The hearing shall be
commenced within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. If the Council finds from
the evidence presented at the hearing that the appellant has been denied a
license without just cause, or that the appellant’s license has been suspended
or revoked without just cause, it may reverse or modify the administrative
decision.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking, or
alley except in accordance with the following:
1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining
a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City
and shall contain the following:
   A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
   B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to
be made;
   C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
   D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted
passage of water along the gutter on the street.
3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
4.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the
minimum sum of $1,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such
bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any
damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $1,000.00 may be filed with the City.
5.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
   A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
   B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill
shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved street or
alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder/property owner.
9.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
11.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
12.   Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all
other pertinent provisions.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 6
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section
6 136.04 relating to property owner’s responsibility for maintenance of
  sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.13 Encroaching Steps
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.16 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required                       136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                    136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
2.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
7.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
8.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the
surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
The abutting property owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly
from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations
within a reasonable time, the City may do so and assess the costs against the
property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to remove
snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b and e])
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or,
in the absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that
portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain
the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d and e])
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.
136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s standard
specifications. An official copy of the specifications is on file in the
Clerk’s office and the Public Works Department. All such work shall be done
under the direction and supervision of and subject to inspection and approval
of the Superintendent of Public Works. If such work does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works, after notice to
the property owner, shall cause the sidewalks to be constructed in the proper
manner and assess the cost for such work against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12   AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall
more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such
purposes.
136.19   SALES STANDS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds
shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The
Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] and 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED          ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
60            May 5, 1954
61            May 5, 1954
67            December 7, 1960
81            May 27, 1968
92            Undated
105           July 23, 1979
116           October 28, 1985
130           May 13, 1991
184           June 23, 2008
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
 
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
53            April 5, 1948
73            March 11, 1965
74            March 11, 1965
103           December 12, 1978
104           June 25, 1979
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing
street.
2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of Sanborn, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.04 Access Controls Imposed
140.02 Definition               140.05 Permitted Access Points
140.03 Right of Access Limited
 
140.01   EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health,
and safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02   DEFINITION.
The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or occupants
of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a
controlled right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any
other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03   RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.
No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto or
across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
140.04   ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.
There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the
City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
Projects No. FN-43(2) and FN-43(3). On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Projects No. FN-43(2) and FN-43(3), Primary Road No. U.S. 18,
within the City, described as follows: Seventh Street, regulating access to and
from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans
for such improvement identified as Projects No. FN-43(2) and FN-43(3), on file
in the office of the Clerk
140.05   PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.
Points of access are hereby permitted as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
Projects No. FN-43(2) and FN-43(3). The compiled list furnished by the Iowa
Highway Commission of drives and entrances provided for access under the
improvement specified as Projects No. FN-43(2) and FN-43(3) is hereby recorded
as follows:
STATION SIDE OF STREET CURB OPENING WIDTH DRIVE OR ENTRANCE USE OF DRIVE OR
                                          WIDTH             ENTRANCE
STATION SIDE OF STREET CURB OPENING WIDTH DRIVE OR ENTRANCE USE OF DRIVE OR
                                          WIDTH             ENTRANCE
541+54  south (right)  18 feet                              Residential
542+89  south (right)  18 feet                              Vacant Lot
544+04  south (right)  18 feet                              Vacant Lot
544+33  north (left)   24 feet                              Commercial
544+55  south (right)  18 feet                              Residential
547+05  north (left)   26 feet                              Commercial
547+51  south (right)  35 feet                              Commercial
547+80  north (left)   35 feet                              Commercial
548+89  north (left)   24 feet                              Joint Residential
550+19  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
551+49  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
551+73  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
553+15  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
554+47  south (left)   18 feet                              Commercial
555+02  south (right)  35 feet                              Commercial
555+90  south (right)  34 feet                              Joint Residential
                                                            and Commercial
556+56  north (left)   35 feet                              Commercial
558+48  north (left)   35 feet                              Commercial
559+17  south (right)  18 feet                              Commercial
559+48  north (left)   45 feet                              Joint Commercial
                                                            and Alley
559+85  south (right)  18 feet                              Commercial
560+55  south (right)  35 feet                              Joint Commercial
563+43  north (left)   24 feet                              Joint Residential
566+74  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
578+39  south (right)  35 feet                              Commercial
567+64  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
569+80  north (left)   18 feet                              Residential
570+96  south (right)  18 feet                              Residential
573+69  south (right)                     42 feet           Commercial
577+45  south (right)                     16 feet           Residential
578+77  south (right)                     18 feet           Residential
579+72  south (right)                     14 feet           Residential
579+90  north (left)                      16 feet           Field Entrance
580+69  south (right)                     16 feet           Residential
590+04  south (right)                     20 feet           Residential
591+82  south (right)                     18 feet           Commercial
 
CHAPTER 141
DRIVEWAYS
 
141.01 Definitions                  141.04 Inspection of Driveways
141.02 Driveway Specifications      141.05 Sidewalks
141.03 Permit to Construct Driveway 141.06 Excavations
 
141.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Driveway” means that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private
property that lies between the property line and the roadway of the public
street.
2.   “Paving” includes any kind of hard surfacing including, but not limited
to, portland cement concrete, bituminous concrete, brick, stabilized gravel, or
combinations of such materials, with the necessary base. “Paving” does not
include surfacing with oil, unstabilized gravel, oil and gravel, or chloride.
141.02   DRIVEWAY SPECIFICATIONS.
All driveway improvements in public property, whether performed by the owner of
abutting property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision and
inspection of the City Engineer and in accordance with the plans and
specifications prepared by office of the same and approved by the Council. No
permanent driveway improvements shall be performed until the bed for the same
shall have been graded so that when completed such driveway will be at the
location and grade established by the City Engineer.
141.03   PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT DRIVEWAY.
No person shall make any driveway improvements whether ordered by the Council
or not, unless such person shall obtain a permit from the City Engineer and
agree in writing that the owner, in making the driveway improvements, shall
comply with the ordinances of the City and with the specifications for
driveways as prepared by the engineering department and approved by the
Council, and that the work shall be done under the direction and supervision of
the City Engineer and subject to the approval of the City Engineer or the City
Engineer’s duly authorized agent. The owner shall file a bond in the proper
amount and shall also agree to hold the City free from all liability for
damages on account of injuries received by anyone through the negligence of
such person or that person’s agent or servants in making the driveway
improvements, or by reason of such person’s failure to properly guard the
premises. All such permits shall be issued without charge and a copy thereof,
together with the written agreement above referred to, shall be filed and
preserved in the office of the City Engineer. Before granting any permit to
make driveway improvements, the City Engineer shall determine the propriety of
the same and shall state in all permits issued when the work is to be commenced
if not upon issuance of the permit and when the sidewalk work is to be
completed. The time of completion for the driveway improvements may be extended
when in the City Engineer’s judgment the same is deemed necessary. All permits
for driveway improvements not ordered by the resolution of the Council shall be
issued in compliance with this chapter. The City Engineer may withhold the
issuance of any permit for any driveway improvements for a sufficient period to
determine the necessity for the proposed improvements or when weather
conditions will adversely affect the driveway improvements. All driveway
improvements in areas where areaways exist or are proposed and in areas
specially designated by the City Engineer shall include the construction,
reconstruction, or repair of the abutting curb and sidewalk, in accordance with
plans and/or specifications on file in the City Engineering department.
141.04   INSPECTION OF DRIVEWAYS.
All driveway improvements shall be done under the direction and supervision of
the City Engineer or the City Engineer’s duly authorized agent, and subject to
the inspection and approval of the Engineer or duly authorized agent. Whenever
any driveway improvements are made which do not conform to the provisions of
this chapter and with the specifications herein referred to, or where any
driveway improvements are made without obtaining a permit therefor as in this
chapter provided, or the work is not performed within the time provided for and
stated in the permit obtained, the City Engineer or duly authorized agent may
serve upon the property owner or property owner’s agent, and upon the
contractor or party interested and performing the work, a written notice to
obtain a permit therefor, if not already obtained, or if the driveway is in the
course of construction, to stop the work, and if the driveway work has been
completed, to obtain a permit therefor, perform necessary driveway improvements
within five days from receipt of said notice as the case may be, in the proper
manner and of proper materials as required by this chapter and specifications
herein referred to, and in case they, or any one of them, shall fail to do so,
the City Engineer or duly authorized agent may cause the driveway to be
removed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired in a proper manner and of the
proper materials, and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the property
fronting thereon. There shall be returned to the Council an itemized and
verified statement of the expenditures of material and of the labor used in
doing such work, and the legal description of the lot, part of lot, or parcel
of ground abutting the driveway on which such work has been performed.
141.05   SIDEWALKS.
The grade of any sidewalk already at proper grade shall not be altered by the
work done. The driveway shall be at the same level as any existing sidewalk,
except as expressly permitted by the Council upon recommendation of the City
Administrator.
141.06   EXCAVATIONS.
Excavations to do work under this chapter shall be dug so as to occasion the
least possible inconvenience to the public and to provide for the passage of
water along the gutter. All such excavations shall have proper barricades at
all times, and warning lights placed from one-half hour before sunset to one-
half hour after sunrise. In refilling the excavation, the earth must be placed
in layers and each layer tamped thoroughly. Any street, sidewalk, or other
public property that is affected by the work shall be restored to as good a
condition as it was previous to the excavation. The affected area shall be
maintained in good repair to the satisfaction of the Council for three months
after refilling.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Building Official is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty
construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used.
3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to
the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date,
time and place of hearing.
2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 7
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
7 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
  procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF SANBORN,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section
145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs shall be charged to
the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against
the land on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified
to the County Treasurer for collection in the manner provided for other taxes.
In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate to recover
costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.04 Manufactured Home Community or Mobile
                                   Home Park Area and Yard Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.03 Foundation Requirements
 
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land
under common ownership upon which 10 or more occupied manufactured homes are
harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which
three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of
these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed
on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in
the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property
as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human
habitation.
2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is located
outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of January 1,
1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 and 414.28)
146.04   MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY OR MOBILE HOME PARK AREA AND YARD
REQUIREMENTS.
Manufactured home communities or mobile home parks shall be designed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
1.   Minimum Requirements for Manufactured Home Communities or Mobile Home
Parks.
   A.   Park area – 8 acres;
   B.   Front yard (to be measured from all streets on which park abuts) – 50
feet;
   C.   Side yard – 35 feet;
   D.   Rear yard – 35 feet;
   E.   Sanitary facilities – connection with the municipal sewer system or
adequate private sewage disposal facilities;
   F.   Streets – each manufactured or mobile home lot shall have direct access
to a park street. The minimum roadway width of interior park streets shall be
as follows:
      (1)   One-way, no parking   11 feet
      (2)   One-way, parking one side   18 feet
      (3)   One-way, parking both sides   24 feet
      (4)   Two-way, no parking   24 feet
      (5)   Two-way, parking one side   27 feet
      (6)   Two-way, parking both sides   34 feet
Such streets shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete according to City
specifications for residential streets and be maintained in good condition and
lighted at night.
2.   Minimum Requirements for Manufactured or Mobile Home Spaces.
   A.   Area – 50 feet by 80 feet;
   B.   Size – 4,000 square feet;
   C.   Off drive parking – one parking space for each manufactured or mobile
home space;
   D.   Off-street or on-street parking – one for each two such manufactured or
mobile home lots, to accommodate guests;
   E.   Front yard – 15 feet;
   F.   Rear yard – 10 feet;
   G.   Side yard – 5 feet each side, with a minimum of 20 feet between any two
manufactured or mobile homes.
3.   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided from the entrance of each
manufactured or mobile home to the service facilities. The walks shall be
constructed of concrete.
4.   Landscaping. All areas not used for access, parking, circulation,
buildings, and service shall be completely and permanently landscaped and the
entire site maintained in good condition. A landscaped strip of land, not less
than 10 feet in width, shall be established and maintained within the
manufactured home community or mobile home park along its exterior boundaries.
5.   Concrete Slab. Each manufactured or mobile home unit lot shall be equipped
with a concrete slab of sufficient size to support the wheels and the front
parking jack. Said slab shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of eight feet
by 10 feet and a minimum thickness of four inches.
6.   Recreation Areas. There shall be provided within each manufactured home
community or mobile home park an adequate site or sites for recreational use by
residents. The minimum area provided for such recreation sire or sites shall
consist of an aggregate of 100 square feet for each manufactured or mobile home
space in said park. The recreation sites shall be of appropriate design and
provided with appropriate equipment.
7.   Length of Occupancy. No manufactured or mobile home shall remain in a
manufactured home community or mobile home park for a period exceeding 15 days
without connection to the permanent sanitary sewer system of the park.
CHAPTER 147
FIRE ZONE
 
147.01 Fire Zone Established  147.05 Reconstruction Prohibited
147.02 Plans Submitted        147.06 Special Permit
147.03 Buildings Prohibited   147.07 Removal of Buildings
147.04 Construction Standards 147.08 Storage of Materials Restricted
 
147.01   FIRE ZONE ESTABLISHED.
A Fire Zone is established to include all of the following territory:
All territory within the City zoned for Central Business use
147.02   PLANS SUBMITTED.
It is unlawful to build, enlarge, or alter any structure, building, or part
thereof, within the Fire Zone until a plan of the proposed work, together with
a statement of materials to be used has been submitted to the Council, who
shall, if in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, issue a permit for
the proposed work.
147.03   BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.
The erection of any building or structure of any kind, or additions thereto, or
substantial alterations thereof, involving partial rebuilding, are prohibited
in the Fire Zone, unless constructed in strict compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
147.04   CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
The construction standards for all buildings, structures, or parts thereof
within the Fire Zone shall be of Type I, Type II, or, at a minimum, Type III
fire resistant construction, as specified in the International Building Code.
147.05   RECONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
Any building within the Fire Zone not constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter which is hereafter damaged by fire, decay, or
otherwise shall not be rebuilt, altered, or reconstructed except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
147.06   SPECIAL PERMIT.
The Council may, by four-fifths vote, issue a special permit to improve any
property within the Fire Zone contrary to the provisions of this chapter, on
condition that such improvement shall not increase the rates for fire insurance
or the fire hazard potential of the area, or to allow any person to erect or
move in any building or structure for temporary purposes for a period of time
not exceeding six months from the date of such permission.
147.07   REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS.
Any person who erects any building in the Fire Zone, contrary to the provisions
of this chapter, shall be given written notice by the Mayor to remove or tear
down the same, and if such removal or taking down is not completed within 30
days from the time of the service of such notice, the Mayor shall cause the
same to be removed or taken down. The Mayor shall report an itemized bill of
the expense to the Clerk, and the same shall be charged to the person owning
such building. The Clerk shall present the bill to the owner of the property
and if the bill is not paid within 10 days from the date it is presented, the
amount of the bill shall be certified, by the Clerk, to the County Treasurer,
as a lien against the property and collected the same as other taxes.
147.08   STORAGE OF MATERIALS RESTRICTED.
No person shall have or deposit any grain stack, pile of rubbish, explosives,
hazardous chemicals or other flammable substance within the Fire Zone, nor
shall any person have or deposit any cord wood or fire wood, within the Fire
Zone without written permission from the Mayor, specifying the maximum amount
of such cord wood or fire wood, that may be kept, stored, or deposited on any
lot or part of a lot within the Fire Zone, unless the same be within one of the
buildings allowed by this chapter. No person shall build or allow any fires,
whether trash fires or otherwise, within the Fire Zone as described in this
chapter.
CHAPTER 148
WELL PROTECTION
 
148.01 Distances   148.03 Designation
148.02 Application 148.04 Existing Facilities
 
148.01   DISTANCES.
No structure or facility of the enumerated types set out in the following Table
A shall be located within the distances set forth in said Table from public
wells within the City.
148.02   APPLICATION.
Proscriptions set forth in Table A shall apply to all public wells existing
within the City, except public water wells formerly abandoned for use by
resolution of the Council.
148.03   DESIGNATION.
The City Administrator shall designate each water well within the City as being
a “shallow well” or “deep well” for the purposes of this chapter.
148.04   EXISITING FACILITIES.
The use of structures or facilities existing on April 13, 1992, may be
continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this
chapter. However, such structure or facility may not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or substituted subsequent to such date.
TABLE A: SEPARATION DISTANCES
SOURCE OF CONTAMINATION REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS
                        HORIZONTAL ON THE GROUND SURFACE, IN FEET
                       Deep Well1 Shallow Well1
TABLE A: SEPARATION DISTANCES
SOURCE OF     REQUIRED MINIMUM LATERAL DISTANCE FROM WELL AS HORIZONTAL ON THE GROUND
CONTAMINATION SURFACE, IN FEET
             Deep Well1                           Shallow Well1
WASTEWATER STRUCTURES:
Point of Discharge to Ground Surface
Sanitary and
industrial    400                                  400
discharges
Water
treatment     50                                   50
plant wastes
Well house    5                                    5
floor drains
Sewers and Drains2
Sanitary and  0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
storm sewers, 25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
drains        75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
              0 – 75 feet: prohibited            0 – 75 feet: prohibited
Sewer force   75 – 400 feet if water main pipe   75 – 400 feet if water main pipe
mains         400 – 1,000 feet if sanitary sewer 400 – 1,000 feet if sanitary sewer main
              pipe                                 pipe
Water plant
treatment
process       0 – 5 feet: prohibited             0 – 5 feet: prohibited
wastes that   5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer pipe 5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
are treated
onsite
Water plant   0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
wastes to     25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
sanitary      75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
sewer
Well house    0 – 25 feet: prohibited            0 – 25 feet: prohibited
floor drains  25 – 75 feet if water main pipe    25 – 75 feet if water main pipe
to sewers     75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer pip75 – 200 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
Well house    0 – 5 feet: prohibited             0 – 5 feet: prohibited
floor drains  5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer pipe 5 – 50 feet if sanitary sewer main pipe
to surface
Land Disposal of Treated Wastes
Irrigation of 200                                  400
wastewater
Land
application   200                                  400
of solid
wastes3
Other
Cesspools and
earth pit     200                                  400
privies
Concrete
vaults and    100                                  200
septic tanks
Lagoons       400                                  1,000
Mechanical
wastewater    200                                  400
treatment
plants
Soil
absorption    200                                  400
fields
CHEMICALS:
Chemical
application   100                                  200
to ground
surface
Chemical &
mineral       100                                  200
storage above
ground
Chemical &
mineral       200                                  400
storage on or
under ground
Transmission
pipelines
(such as
fertilizer,   200                                  400
liquid
petroleum, or
anhydrous
ammonia)
ANIMALS:
Animal        50                                   50
pasturage
Animal        200                                  400
enclosure
Earthen
silage        100                                  200
storage
trench or pit
Animal Wastes
Land
application   200                                  400
of liquid or
slurry
Land
application   200                                  400
of solids
Solids        200                                  400
stockpile
Storage basin 400                                  1,000
or lagoon
Storage tank  200                                  400
MISCELLANEOUS:
Basements,    10                                   10
pits, sumps
Cemeteries    200                                  200
Cisterns      50                                   100
Flowing
streams or    50                                   50
other surface
water bodies
GHEX loop     200                                  200
boreholes
Railroads     100                                  200
Private wells 200                                  400
Solid waste
landfills and 1,000                                1,000
disposal
sites4
 
1   Deep and shallow wells, as defined in IAC 567-40.2(455B): A deep well is a
well located and constructed in such a manner that there is a continuous layer
of low permeability soil or rock at least five feet thick located at least 25
feet below the normal ground surface and above the aquifer from which water is
to be drawn. A shallow well is a well located and constructed in such a manner
that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock (or
equivalent retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least five feet
thick, the top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal ground
surface and above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn.
2   The separation distances are dependent upon two factors: the type of piping
that is in the existing sewer or drain, as noted in the table, and that the
piping was properly installed in accordance with the standards.
3   Solid wastes are those derived from the treatment of water or wastewater.
Certain types of solid wastes from water treatment processes may be land-
applied within the separation distance on an individual, case-by-case basis.
4   Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than four inches in height and of a
contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition            151.04 Trimming Trees To Be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees    151.06 Inspection and Removal
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the
following:
1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking
midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb
line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line 10 feet from the
property line.
2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than nine
feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil surface per
tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from street intersections
(property lines extended) and 10 feet from driveways. If it is at all possible,
trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk
and the curb.
3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing
tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder,
Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c and e])
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
Except as allowed in Section
151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect or
disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the
City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or damaged, and such trees and
shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any
public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon.
2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any
such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to
adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council
shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such
property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14 days of
said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b and h])
CHAPTER 152
HEIGHT OF GRASS RESTRICTED
 
152.01 Purpose         152.05 Failure to Cut Grass
152.02 Height of Grass 152.06 Additional Violation
152.03 Violation       152.07 Exceptions
152.04 Notice
 
152.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a maximum height that grass on
lands within the City may be grown before it must be cut.
152.02   HEIGHT OF GRASS.
Grass growing on lands within the City shall be cut on a periodic basis so that
the height of such grass is never greater than eight inches in height.
152.03   VIOLATION.
Upon a determination, by visual observation and measurement, that a violation
of this chapter has occurred the City will send written notice by certified
mail to the landowner informing said owner of the problem and the action that
is to be taken.
152.04   NOTICE.
The notice will set forth that the property owner has seven days from the date
of the notice to have the grass cut so that the height conforms with this
chapter. The notice will set forth the address of the property in question and
will instruct the landowner that this notice constitutes notice for the balance
of the summer and that further action will be taken by the City to remedy the
problem if it occurs again on the same property without additional written
notice being given.
152.05   FAILURE TO CUT GRASS.
If any such owner, who has been sent notice, fails to cut the grass on said
owner’s property as set forth in the notice so that it conforms with this
chapter within the time period set forth in the notice, the designated
municipal officer will instruct the City Staff or a private contractor to mow
the grass so that the property conforms with this chapter. The cost of this
action will be assessed against the property. The fee for this service will be
set by the City Administrator on a case-by-case basis and will be based on
actual costs associated with mowing of the property.
152.06   ADDITIONAL VIOLATION.
Any landowner who violates this chapter will be given one notice per summer and
the City will be authorized to respond to additional violations without
additional written notice being given.
152.07   EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter pertains to all residential, commercial, and industrial land
within the City limits, but excludes agricultural land within the City.
CHAPTER 165
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
165.01 Purpose                          165.27 Inspection of Improvements
165.02 Policy                           165.28 Release or Reduction of
                                        Performance Bond
165.03 Definitions                      165.29 Maintenance of Improvements
165.04 Application and Jurisdiction     165.30 Deferral or Waiver of Required
                                        Improvements
165.05 Interpretation                   165.31 Improvements Required
165.06 Action Under Prior Provisions    165.32 Design Standards Are Minimum
165.07 Procedure                        165.33 Conformance to Applicable Rules
                                        and Regulations
165.08 Pre-submission Consultations     165.34 Subdivision Name
165.09 Requirements of Preliminary Plat 165.35 Monumentation
165.10 Submission of Preliminary Plat   165.36 Character of the Land
165.11 Referral of Preliminary Plat     165.37 Lots
165.12 Review of Preliminary Plat       165.38 Blocks
165.13 Action by the Commission         165.39 Streets – General Requirements
165.14 Action by Council                165.40 Streets – Design Standards
165.15 Effective Period of Tentative    165.41 Storm Sewers and Drainage
Approval
165.16 Completion of Improvements       165.42 Water Facilities
165.17 Performance Bond                 165.43 Sewage Facilities
165.18 Final Plat                       165.44 Sidewalks
165.19 Requirements of the Final Plat   165.45 Utilities
165.20 Submission of Final Plat         165.46 Preservation of Natural Features
                                        and Amenities
165.21 Referral of Final Plat           165.47 Nonresidential Subdivisions
165.22 Action by the Commission         165.48 School and Park Reservations
165.23 Action by Council                165.49 Improvements within
                                        Unincorporated Jurisdiction
165.24 Resubdivision of Land            165.50 Variations and Exceptions
165.25 Completion of Improvements       165.51 Changes and Amendments
165.26 Performance Bond                 165.52 Enforcement, Violations, and
                                        Penalties
 
165.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the design,
development, and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions so that
existing developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions are
made for public services and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare
in the City.
165.02   POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision
of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the
control of the City to provide for the orderly, efficient, and economical
development of the City. And further:
1.   Character of Land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril
from fire, flood, or other menace.
2.   Regulations to Supplement and Facilitate. It is intended that these
subdivision regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of
provisions and standards, ordinances, or regulations of the City.
165.03   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms or words are defined.
1.   “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
2.   “Applicant” means the owner of land to be subdivided or said owner’s
representative.
3.   “Block” means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or corporate boundaries.
4.   “Bond” means any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the Council.
5.   “Building” means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattel, or movable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
6.   “Central sewage system” means a private sewer system including collection
and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision or resubdivision.
7.   “Central water system” means a private water system established by the
developer to serve a new subdivision or resubdivision. It includes water
treatment and distribution facilities.
8.   “City Engineer” means the person designated by the Council to furnish
engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
9.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
10.   “Cul-de-sac” means a municipal service street with only one outlet and
having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
11.   “Developer” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided (or said
owner’s representative).
12.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said person's
property.
13.   “Frontage” means that portion of a lot abutting on a street or way and
complying with the setback and front yard requirements as they may exist, but
it is not to be considered as the side of a corner lot.
14.   “Individual sewage disposal system” means a private septic tank, seepage
tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device.
15.   “Local board of health” means a County, City, or District Board of
Health.
16.   “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
17.   “Municipal arterial streets” means those streets which connect principal
traffic generating areas or connect such areas with other street systems.
18.   “Municipal collector streets” mean those streets that collect traffic
from municipal service streets and connect to other street systems.
19.   “Municipal service streets” means those streets that primarily provide
access to property.
20.   “Owner” means any person having legal title to or sufficient proprietary
interest in the land to be sought to be subdivided under these regulations.
21.   “Plat” means a map, drawing or chart on which the developer’s plan of the
subdivision of land is presented and which the developer submits for approval
and intends, in final form, to record.
22.   “Public improvement” means any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian crosswalk, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement, or other facility for which the City may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which City responsibility is established.
23.   “Right-of-way” means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another
special use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes
means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat
is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-
of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall
be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way
is established.
24.   “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular
traffic and where curbs are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
25.   “Street” means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words
includes every other of them, and also includes the entire width between
property lines.
26.   “Subdivider” means the person undertaking the subdivision or
resubdivision of a tract or parcel of land.
27.   “Subdivision” means the division of land into three or more lots or other
division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or building development. The term, when appropriate to the context,
relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the
resubdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots or other
divisions of land, or, if a new street is involved, any division of land.
28.   “Surveyor” means a land surveyor licensed and registered under the
provisions of Chapter 542B of the Code of Iowa.
165.04   APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION.
Every owner (or agent) of any tract or parcel of land lying within the City or,
pursuant to Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, within two miles of the
corporate limits of the City who has subdivided or shall hereafter subdivide
the same into three or more parts for the purpose of laying out an addition,
subdivision, building lot or lots, or acreage lots, shall cause plats of such
area to be made in the form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set
forth before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record.
165.05   INTERPRETATION.
In their interpretation or application, the provisions of these regulations
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare. Specifically:
1.   Relationship to Other Public Provisions. These regulations are not
intended to interfere with or to abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes a restriction different from those imposed by any other
provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher standards shall control.
2.   Relationship to Private Provisions. These regulations are not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or
impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other
private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall
govern.
165.06   ACTION UNDER PRIOR PROVISIONS.
These regulations do not abate any action now pending under or by virtue of
prior existing subdivision regulations. Nor do they discontinue, abate, modify,
or alter any penalty accrued or about to accrue or affect the liability of any
person or waive any right of the City under any section or provision existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations. Nor do they vacate or annul any
rights obtained by any person by lawful action of the City except as expressed
in these regulations.
165.07   PROCEDURE.
Before seeking approval of a proposed subdivision by the Council, the
subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and install the required improvements or provide a performance
bond.
165.08   PRE-SUBMISSION CONSULTATIONS.
Prior to the submission of the preliminary plat of any subdivision, the
subdivider is encouraged to meet with the City Engineer and other City
officials responsible for the administration of these regulations to be advised
of the procedural steps, design standards, required improvements, and platting
requirements. During such meetings, no commitments shall be made which will be
binding upon the City.
165.09   REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
Every proposed subdivision shall be submitted for tentative approval in the
form of a preliminary plat prior to the submission of a final record plat. The
purpose of the preliminary plat and accompanying material is to provide all
facts needed for the Commission and Council to determine whether the proposed
subdivision is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The
following graphic and descriptive material is required to be provided on the
preliminary plat and on the accompanying material.
1.   Contents of Preliminary Plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than one inch equals
100 feet may be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall be numbered in
sequence if more than one sheet is used. The following information shall be
shown on the preliminary plat:
   A.   Title, scale, north point, and date.
   B.   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and
references to section, townships, and range lines or corners. Exterior
boundaries are to be indicated with a solid heavy line.
   C.   Present and proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks, with their rights-
of-way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs, and planting
strips, and location of street lights, fire hydrants, and street signs.
   D.   Proposed layout of blocks and lots, showing dimensions, radii, chords,
and the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular, and the lot and
block numbers in numerical order.
   E.   Building setback or front yard lines.
   F.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community purposes.
   G.   Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes,
and limitations.
   H.   Location and names of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided and subdivided
land.
   I.   Boundaries of the highest known flood of record affecting the
subdivision and the source of information.
   J.   If the proposed subdivision borders on a lake or stream, the distances
and bearings of meander lines established not less than 20 feet back from the
mean high water mark of the lake or stream.
   K.   Existing blocks, lots, and buildings.
   L.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm
sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities,
and other facilities, with the size, capacity, invert elevation, and location
of each. If the subdivision is within one mile of public sewer or water or
both, notation shall be made of the direction and distance to such facilities.
   M.   Proposed name of the subdivision.
   N.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder and surveyor who
prepared the preliminary plat, and the surveyor who will prepare the final
plat.
   O.   Official legal description of the property being platted.
   P.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet if the general
slope of the site is less than 10 percent and at vertical intervals of not more
than five feet if the general slope is 10 percent or greater.
   Q.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
property.
   R.   Location of all proposed monuments.
2.   Information to Be Provided in Accompanying Material. The following
information shall accompany a plat when filing:
   A.   A complete listing of all existing covenants which apply to the land to
be subdivided, and a complete listing of all covenants which are proposed by
the developer to apply to the subdivided land.
   B.   A table of the following information:
      (1)   Total acreage of the subdivision.
      (2)   Total number of lots.
      (3)   Minimum, average, and maximum lot area.
      (4)   Acreage of public lands to be dedicated or reserved other than
streets.
   C.   An attorney’s opinion showing that the fee title to the property
proposed for subdividing is in the owner’s name as shown on the plat and
showing any encumbrances that may exist against the land.
   D.   If any portion of the subdivision is to have access on a State or
County jurisdictional street, a written and signed statement acknowledging and
permitting the access by the duly authorized official of the appropriate
jurisdiction.
   E.   Specifications and engineering construction drawings including
profiles, cross-sections, and details of all public improvements. Elevations
shall be referred to mean sea level as exhibited in standard U.S. Geological
Survey Maps. Specifications and references shall meet those required by the
City’s construction and specification standards, including a site grading plan
for the entire subdivision.
165.10   SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat in accordance with the
provisions of Section
165.09 and shall file with the Clerk an application in triplicate for the
tentative approval of the plat. The application shall:
1.   Forms and Fees. Be made on forms available from the Clerk together with a
fee to be set by the Council.
2.   Number of Plats. Be accompanied by a minimum of 10 copies of the
preliminary plat.
3.   Time of Submission. Be presented to the Clerk at least four weeks prior to
the meeting of the Commission.
165.11   REFERRAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The Clerk shall immediately refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the
City Engineer and seven copies to the Commission. In the case of a subdivision
outside the corporate limits of the City, the Clerk shall refer one copy of the
preliminary plat to the County Board of Supervisors.
165.12   REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Commission to determine its
conformity with these regulations and all other ordinances and regulations in
force affecting subdivisions. Copies of the preliminary plat may be transmitted
to other City or school officials, as the Commission deems necessary, for their
recommendations concerning matters within their jurisdiction. Their
recommendations, along with those of the City Engineer, shall be transmitted to
the Commission within three weeks after the date the plat is filed. The
Commission may confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of such improvements to be made.
165.13   ACTION BY THE COMMISSION.
The Commission, as soon as possible, but not more than 30 days thereafter,
shall pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If
the Commission does not act within 30 days, the preliminary plat shall be
deemed to be approved; provided, however, the subdivider may agree to an
extension of the time period, not to exceed an additional 60 days. It shall
then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval,
modification, or disapproval.
1.   Reasons for Changes or Disapproval. In the event that substantial changes
or modifications are made by the Commission or the Commission recommends
disapproval of the plat, it shall give its reasons therefor and it may request
and cause the revised preliminary plat to be resubmitted in the same manner as
the original plat.
2.   Tentative Approval. If the Commission recommends approval, it shall
express its approval as “Tentative Approval” and state the conditions of such
approval, if any.
3.   Documenting Approval. The action of the Commission shall be documented on
seven copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions
determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy shall be
retained by the Commission, and five copies shall be referred to the Council.
165.14   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
Within 30 days of its receipt of the preliminary plat, the Council shall, by
resolution, tentatively approve or disapprove the plat. If the preliminary plat
is disapproved, objections to it shall be returned to the Commission for
further review and the Clerk shall notify the subdivider of such action. If
approved, the Clerk shall affix his or her signature to five copies of the
preliminary plat with the notation of the date the preliminary plat received
the Council’s tentative approval. One copy shall be returned to the Commission
and three copies shall be returned to the subdivider. The tentative approval by
the Council shall not constitute final acceptance of the addition or
subdivision by the City but an authorization to proceed with preparation of the
final plat.
165.15   EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL.
The tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of
one year at the end of which time final approval must have been obtained. Any
plat not receiving final approval within this period of time shall be void, and
the subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new plat for tentative approval
subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations.
165.16   COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the Council will approve the final plat, all of the required
improvements shall be constructed and either accepted by formal resolution of
the Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances
or other City requirements, and the agreements between subdivider and the City.
165.17   PERFORMANCE BOND.
The completion requirement for improvements may be waived in whole or in part
if the subdivider will post a performance bond with the Council guaranteeing
that improvements not completed will be constructed within a period of one year
from final acceptance of the plat; but final acceptance of the plat will not
constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed.
Such performance bond shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form,
sufficiency, and manner of execution. Upon recommendation of the Commission,
the Council may extend the completion date set forth in the bond for a maximum
period of one additional year.
165.18   FINAL PLAT.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved,
and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations.
165.19   REQUIREMENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT.
The following graphic and descriptive material is required to be provided on
the final plat and in the accompanying material.
1.   Contents of the Final Plat. Every plat of a subdivision offered for record
shall conform to all of the following provisions where applicable:
   A.   The plat shall be a permanent copy or a photographic print made on a
stable plastic film. Exact copies of the plat to be recorded shall be provided
to and filed with the County Recorder, Assessor, and Auditor. The original plat
drawing shall remain the property of the registered land surveyor.
   B.   The size of each sheet showing any portion of the subdivided lands
shall not be greater than 18 inches by 24 inches nor less than eight and one-
half inches by 11 inches.
   C.   Whenever more than one sheet is used to accurately portray the lands
subdivided, each sheet shall display the number of the sheet and the total
number of sheets included in the plat, as well as clearly labeled match lines
indicating where the other sheets adjoin. An index sheet shall be provided to
show the relationship between the sheets.
   D.   A maximum scale of 100 feet to one inch shall be used. The scale used
shall be clearly stated and graphically illustrated by a bar scale drawn on
every sheet showing any portion of the lands subdivided.
   E.   Subdivisions shall be designated, by name or as otherwise prescribed,
in bold letters inside the margin at the top of each sheet included in the
plat.
   F.   An arrow indicating the northern direction shall be drawn in a
prominent place on each sheet included in the plat, as well as the scale and
date.
   G.   All monuments to be of record shall be adequately described and clearly
identified on the plat. When additional monuments are to be established
subsequent to the recording of the plat, the location of the additional
monuments shall be shown on the plat.
   H.   Sufficient survey data shall be shown to positively describe the bounds
of every lot, block, street, easement, or other areas shown on the plat, as
well as the outer boundaries of the subdivided lands.
   I.   All distances shall be shown in feet to the nearest one-hundredth of a
foot, and in accordance with the definition of a foot adopted by the United
States Bureau of Standards. All measurements shall refer to the horizontal
plane.
   J.   The course of every boundary line shown on the plat shall be indicated
by a direct bearing reference or by an angle between the boundary line and an
intersecting line having a shown bearing, except when the boundary line has an
irregular or constantly changing course, as along a body of water, or when a
description of the boundary line is better achieved by measurements shown at
points or intervals along a meander line having a shown course. All bearings
and angles shown shall be given to at least the nearest minute of arc.
   K.   Curve data shall be stated in terms of radius, central angle, and
tangent, or length of curve. In all cases, the curve data must be shown for the
line affected.
   L.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision
boundaries shall be 1:10,000 and shall be 1:5,000 for any individual lot.
   M.   When any lot or portion of the subdivision is bounded by an irregular
line, the major portion of that lot or subdivision shall be enclosed by a
meander line showing complete data with distances along all lines extending
beyond the enclosure to the irregular boundary shown with as much certainty as
can be determined or as “more or less,” if variable. In all cases, the true
boundary shall be clearly indicated on the plat.
   N.   All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and labeled,
“not a part of this plat.”
   O.   All adjoining properties shall be identified and where such adjoining
properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the name of that subdivision
shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a resubdivision of a part or the
whole of a previously recorded subdivision, sufficient ties shall be shown to
controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be
made. Re­ subdivisions shall be labeled as such in a subtitle following the
name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on the plat.
   P.   The purpose of any easement shown on the plat shall be clearly stated
and shall be confined to only those easements pertaining to public utilities
including gas, power, telephone, water, sewer, and such drainage easements as
are deemed necessary for the orderly development of the land encompassed within
the plat.
   Q.   A strip of land shall not be reserved by the subdivider unless the land
is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use or service as
determined by the Council.
   R.   The purpose of all areas dedicated to the public must be clearly
indicated on the plat.
   S.   Street names and clear designation of public alleys.
   T.   Block and lot numbers.
   U.   Name and address of owner and subdivider.
   V.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or reserved for
public use.
   W.   The plat shall be signed and acknowledged by the subdivision land owner
and his or her spouse.
   X.   A sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the registered
land surveyor who drew the plat.
2.   Information to be Provided in Accompanying Material. The following
material shall be submitted with the final plat:
   A.   A correct legal description of the subdivision land;
   B.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat
is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed
and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the
public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys,
parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is
approved by the Council;
   C.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the
plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire,
signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgment
of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section 354.12 of the Code
of Iowa may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the mortgage or lienholder.
When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the subdivision, a release of
mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the City or
dedicated to the public.
   D.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title
of the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors
and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land being
platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the
encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for
the purpose of this section.
   E.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from
certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond
in compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
   F.   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
   G.   A certificate by the City Engineer that all required improvements and
installations have been completed according to the construction plans submitted
to the City prior to construction or with the final plat if not constructed, or
that a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the City
Attorney and filed with the Clerk, or that the Council has agreed that the City
will provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess the costs
against the subdivider or future property owners in the subdivision.
   H.   The encumbrance bond, if any.
165.20   SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.
The subdivider shall prepare a final plat in accordance with the provisions of
Section
165.19 and shall file with the Clerk an application in triplicate for the final
approval of the plat. The application shall:
1.   Forms and Fees. Be made on forms available from the Clerk together with a
fee to be set by the Council.
2.   Number of Copies of Plat. Be accompanied by a minimum of 10 copies of the
final plat.
3.   Offers of Dedication. Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of
dedication to the public of all streets, City uses, utilities and easements, in
a form approved by the City Attorney.
4.   Time of Submission. Be presented to the Clerk at least four weeks prior to
the regular meeting of the Council.
165.21   REFERRAL OF FINAL PLAT.
The Clerk shall immediately refer two copies of the final plat to the City
Engineer and seven copies to the Commission. In the case of a subdivision
outside the corporate limits of the City, the Clerk shall refer one copy of the
final plat to the County Board of Supervisors.
165.22   ACTION BY THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall, upon receiving the final plat, as soon as possible, but
within 30 days of receiving the final plat, consider the final plat, and if the
same is recommended for approval, shall submit its recommendation of approval
to the Council together with a certified copy of its resolution showing the
action of the Commission. If the Commission recommends approval of the final
plat, such approval and the date thereof shall be noted on the plat over the
signature of both the Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission and the plat
and five copies shall be transmitted to the Council, and one copy shall be
returned to the subdivider.
165.23   ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
Upon receipt of the certification by the Commission, the Council shall, within
60 days, either approve or disapprove the final plat.
1.   Disapproval of Plat. In the event that said plat is disapproved by the
Council, such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and shall point out
wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
2.   Acceptance of Plat. In the event that said plat is found to be acceptable
and in accordance with this chapter, the Council shall accept the same.
3.   Final Approval and Recording of Plat. The passage of a resolution by the
Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of
the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such
plat to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and shall file
satisfactory evidence of such recording in the office of the Clerk before the
City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
165.24   RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
The following requirements shall govern the resubdividing of land.
1.   Procedure for Resubdividing. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map, or area reserved for public use indicated on the map, or any lot
line, or if it affects any map or plan legally established prior to the
adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be
approved by the same procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.
2.   Acreage Lots. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision
plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller
building sites, the Commission and Council may require that such parcel of land
allow for future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent
streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such
streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
165.25   COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the final plat is approved by the Council, all applicants shall be
required to complete, in accordance with the Council’s decision and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer, all the street, sanitary sewer, water, and
other improvements as required in these regulations, specified in the final
plat, and as approved by the Council, and to dedicate the same to the City,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public
improvements thus dedicated.
165.26   PERFORMANCE BOND.
The Council in its discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant
complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approving the final
plat, and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond at the time of
application for final plat approval in an amount estimated by the Council as
sufficient to secure to the City the satisfactory construction, installation,
and dedication of the incomplete portion of required improvements. In addition:
1.   Approved by City Attorney. Such performance bond shall comply with all
statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to
form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these regulations.
2.   Completion Period. The period within which required improvements must be
completed shall be specified by the Council in the resolution approving the
final plat shall be incorporated in the bond, and shall not exceed one year
from date of final approval.
3.   Extension of Completion Period. The performance bond shall be approved by
the Council as to the amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the
Council. The Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the Council
an extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period
of one additional year. The Council may at any time during the period of such
bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond.
4.   Temporary Improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of
temporary improvements required by the Council and shall maintain same for the
period specified by the Council. Prior to the construction of any temporary
facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the City a separate
suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond shall insure that the
temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed.
5.   Failure to Complete Improvement. For subdivisions for which no performance
bond has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within the period
specified by the Council in the resolution approving the plat, the approval
shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance bond has
been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms
of such performance bond, the City may declare the bond to be in default and
require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the
building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default.
165.27   INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
The Council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during
construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay
to the City an inspection fee equal to the actual cost of inspection. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits
shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivider shall furnish the
Council with a construction schedule prior to the commencement of any and all
construction, and notify the City not less than 24 hours in advance of
readiness for required inspections.
165.28   RELEASE OR REDUCTION OF PERFORMANCE BOND.
The performance bond may not be released or reduced except as follows:
1.   Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. The Council will not accept
dedication of required improvements, nor release or reduce a performance bond,
until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant’s
engineer has certified to the City through submission of detailed “as built”
plans of the subdivision indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other
information required by the City, that all public improvements are in
accordance with construction plans for the subdivision.
2.   Reduction of Performance Bond. A performance bond may be reduced upon
actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the
public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the
plat.
165.29   MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Improvements shall be maintained and a maintenance bond provided as follows:
1.   Maintenance of Improvements Before Acceptance. The applicant shall be
required to maintain all improvements on the individual subdivided lots and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks, if required, until
acceptance of said improvements by the Council.
2.   Maintenance Bond. The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance
bond with the Council, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by
the Council and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure
the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of two
years after the date of their acceptance by the Council and dedication of same
to the Council.
165.30   DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
Required improvements may be deferred or waived as follows:
1.   Waiver of Required Improvements. The Council may defer or waive at the
time of final approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any
or all such improvements as in its judgment are not requisite in the interests
of the public health, safety and general welfare, or which are inappropriate
because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.
2.   Deferral of Required Improvements. Whenever it is deemed necessary by the
Council to defer the construction of any improvement required herein because of
incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting
facilities, or for other reasons, the applicant shall pay his or her share of
the costs of the future improvements to the City prior to the approval of the
final plat, or the applicant may post a bond insuring completion of said
improvements upon demand of the City.
165.31   IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements required by these
regulations in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of
the Council and to its satisfaction.
165.32   DESIGN STANDARDS ARE MINIMUM.
The standards and details of design herein contained are intended only as
minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a
subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances. However, in the
design and development of the subdivision, the subdivider shall use standards
consistent with the site conditions so as to assure an economical, pleasant,
and durable neighborhood.
165.33   CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdividers shall
comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations.
1.   State Statutes. All applicable statutes of the State of Iowa.
2.   City Plans. Any comprehensive plan, public utilities plan, and capital
improvements program of the City.
3.   State Agency Rules. The requirements and rules of State agencies such as
the State Department of Natural Resources, State Department of Health, and the
State Department of Transportation, where applicable.
4.   County Standards and Regulations. The standards and regulations of the
County Board of Supervisors and County commissions, boards, and agencies where
applicable.
5.   City Standards and Regulations. The standards and regulations adopted by
the Council, boards, commissions, and agencies of the City.
6.   Plat Approval and Conformity. Plat approval may be withheld if a
subdivision is not in conformance with the above guides or policy and purposes
of these regulations.
165.34   SUBDIVISION NAME.
The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too closely
approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area covered
by these regulations. The Council, after consultation with the Commission,
shall have the final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which
shall be determined at preliminary plat approval.
165.35   MONUMENTATION.
Monuments shall be in conformance with the following requirements:
1.   Establishment of Permanent Control Monuments. Prior to the offering of the
plat of any subdivision for record, the surveyor shall confirm the prior
establishment of permanent control monuments at each controlling corner on the
boundaries of the parcel or tract of land being subdivided. If no permanent
control monuments exist, the surveyor shall establish at least two permanent
control monuments for each block created, or if the area subdivided into lots
is less than a block in size, at least two permanent control monuments shall be
established for the subdivision. Permanent control monuments shall be
constructed of reasonably permanent material solidly embedded in the ground and
capable of being detected by commonly used magnetic or electronic equipment.
The surveyor shall affix a cap of reasonably inert material bearing an embossed
or stencil cut marking of the Iowa registration number of the surveyor to the
top of the monument.
2.   Other Monuments of Record. Other monuments established prior to the
recording of the plat of the subdivision and described on the plat shall be
considered monuments of record and shall be given the same weight as original
permanent control monuments if the monuments remain undisturbed in their
original positions. The additional monuments shall be constructed and embedded
according to the provisions for permanent control monuments prescribed in
Subsection 1 of this section.
3.   Establishment and Recording of Other Monuments. Monuments other than the
permanent control monuments required in Subsection 1 of this section shall not
be required to be established before the recording of the plat or the
conveyancing of lands by reference to the plat if the registered land surveyor
includes in the surveyor’s statement on the plat that the additional monuments
required by these regulations shall be established before a specified future
date.
4.   Additional Monuments Required. Additional monuments shall be constructed
and embedded according to the provisions for permanent control monuments
prescribed in Subsection 1 of this section, and shall be set in all of the
following locations whether set prior to the recording of the plat, or
subsequent to such recording:
   A.   At every corner and angle point of every lot, block, or parcel of land
created.
   B.   At every point of intersection of the outer boundary of the subdivision
with an existing or created right-of-way line of any street, railroad, or other
way.
   C.   At every point of curve, tangency, reversed curve, or compounded curve
on every right-of-way line established.
5.   Placement of Monument. When the placement of a monument required by this
chapter at the prescribed location is impractical, it is permissible to
establish a reference monument in close proximity to the prescribed location.
If the reference monument is established prior to the recording of the plat and
its location properly shown on the plat, the reference monument shall have the
same status as other monuments of record. Where any point requiring
monumentation has been previously monumented, the existence of the monument
shall be confirmed by the surveyor. The existing monument shall be considered a
monument of record when properly shown and described on the recorded plat.
165.36   CHARACTER OF THE LAND.
Land which the City finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due
to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth
formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which will
reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present
or future inhabitants of the subdivision or its surrounding areas or both,
shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by
the subdivider and approved by the Council, upon recommendation of the
Commission, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions.
Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve such a danger.
165.37   LOTS.
The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
1.   Lot Size. Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning regulations where applicable, but in no case shall a
lot contain less than 5,000 square feet of area or be less than 50 feet wide
measured at the building line.
   A.   Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall be of
sufficient size, as determined by the City and subject to any applicable State
or County rules or regulations, to accommodate the type of private sewage
disposal system proposed by the developer.
   B.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and
parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated.
   C.   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra 20 feet of width to
permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
2.   Street Access. Each lot shall be provided with satisfactory access to a
public street.
3.   Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reverse
frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at
least 10 feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other
disadvantageous use.
4.   Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to
straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.
5.   Lot Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage
away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with
the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so
as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent
lots.
6.   Building Lines. Building lines conforming with zoning standards shall be
shown on all lots within the platted area. Where the subdivided area is not
under zoning control, the Council may require building lines in accordance with
the needs of each subdivision.
165.38   BLOCKS.
Blocks shall conform to the following requirements:
1.   Provision for Lots. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two
tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions shall be permitted in blocks
adjacent to arterial streets, railroads, or waterways.
2.   Design Considerations. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to:
   A.   Provision for adequate building sites.
   B.   Zoning requirements where applicable.
   C.   Topography.
   D.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street
traffic.
3.   Block Lengths. The lengths of blocks shall be appropriate to the type of
development contemplated, but block lengths in residential developments shall
not exceed 2,000 feet, or be less than 500 feet. Wherever practicable, blocks
along arterials and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in
length.
4.   Easement Reservation. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the Council may
require the reservation of an easement to accommodate utilities, drainage
facilities, or pedestrian traffic.
5.   Pedestrian Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than 10 feet wide,
may be required by the Council through the center of blocks more than 800 feet
in length. Pedestrian crosswalks shall not exceed 12 percent in grade unless
steps of an approved design are to be constructed.
165.39   STREETS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
Streets shall conform with the following general requirements:
1.   Frontage on Improved Roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the
area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing
street.
2.   Grading and Improvement Plan. Streets shall be graded and improved and
conform to the City construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer, in accordance
with the construction plans required to be submitted.
3.   Topography and Arrangement. Streets shall be in conformance with the
following requirements related to topography and arrangement:
   A.   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All streets
shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building sites at
or above the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely
as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and
curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design
standards of these regulations.
   B.   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed
system of streets and dedicated right-of-way.
   C.   All arterials shall be properly related to special traffic generators
such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping
centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed
land uses.
   D.   Municipal service streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
   E.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract
to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions,
or unless in the opinion of the Council such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the
existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.
   F.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of
movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
4.   Access to State or County Jurisdictional Roads. Whenever any part of a
subdivision is designed with access to a road under State or County
jurisdiction, permission for access to such roads shall be obtained from the
appropriate jurisdiction and such access shall be designed according to the
standards of the appropriate jurisdiction.
5.   Access to Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Council may require that lot access
to such streets be limited by one of the following means:
   A.   Lots shall be designed so as to back onto the primary arterial and
front onto a parallel municipal service street; no access shall be provided
from the arterial street, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land
along the rear property line of such lots.
   B.   A series of cul-de-sacs entered from and designed generally at right
angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots
backing onto the arterial street.
   C.   A frontage or service road, separated from the primary arterial by a
planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points.
6.   Street Names. Streets that are in alignment with others already existing
shall bear the name of the existing streets. The proposed names of new streets
shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. Street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Council and Commission.
7.   Street Name Signs. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections
within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be
approved by the Council. The City shall install all street name signs. The
applicant shall deposit with the City at the time of final subdivision approval
the estimated cost of installation of each street sign required by the Council.
8.   Street Lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the Council.
9.   Construction of Streets and Dead-end Streets. Streets and dead-end streets
shall be in conformance with the following requirements:
   A.   Construction of Streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for
the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, and for efficient provision of utilities. If the adjacent property
is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-
of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T or L shaped
turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the
notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-
way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued. The Council may
limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design
standards of these regulations.
   B.   Permanent Dead-end Streets. Where a road does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Council
for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to
such boundary than 150 feet. However, the Council may require the reservation
of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street in accordance with City construction standards and
specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police
and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited
in length in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.
165.40   STREETS – DESIGN STANDARDS.
The following design standards shall apply to the design of streets:
1.   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and
improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access
to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and street maintenance
equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a convenient system and
avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards
for streets are hereby required:
   A.   A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on municipal arterial and municipal collector streets, and 75 feet on
municipal service streets.
   B.   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 100 feet for municipal
service and municipal collector streets, and of such greater radii as the
Council shall determine for special cases.
   C.   Minimum Roadway and Right-of-way Standards:
      (1)   Municipal arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of not
less than 80 feet and a roadway width of not less than 44 feet.
      (2)   Municipal collector streets shall have a right-of-way width of not
less than 60 feet and a roadway width of not less than 36 feet.
      (3)   Municipal service streets shall have a right-of-way width of not
less than 50 feet and a roadway width of not less than 26 feet.
      (4)   Frontage streets shall have a right-of-way width of not less than
40 feet and a roadway width of not less than 26 feet.
      (5)   Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for a municipal service
street and, in addition, shall provide a turnaround with a right-of-way radius
of 50 feet and a roadway radius of 40 feet. No cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet
in length.
   D.   Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following:
      (1)   Municipal arterial streets – six percent;
      (2)   Municipal collector streets – eight percent;
      (3)   Municipal service streets – 10 percent;
      (4)   Frontage streets – six percent.
   E.   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
minimum length in feet equal to 20 times the algebraic difference in percents
of grade.
   F.   No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent.
2.   Street Surfacing and Improvements. After sewer, water, and other utilities
to be located underground within the right-of-way have been installed by the
applicant, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or
cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations.
Said surfacing shall be of Portland concrete cement. Adequate provisions shall
be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders,
drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall
conform to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the City,
and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted
by the developer for plat approval.
3.   Excess Right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such slopes
shall not be in excess of three to one.
4.   Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited
access highways were so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands
shall be treated as follows:
   A.   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in
addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be
provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This
strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat:
“This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon is
prohibited.”
   B.   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
   C.   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
5.   Intersections. The following standards shall apply to the design of
intersections:
   A.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved
approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at
least 100 feet therefrom. No more than two streets shall intersect at any one
point unless specifically approved by the Council.
   B.   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall,
wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite
side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet
shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual
drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect
major streets, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of major
streets shall be at least 800 feet apart.
   C.   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two municipal service
streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection
involving a municipal collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Abrupt
changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in
accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular
movement.
   D.   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical.
In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area
shall be provided having not greater than a two percent rate at a distance of
60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting
street.
   E.   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation, including
trees, in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent
deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
   F.   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be
three percent or less.
6.   Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the
Council, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without
reimbursement from the City. The sharing expense for the construction of
bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant as determined by the Council,
will be fixed by special agreement between the Council and the applicant. Said
cost shall be charged to the applicant pro rata as the percentage of his or her
land developed and so served.
7.   Alleys. The following design standards for alleys shall be required of all
subdividers:
   A.   Alleys may be prohibited in residential districts.
   B.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except
that the Council may waive this requirement where other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading,
and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   C.   Alleys shall have a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet and a roadway
width of not less than 20 feet.
   D.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
   E.   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as
determined by the Council.
8.   Street Dedications and Reservations. The following provisions shall apply
to street dedications and reservations:
   A.   Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate
or avoid new perimeter half streets. Where an existing half street is adjacent
to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and
dedicated by the subdivider. The Council may authorize a new perimeter street
where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-
of-way width within his or her own subdivision boundaries.
   B.   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when City
plans or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening
a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the
applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his or her expense such
areas for widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and
streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own
expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land
reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area
requirements of the zoning regulations whether the land is to be dedicated to
the City in fee simple or an easement is granted to the City.
165.41   STORM SEWERS AND DRAINAGE.
The following requirements shall apply to the provision of storm sewers and
drainage:
1.   General Requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval any
plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood
water run-off channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by methods as approved by the Council, and a copy
of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be
provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any
intersection, or for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further
allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to
intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown
for each and every lot and block.
2.   Nature of Stormwater Facilities. The applicant may be required by the
Council to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that
may exist either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in
perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed
in accordance with the construction standards and specifications.
   A.   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install
storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance,
adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to
the specifications of the Council. However, in subdivisions containing lots
less than 15,000 square feet in area and in business and industrial districts,
underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed throughout the
subdivisions and be conducted to an approved outfall.
   B.   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as
determined by the Council, the subdivider shall make arrangement for future
stormwater disposal by a public storm sewer system at the time the plat
receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by
inclusion in the performance bond required for the subdivision plat.
   C.   A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough
to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether
inside or outside the subdivision. The Council shall determine the necessary
size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by applicable zoning regulations.
   D.   The Council shall also study the effect of each subdivision on existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. City
drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate shall
serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the
additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload
an existing downstream drainage facility, the Council may withhold approval of
the subdivision until provision has been made for the recovery of the cost for
the improvement of said potential condition in such sum as the Council shall
determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
   E.   The Council may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or
welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the
conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the
subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the flood plain of
any stream or drainage course.
3.   Dedication of Drainage Easements. The following shall apply to the
dedication of drainage easements.
   A.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of
such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose.
Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by an open
channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for maximum potential volume
of flow.
   B.   Drainage easements:
      (1)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the street lines and with
satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural watercourse or
to other drainage facilities.
      (2)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and
indicated on the plat.
      (3)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation easement of land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a
distance to be determined by the Council.
      (4)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in
determining the area requirement of any lot.
165.42   WATER FACILITIES.
Water facilities shall be provided as follows:
1.   General Requirements. The following general requirements shall apply to
the provision of water facilities:
   A.   Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install
adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to City
specifications. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.
   B.   Water main extensions shall be approved by the City.
   C.   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants and all
water supply improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plat and final
plat.
2.   Individual Wells and Central Water Systems. The following requirements
shall apply to the provision of individual wells and central water systems:
   A.   In the discretion of the Council, if a public water system is not
available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in
such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to
every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the
appropriate County or State agency for testing, and individual wells and
central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate County or State
health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the Council.
   B.   If the Council requires that a connection to a public water main be
eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central
water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water service at
the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds may be
required to insure compliance.
3.   Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except
those coming under Subsection 2 of this section. Fire hydrants shall be located
no more than 1,000 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structures and shall
be approved by the City.
165.43   SEWAGE FACILITIES.
Sewage facilities shall be provided as follows:
1.   General Requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the City construction standards and
specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules,
regulations, and standards of the City and the State Department of Natural
Resources or State Department of Health. Plans shall be approved by the above
agencies.
2.   Construction of Sanitary Sewage Systems. Sanitary sewage systems shall be
constructed as follows:
   A.   Where a public sanitary sewage system is reasonably accessible, the
applicant shall connect with the same and provide sewers accessible to each lot
in the subdivision.
   B.   Where public sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and
will not become available within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 years, the
applicant may choose one of the following alternatives:
      (1)   Install a central sewage system, operated and maintained by the
benefited property owners. Where plans for future public sanitary sewage
systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains
to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such
public sewer mains.
      (2)   Individual disposal systems, provided the applicant shall install
sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains from the street curb to a point in the
subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall
be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a
connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual
disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become available.
Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready to use and shall conform to all
plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall
be ready for connection to such public sewer main.
   C.   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not
become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant shall
install individual disposal systems or central sewage systems.
3.   Individual Disposal System Requirements. If public sewer facilities are
not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas
shall conform to the requirements of applicable zoning regulations and these
regulations. Percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the
City and the results submitted to the local board of health.
4.   Water Supply Interconnections. There shall be no physical connection
between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will
permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply
sources and structures.
165.44   SIDEWALKS.
The following requirements shall apply to the provision of sidewalks:
1.   Location. Sidewalks, if provided in the plat, shall be included within the
dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of all streets.
2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be improved as required in Subsection 2 of
Section
165.40 of these regulations.
165.45   UTLITIES.
The following shall apply to the provision of utilities:
1.   Location. The Council may require that all utility facilities, including,
but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, be located
underground throughout the subdivision. All utility facilities existing and
proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot
shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the
Council, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in
the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to
be developed for the same primary use.
2.   Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows:
   A.   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities.
Such easements shall be at least 10 feet wide. Proper coordination shall be
established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the
establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties.
   B.   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical
the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least 10 feet in width shall be provided alongside lot lines with
satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. Easements shall be
indicated on the plat.
165.46   PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the
City as a whole, such as trees, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic
spots. and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of
the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change
of grade of the land effected until approval of the preliminary plat has been
granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and
all trees where required shall be protected against change of grade.
165.47   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
The following provisions shall apply to nonresidential subdivisions:
1.   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is used for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall make such provision as the Council may require. A
nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards required by the Council, and
shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in City plans
and regulations.
2.   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the street,
parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses
anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed:
   A.   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to
the types of industrial development anticipated.
   B.   Streets rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the
type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
   C.   Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to street,
curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
   D.   Special requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water
drainage.
   E.   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
   F.   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
165.48   SCHOOL AND PARK RESERVATIONS.
If land to be subdivided contains sites that are designated in City plans or
plans of other public bodies to be used for schools or parks, the developer
shall reserve such site for such use. If sites which have been reserved are not
acquired by the City or other public body within two years of the date of the
preliminary plat approval, then such sites may be subdivided by the developer.
The appropriate public body may release the reserved site sooner by certifying
to the Council that it does not intend to acquire such site within the two year
period.
165.49   IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN UNINCORPORATED JURISDICTION.
Improvements in the two mile unincorporated area under the jurisdiction of
these regulations shall be the same as required herein, provided they are not
less than that required by the applicable County subdivision regulations, and
provided further that all construction plans shall be approved by the County,
and completed public roads shall be accepted by the Board of Supervisors for
public maintenance.
165.50   VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
The following shall apply to the granting of variations and exceptions:
1.   Hardships. Where the Council finds that extraordinary hardships or
particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may result
from strict compliance with these regulations, it may make variations or
exceptions to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and
further provided, the Council shall not grant variations or exceptions to these
regulations unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:
   A.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in
the neighborhood in which the property is located.
   B.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought, and are not
applicable, generally, to other property.
   C.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out.
   D.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to
make more money out of the property.
2.   Conditions. In granting variations and exceptions the Council may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
3.   Procedure for a Variance. A petition for any such variance shall be
submitted in writing by the developer at the time when the preliminary plat is
filed. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all
of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
165.51   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to
time by the Council; provided, however, that such changes or amendments shall
not become effective until after a public hearing has been held, public notice
of which shall have been given as required by law. Such proposed amendments
shall first be submitted to the Commission for study and recommendation before
the hearing is held. The Commission shall forward its recommendations to the
Council within 30 days, after which the Council shall give notice of and hold a
public hearing on the proposed amendment.
165.52   ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES.
No plat or subdivision within the City or within two miles thereof shall be
filed or recorded with the County, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any
validity until it complies with the provision of these regulations, has been
approved by the Council as herein set forth, and further:
1.   Issuance of Building Permits. No more than two building permits for each
separate tract existing at the time of the effective date of these regulations
shall be issued unless the tract has been platted in accordance with these
regulations; except that this provision shall not limit the number of building
permits that may be issued for accessory buildings as defined by applicable
land use regulations such as zoning and restricted residence regulations or
additions or improvements to a main or accessory building already legally
located upon said tract.
2.   Sale or Lease Without Plat. Any person who shall dispose of or offer for
sale or lease any lots in the City or addition to the City, until the plat
thereof has been acknowledged and recorded as provided in these regulations,
shall forfeit and pay $50.00 for each lot and part of lot sold or disposed of,
leased or offered for sale.
CHAPTER 170
ZONING REGULATIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS     170.32 Other Than Corner
170.01 Plan Adopted                    170.33 Measurement Rule
170.02 Establishment of Zones          170.34 Exception; Board Adjustment
170.03 Zones Listed                    170.35 Fences; Location Of
170.04 Official Zoning Map             170.36 Fences; Required Distance from
                                       Property Line
170.05 Interpretation of Map
170.06 Annexation                      DISTRICTS
170.07 Zoning Lots to Be Designated    170.40 AG – Agricultural District
170.08 Application to Land and         170.42 RS-90 – Single-Family Residence
Buildings                              District
170.09 Applicability; Open Space       170.44 RD-60 – Duplex Residence District
170.10 Interpretation; Priority of     170.46 RG-20 – General Residence
Contracts                              District
170.11 General Interpretation          170.48 ER – Existing Residential
                                       District
170.12 Definitions                     170.50 CGB – Central General Business
                                       District
170.13 Residential Dwelling Standards  170.52 HSB – Highway Service Business
                                       District
                                       170.54 ML – Light Manufacturing District
EXCEPTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS           170.56 HI – Heavy Industrial District
170.20 Height Exception; General Rule  170.58 M – Modified Residential District
170.21 Height Exceptions;
Appurtenances
170.22 Height Exceptions; Electronic   SIGNS, NONCONFORMITIES, AND
Towers                                 ADMINISTRATION
170.23 Yard Space; General Rule        170.60 Advertising Signs, Posters, and
                                       Billboards
170.24 Yard Space Encroachments; Eaves 170.62 Nonconforming Lots, Structures,
                                       and Uses
170.25 Yard Space Encroachments;       170.64 Automobile Parking and Loading
Chimneys                               Space
170.26 Yard Space Encroachments;       170.66 Board of Adjustment
Porches and Terraces
170.27 Yard Space Encroachments; Rear  170.68 Application for Building Permit
Yard
170.28 Lot Area Exception; Existing    170.70 Certificate of Occupancy
Platting
                                       170.72 Amendments
FENCES AND HEDGES                      170.74 Interpretations, Purpose, and
                                       Conflict
170.30 Fence Not a Structure           170.76 Violation and Penalty
170.31 Corner Visibility
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
170.01   PLAN ADOPTED.
There is hereby established a new comprehensive zoning plan for the City of
Sanborn, Iowa, which plan is set forth in the text, maps, and descriptions
which constitute this chapter. Said plan is adopted by the authority of and for
the purposes set forth in Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, and amendments
thereto. This chapter shall be known and referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance.”
170.02   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES.
In carrying out the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council have divided the City into districts
and have prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan and designed to lessen congestion on the streets; to
secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to promote health and
general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and
other public requirements.
170.03   ZONES LISTED.
Symbols, titles, and a description of each of the zones hereby established by
this chapter are as follows:
1.   Residential Zones:
AG – Agricultural District. Provides for agriculture, very low density
residential development, and interim uses under specific conditions.
RS-90 – Single-Family Residence, 9000 square foot Zone. Provides for medium
density residential uses.
RD-60 – Duplex Residential, 6000 square foot Zone. Provides for dwellings
containing one and two family dwelling areas on moderate sized lots.
RG-20 – General Residence, 2000 square foot Zone. Provides for multiple
dwellings and compatible office buildings.
ER – Existing Residential. Provides for minimum development regulations for
already developed areas of the City.
M – Modified Residential Zone. A combining zone designation to provide for
mobile home parks.
2.   Business Zones:
CGB – Central General Business Zone. Provides a general business zone which
will take into account the special characteristics of the Central Business
District, including the orientation of pedestrian traffic rather than vehicular
traffic.
HSB – Highway Service Business Zone. Provides for efficient use of business
land near major highways and highway interchanges.
3.   Industrial Zones:
ML – Light Manufacturing Zone. Provides for most uses which can meet rigid
specifications but prohibiting residences.
HI – Heavy Industrial District. Provides for activities and uses of a heavy
industrial character but prohibits residences.
170.04   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
The location, size, shape, and boundaries of the zones to which the provisions
of the text of this chapter are applicable, shall be indicated on the atlas of
maps which is entitled “Official Zoning Map” incorporated herein and by this
reference made a part hereof and such maps, after being adopted by reference as
a part of this chapter, and so certified by the City Clerk and such atlas shall
be the Official Zoning Map, for the purpose of enforcement of these zoning
regulations. Any amendment to the zoning classifications on Official Zoning Map
shall include the legal description of the land involved, including appropriate
adjacent public rights-of-way on public property. Such amendments shall be
promptly and permanently noted on the face of the maps in the custody of the
City Clerk.
170.05   INTERPRETATION OF MAP.
The following rules shall govern interpreting the boundaries of zones as
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map.
1.   The boundaries of the zones, except where otherwise referenced, are
intended to follow the lines of platted lots, center lines of streets and
alleys, and when lines appear to be not more than 10 feet from the line of a
platted lot, the boundary shall be interpreted as being coincidental therewith.
2.   When boundaries cross unplatted property or platted lots otherwise than
set forth above, and their distances are not clearly marked, their location
shall be determined by use of the scale of the map and every such line shall be
interpreted to fall on the nearest multiple of 10 feet.
3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
4.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad tracks shall be construed to be
midway between the rails of the main tracks.
5.   In case of doubt or dispute, the boundary lines shall be determined by the
Board of Adjustment upon receiving an appeal from a ruling of the Zoning
Officer.
170.06   ANNEXATION.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the zoning classification of
any annexed land and shall report thereon to the City Council giving their
recommendations as to the proper classification. Said report shall be submitted
within six months of the effective date of the annexation.
170.07   ZONING LOTS TO BE DESIGNATED.
In order to facilitate the enforcement of this chapter, the device of zoning
lots as defined herein shall be used. A parcel of land shall be designated and
suitably recorded by the Zoning Officer as forming the site of each new
building, structure, or use of land or the site of any building, structure, or
use of land designated for any alteration or modification requiring a building
permit or certificate of occupancy. Said parcel shall conform in dimensions and
area to the provisions of this chapter. A zoning lot may or may not coincide
with platted lot lines. Each zoning lot shall front on a public street of not
less than 25 feet in width for a distance of not less than 20 feet or shall
have an exclusive, unobstructed, permanent access to such a public street by an
unobstructed easement of not less than 20 feet in width and not to exceed 150
feet in length.
170.08   APPLICATION TO LAND AND BUILDINGS.
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of
the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
170.09   APPLICABILITY; OPEN SPACE.
1.   No open space surrounding any building shall be encroached upon or reduced
in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area, and building
location regulations herein designated for the zone in which such building or
open space is located. No yard, off-street parking space, off-street loading
space, or other open space surrounding any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specified
herein, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building, and no yard or other open space on one platted lot shall be
considered as the required open space on another platted lot unless the other
platted lot is in the same ownership and is declared as a single zoning lot in
applying for a building permit, and provided no land so considered has
previously been issued a building permit for an existing building. The required
yard or open space for any use, building or structure shall be contained in the
same zone as required for the principal use, its buildings or accessory
buildings.
2.   No lot, yard, off-street parking space, or other open space required for
an existing building by the regulations contained herein shall hereafter be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein
for said building or structure, except to provide for the extension,
establishment, or widening of a public street or highway.
170.10   INTERPRETATION; PRIORITY OF CONTRACTS.
It is not the intention of this chapter to defeat the purpose of any contract,
deed restriction, or protective covenant when such instrument is not
inconsistent with this chapter or contains stricter requirements. In the event
this chapter, rules, and regulations adopted pursuant to law are inconsistent
with such contracts, deed restrictions, covenants, or State or federal law,
then the more strict provisions apply.
170.11   GENERAL INTERPRETATION.
Any use that is not specifically permitted in a district as a principal use, an
accessory use or a special exception, is hereby specifically prohibited. In the
regulations for some zones, specifically excluded uses are enumerated for
clarification of intent, but such lists of excluded uses are not to be
interpreted as including all excluded uses.
170.12   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms used herein shall be
defined and interpreted as follows.
All words in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural
include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicated
otherwise.
The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
The word “used” shall be deemed to include “designed, intended, or arranged to
be used.”
1.   “Alley” means a minor way, dedicated to public use, which is used
primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
2.   “Apartment hotel” means an apartment house which furnishes services for
the use of its tenants which are ordinarily furnished by hotels, but the
privilege of which are not primarily available to the public.
3.   “Auto wrecking” means the collecting, burning out, dismantling, or
wrecking of used motor vehicles, wheeled or track laying equipment, or
trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled,
obsolete, or wrecked motor vehicles, wheeled or track laying equipment, or
trailers or their parts. The dismantling and rebuilding, other than custom
repair, of more than one motor vehicle, piece of wheeled or track laying
equipment, or trailer at a time even though not for profit or a principal use
of a parcel of land shall be defined as auto wrecking. The storage of a
partially dismantled motor vehicle, piece of wheeled or track laying equipment
or trailer shall be considered auto wrecking.
4.   “Billboard” means any structure or portion thereof, situated on private
premises, on which lettered, figured, or pictorial matter is displayed for
advertising purposes, except the name and occupation of the user of the
premises, the nature of the business conducted on the premises and having an
area of 100 square feet or more shall be considered a billboard. This
definition shall not include any board, sign, or surface used to display any
official notices issued by a court or public duty, or bulletin boards used to
display announcements of meetings to be held on the premises on which such
bulletin boards are located, nor shall it include a real estate sign
advertising for sale or rent the property upon which it stands when such sign
does not exceed 100 square feet.
5.   “Block” means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highways, streets, streams, railroad right-of-way, parks, or a combination
thereof. There may be more than one numbered block shown on a plat, falling
within a single block as herein defined.
6.   “Board” means the Board of Adjustment of the City of Sanborn, Iowa.
7.   “Building” means any structure having a roof or partial roof supported by
columns, posts, or walls for the enclosure of persons, animals, equipment, or
chattel of any kind. A residential building within the meaning of this chapter
shall include a building enclosed by a continuous wall, regardless of the
existence of platted lot lines through the area occupied by such building. A
commercial or industrial structure may, within the meaning of this chapter,
consist of separate buildings where party walls or ownership lines exist in
such a manner as to indicate the intent that they be separate buildings. A tent
shall be defined as a building for the purposes of this chapter.
8.   “Building accessory” means any structure erected or constructed, including
buildings as herein defined, the use of which requires location on the ground
or attachment to something located on the ground and which is incidental and
customarily appurtenant to a principal use permitted on the zoning lot, but not
including fences of less than six feet in height, or bank protection structures
regardless of height provided they do not project more than one foot above the
surface of the ground on high side.
9.   “Building height” means the distance measured from the mean elevation of
the grade at the front face of the building to the highest point on the roof or
parapet of said building.
10.   “Building principal” means a building in which is conducted the primary
use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district any
dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building of the site on which it
is located.
11.   “Certificate of Occupancy” means a permit issued by the Zoning Officer
indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity
with this chapter or that there has been a legal variance therefrom as provided
by this chapter.
12.   “Clinic, medical” means a building or portion thereof containing the
offices and associated facilities of one or more practitioners providing
medical, dental, psychiatric, osteopathic, chiropractic, physical therapy, or
similar services for out-patients only with or without shared or common spaces
and equipment. A common area pharmacy or drug dispensary available to persons
other than patients treated therein or making charges separate from bills for
professional services of said practitioners shall not be considered as a
medical clinic use.
13.   “Club” or “clubhouse” means a voluntary association of persons organized
for cultural, recreational, fraternal, civic, charitable, or similar purposes,
but shall not include an organization or premises the chief activity of which
is a service or activity customarily carried on as a business, even though it
may be chartered and named for purposes herein defined as a club.
14.   “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Sanborn, Iowa.
15.   “Council” means the City Council of the City of Sanborn, Iowa.
16.   “Country club” includes golf courses, par-3 golf courses, swimming pools,
tennis clubs and neighborhood clubhouses, any and each of which shall be
located on a site of not less than one acre and open only to membership
subscribing for the use of all facilities for a term of not less than one year
and members’ non-paying guests. Sleeping facilities, other than quarters for
one caretaker or manager and their family, shall be prohibited. Clubs operated
as restaurants, cocktail lounges, card rooms, beer taverns, bowling alleys,
pool and billiard parlors, and similar activities normally carried on as a
business shall be excluded from the definition of a country club. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the method of operation of such facilities
enumerated in this definition when owned and operated by governmental agency.
17.   “Drive-in” means a business which is designed to serve patrons while they
are reposed in vehicles or by means of service windows with the intent that
products be consumed in automobiles. This shall not be construed to include
places for making deposits from automobiles such as drive-in bank windows, post
office drop boxes, or laundry or cleaning drop boxes.
18.   “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-
family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and group dwellings; provided however,
that the following are not dwellings:
   A.   Hotels, motels, tourist courts, and cabins.
   B.   In a building that contains one or more dwelling units or lodging rooms
in addition to one or more non-residential uses, the portion of such building
that is devoted to such non­residential uses, except when accessory to the
residential use.
   C.   Used for the institutional care of people such as hospitals, rest
homes, orphanages, and homes for the aged.
19.   “Dwelling, attached” means a multi-family dwelling in which each dwelling
unit has a separate outdoor entrance and is either:
   A.   Joined to one other dwelling unit at one side by one party wall.
   B.   Joined by two other dwelling units by one party wall on each side.
20.   “Dwelling, detached” means a dwelling that is completely surrounded by
open space on the same lot.
21.   “Dwelling, group” means a structure other than a hotel or motel inhabited
by more or less permanent occupants in excess of four, living independently in
quarters other than dwelling units.
22.   “Dwelling, mobile” means a vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
its being used as a conveyance upon a public street or highway and duly
licensable as such, and shall include self-propelled vehicles so designed,
constructed, reconstructed, or added to by means, in such a manner as will
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place of one or more
persons and supported by wheels, jacks, or similar supports. Transportable
dwellings not meeting building code requirements for dwellings shall be treated
as mobile dwellings.
23.   “Dwelling, multi-family” means a building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units.
24.   “Dwelling, single-family” means a building containing one dwelling unit
only.
25.   “Dwelling, two-family” means a building containing two dwelling units
only.
26.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms that are (a) located in a
dwelling and that are, (b) arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for
one family only. Each dwelling unit contains one, and only one, complete set of
kitchen facilities permanently installed. Solely for the purpose of determining
compliance with lot area per dwelling unit requirements, each lodging room in a
group dwelling shall be considered as one-half a dwelling unit. No lodging room
in a group dwelling shall be included as part of a dwelling unit.
27.   “Family” means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption living together in one dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household, including domestic servants, gratuitous guests, boarders, roomers,
or lodgers, but not to exceed 10 persons when all are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption.
28.   “Flammable liquids” means any liquid which gives off flammable vapors, as
determined by the flash point from an open cup tester as used for test of
burning oils, at or below a temperature of 80 degrees Fahrenheit, is flammable.
29.   “Floor area” means the floor area of a building as used in calculating
the gross floor area ratio as otherwise used in this chapter shall include all
areas having headroom of seven feet or more, including basement areas where
they are used as a dwelling unit for sleeping accommodations, or other family
eating or living purposes, but not including basement floor areas used for
storage and utility purposes. Floor area for business and industrial buildings
shall include all useable floor space above grade and that portion of basements
used for the conduct of business or industry, but not including utility areas
of said basements. Measurements shall be made at the outside of outside walls.
An area may be surfaced with natural earth and still be considered a floor.
30.   “Garage, private” means an attached or detached accessory building for
the storage of private passenger vehicles or recreational equipment, where no
repair facilities are maintained and no for-profit business is conducted. Each
single-family dwelling unit may have no more than three single-stall (single-
vehicle) units; however, the Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception
for additional units in suitable cases. Multi-family dwellings may have no more
than two single-stall (single-vehicle) units; however, the Board of Adjustment
may grant a special exception for additional units in suitable cases.
31.   “Golf course” means a standard sized layout of at least nine holes and
shall not include miniature golf courses, pitch and putt courses, or driving
ranges.
32.   “Grade” means the mean elevation of the ground, measured along the wall
of a building, or a lot line, or the top of a street curb or official grade of
a street curb not yet constructed, or an official grade of an alley surface, as
appropriate to the context in which the term is used.
33.   “Gross Floor Area Ratio” or “G.F.A.R.” means the floor area of a building
divided by the area of the zoning lot as defined herein. (For example, a
building one story high covering an entire lot would have a G.F.A.R. of 1.0,
whereas a building two stories high covering an entire lot would have a
G.F.A.R. of 2.0, while a one story high building covering half a lot would have
a G.F.A.R. of 0.5.) Both principal and accessory buildings shall be considered
in calculating gross floor area.
34.   “Ground coverage” means the area of a zoning lot occupied by all
buildings expressed as a percentage of the gross floor area of the zoning lot.
35.   “Height, building” (See Building height).
36.   “Home occupation, general” means a business, occupation, or profession
carried on within a residential dwelling by the resident thereof, and which
shall have the following characteristics:
   A.   There shall be no external evidence of the occupation with the
exception of one unlighted nameplate of not more than two square feet in area
attached flat against the building. Advertising displays and advertising
devices displayed through a window of the building shall not be permitted.
   B.   There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, noise,
vibration, electrical, or electronic disturbances detectable at the zoning
line.
   C.   The activity shall employ only members of the immediate family of the
resident of the dwelling.
   D.   The maximum allowable stock of goods shall be 30 cubic feet, none of
which shall be flammable in nature.
   E.   There shall be no signs, radio, television, newspaper, handbill, or
similar types of advertising linking the address of the premises with the home
occupation.
   F.   Said home occupation shall not involve continual visits by the general
public, except that music lessons may be given to one pupil at a time; dance
and art lessons may be given to four pupils at a time; a dressmaker may have
two customers at a time; a beauty parlor may have two customers at a time; and
a professional person may have one client or patient at a time. A barber shop
shall not be considered a home occupation.
   G.   The above listed characteristics of a home occupation shall not be
construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises,
provided this exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial
greenhouse or nursery, or the existence of stands or booths for the display of
produce grown on the premises.
   H.   Said occupation may include the caring for not more than eight children
at one time for compensation.
   I.   Room or board for hire, but not for more than two persons.
Any business, occupation, or profession, the operation of which does not meet
the aforesaid characteristics, shall not be interpreted to be a home occupation
despite the fact that it may attempt to operate in a residential building.
37.   “Home occupation, limited” means a business, occupation, or profession
carried on within a residential dwelling by the resident thereof, and which
shall have the following characteristics:
   A.   There shall be no external or externally visible evidence of the
occupation, business or profession whatsoever.
   B.   There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, noise,
vibration, electrical, or electronic disturbance detectable at the zoning lot
line.
   C.   The activity shall employ only members of the immediate family of the
resident of the dwelling.
   D.   There shall be no stack of goods on the premises.
   E.   There shall be no machinery other than that normally found in a home.
   F.   There shall be no contact at the premises with customers or clients
other than by telephone or mail, except that music lessons may be given to one
pupil at a time and cultural, art, or dance instruction may be given to four
pupils at a time.
   G.   Said occupation may include the caring for of not more than four
children at one time for compensation.
   H.   There shall be no signs, radio, television, newspaper, handbill, or
similar types of advertising linking the address of the premises with the home
occupation.
   I.   Room or board for hire, but not for more than two persons.
The above listed characteristics of a limited home occupation shall not be
construed to restrict the sale of garden produce grown on the premises,
provided that exception shall not extend to allow the operation of a commercial
greenhouse or nursery or the existence of stands or booths for display of said
produce.
Any business, occupation, or profession, the operation of which does not meet
the aforesaid characteristics of a limited home occupation, shall not be
interpreted to be a limited home occupation despite the fact that it may
attempt to operate in a residential building.
38.   “Junk or salvage yard” means a place where waste, discarded or salvaged
metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, and other
used materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, or cleaned; and
places or yards for the storage of salvaged metal, materials, and equipment;
but not including pawn shops and establishments for sale, purchase, or storage
of used cars or trucks in operable condition, boats or trailers in operable
condition, salvaged machinery in operable condition, and used furniture and
household equipment in useable condition and not including the processing of
used, discarded, or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations.
39.   “Lot” means a zoning lot unless the context shall clearly indicate a lot
of record, in which such case a “lot” is a lot of record.
40.   “Lot of record” means land designated as a separate and distinct parcel
in a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of O'Brien County, Iowa, or a parcel of land, the deed to which
was recorded in the office of said recorder prior to the adoption of these
zoning regulations.
41.   “Lot, corner” means a zoning lot situated at the intersection of two
streets, or bounded on two sides, by street right-of-way lines or in the case
of curved right-of-way lines, the extension of tangents at the side lot lines
does not exceed 135 degrees.
42.   “Lot, interior” means a zoning lot other than a corner lot.
43.   “Lot, line” means a boundary of a zoning lot. Lot line is synonymous with
property line.
44.   “Lot, reverse corner” means a corner zoning lot, the side street line of
which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the zoning lot
to its rear.
45.   “Lot, through” means a zoning lot having frontage on two parallel,
approximately parallel diverging, or converging streets, but not including a
corner lot as defined herein.
46.   “Lot, width” means the distance between side lot lines measured at the
rear of the required front yard on a line parallel with a line tangent to the
street right-of-way line.
47.   “Lot, zoning” (See Zoning Lot).
48.   “Minor repair, automobile” means the replacement of minor assemblies or
parts and tune-up of automobiles, or trucks of less than 15,000 pounds gross
license weight, but not including body and fender work, painting, engine
overhaul, or similar type of work.
49.   “Mobile home” (See
Chapter 146).
50.   “Mobile home park” (See
Chapter 146).
51.   “Modifying zone” means a zone which is dependent upon a primary zone and
which is designed to add to the primary zone a specific restriction or
liberalization to meet specific locational needs which if accomplished by an
additional series of primary zones would make these zoning regulations
unnecessarily lengthy and complicated.
52.   “Motel” means a group of attached or detached living units with
individual toilet facilities operated for transient guests and so constructed
that guest’s automobiles may be parked at or near the living unit.
53.   “Nonconforming building” means a building or structure or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of these zoning regulations or
an amendment thereto becomes effective, which does not meet the requirements of
these regulations or any amendments thereto.
54.   “Nonconforming use” means a use which lawfully occupies a building or
land at the time these zoning regulations or an amendment thereto becomes
effective but does not meet the requirements of this chapter or any amendment
thereto.
55.   “Par-3 golf course” means a golf course other than a miniature golf
course and other than a golf course defined herein, and having greens similar
to a golf course and fairways of not less than 50 yards in length. A par-3 golf
course may not be lighted unless so specified as permitted in the text of this
chapter.
56.   “Primary zone” means a zoning classification which can stand alone as a
classification of a parcel of property.
57.   “Principal permitted use” means that use of a zoning lot which is among
the uses allowed as a matter of right under the zoning classification.
58.   “Rooming house” means a dwelling containing one or more lodging rooms
that accommodate one or more persons who are not members of the keeper’s
family; provided however, that the letting of rooms for hire, to the extent
permitted by this chapter as a home occupation, shall not in itself cause a
dwelling to be a rooming house. In a rooming house, lodging or meals are
provided for compensation on a weekly or monthly basis. Rooming house includes
boarding houses.
59.   “Setback line” means a line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and defining
that minimum distance between a building and property line in which structures
may not be placed.
60.   “Special exception” means a use which is not allowed in the zone as a
matter of right, but which is permitted upon findings of the Board that under
the particular circumstances present such use is in harmony with the principal
permitted uses of the zone. Moveable conditional uses are specifically listed
under the district regulations. Uses not so listed shall not be allowed as
special exception uses.
61.   “Street” means the entire width between property line of a way or place
dedicated or acquired for the purpose of public use for vehicular traffic or
access other than an alley. Where a way or place exists by virtue of consent
agreement or an established public right, then for the purposes of this chapter
the way or place shall be considered to be 60 feet in width, falling half on
each side of the center line of the traveled way. Where the dimensions set out
in a consent agreement exceeds 60 feet, then the larger dimension shall govern.
62.   “Structural alteration” means any change in the structural members of a
building, such as walls, columns, beams, or girders. Vehicles duly licensed for
operation upon public streets or highways shall not be considered structures.
63.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location
on the ground or attached or resting on something having a fixed location on
the ground. Moreover, the following shall always be considered structures:
buildings, walls, signs, and billboards.
64.   “Use” means the purpose or purposes for which land or building is
designed, arranged, or intended, or to which said land or building is occupied,
maintained, or leased.
65.   “Use, accessory” means a use customarily incidental to the principal
permitted use or building and located on the same zoning lot with such
principal use or building.
66.   “Use, specifically excluded” means a use of land or a structure which is
excluded from a zone by the operation of the other regulations of the zone, but
which is specifically enumerated as excluded for purposes of clarity of intent
and ease of reference.
67.   “Yard, front” means an open space extending the full width of the zoning
lot, between the main building and the front lot line. In the case of a corner
lot, the front yard shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. His/her
determination shall be made without regard to the orientation of the building
on the lot.
68.   “Yard, rear” means an open space extending the full width of the zoning
lot, between the main building and the rear lot line.
69.   “Yard, side” means an open space extending from the front yard to the
rear yard, between the main building and the side lot line.
70.   “Zoning lot” means a single tract of land, located within a single block,
which at the time of filing for a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy, is designed by the owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control, and
assigned to the particular use, building, or structure, for which the building
permit or the certificate of occupancy is issued and including such area of
land as may be required by the provisions of this chapter for such use,
building, or structure.
71.   “Zoning Officer” means the official appointed by the City Council and
charged with the responsibility of enforcing these regulations.
170.13   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING STANDARDS.
All residential dwelling units shall meet the following minimum standards:
1.   The dwelling unit must have a minimum width of 22 feet for at least 65
percent of the length of the dwelling unit, said dimension to be exclusive of
attached garages, porches, or other accessory structures.
2.   All dwelling units including attached garages shall be placed on a
permanent frost-free foundation.
3.   All dwelling units shall provide for a minimum of 900 square feet of floor
space.
4.   All dwelling units shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3:12. This
requirement shall not apply to manufactured housing if the housing otherwise
complies with 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
EXCEPTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
170.20   HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS; GENERAL RULE.
Any structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the height
limitations of the zone in which it is located except as specified below.
However, no exception listed below shall exceed the height restrictions of an
aircraft approach and turning zone.
170.21   HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS; APPURTENANCES.
The following appurtenances may exceed the prescribed height limit except when
they would violate the height restrictions of an aircraft approach and turning
zone, provided they are normally required for a use permitted in the zone in
which they are erected or constructed: flagpoles, chimneys, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, belfries, penthouses (for other than living purposes),
grain elevators, stacks, silos, storage towers, observation towers, ornamental
towers, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, standpipes, and other necessary
mechanical appurtenances and their protective housing, provided however, that
any of the above except flagpoles and chimneys when located in any zone with a
height limit of 40 feet or less, shall be allowed only upon finding of the
Board of Adjustment that such appurtenances will not be unduly detrimental to
the surrounding property.
170.22   HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS; ELECTRONIC TOWERS.
Radio, television, microwave, and other electronic transmission or receiving
towers in excess of height limits may be allowed in any zone as a special
exception upon the finding by the Board of Adjustment that topographic or other
considerations make it necessary that they be located outside a zone where they
are permitted as a matter of right and that the proposed tower or towers will
not be unduly detrimental to surrounding property. Exceptions to height
restrictions shall not be granted in cases where they would violate height
restrictions of an aircraft approach and turning zone.
170.23   YARD SPACE; GENERAL RULE.
Any building, structure, or use hereafter erected, altered, or established
shall comply with the yard space requirements of the zone in which it is
located except as specified below. The required yard space for any building or
structure or use shall be contained on the same zoning lot as the building or
structure or use, and such required yard space shall fall entirely upon land in
a zone or zones where the principal use is permitted. Any required yard space,
as determined at the setback line, shall be open from 30 inches above the
ground for the sky except as specified herein.
170.24   YARD SPACE ENCROACHMENTS; EAVES.
Cornices and similar features may extend one foot into a required yard space.
Eaves may extend three feet into a yard space when such yard space is 10 feet
or more in width.
170.25   YARD SPACE ENCROACHMENTS; CHIMNEYS.
Chimneys may extend two feet into any yard space when such yard is 10 feet or
more in width, but shall not encroach upon a yard space of a lesser width.
170.26   YARD SPACE ENCROACHMENT; PORCHES AND TERRACES.
Open, uncovered porches or terraces, no higher than 30 inches above grade of
the lot on the side of the building where such porch or terrace is located, may
extend into any required yard. No railing or other barrier higher than 36
inches shall be placed around such porch or terrace and no such barrier which
interferes appreciably with the passage of light or air shall be within five
feet of any property line, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any
such porch or terrace when located on a lot at the intersection of two streets
or a street and an alley shall comply with the provisions designed to insure
proper sight distances as set forth in this chapter for fences and hedges.
170.27   YARD SPACE ENROACHMENTS; REAR YARD.
Accessory buildings or structures shall be permitted to occupy a required yard
with the following restrictions:
1.   No such accessory structure shall be greater than 15 feet in height nor be
closer than 20 feet from any street or alley line.
2.   An accessory structure may be constructed within two feet of an inside lot
line when the entire structure is within 40 feet of the rear property line.
170.28   LOT AREA EXCEPTION; EXISTING PLATTING.
A single-family dwelling may be built on any platted lot of record containing
75 percent of the required lot area for the district in which the lot is
located if said lot was in separate ownership and separate control at the
effective date of these regulations, provided the front, side, and rear yard
requirements for the district in which the lot is located are met. It is not
the intention of this exception to allow building as a matter of right on a
platted parcel which was never intended as a building site, but rather was
numbered on a plat for identification purposes under a scheme in which multiple
lots were intended to provide one building site.
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of these regulations, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of these regulations, and
no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter,
nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or
area below the requirements stated in this chapter.
FENCES AND HEDGES
170.30   FENCE NOT A STRUCTURE.
For the purposes of this chapter, fences shall not be classified as a structure
but shall be deemed a separate and distinct use of the land so as to allow
their placement on a portion of a lot in which a structure or accessory
building may not be located.
170.31   CORNER VISIBILITY.
Except in a Central General Business Zone, there shall be provided an
unobstructed view across a triangle formed by joining points measured 20 feet
distant along the property line from the intersection of two streets, or 15
feet along both the street and the alley line from the intersection of a street
and an alley. Within said triangle there shall be no sight obscuring or partly
obscuring wall, fence, or foliage higher than 30 inches above grade or in the
case of trees, foliage lower than five feet.
170.32   OTHER THAN CORNER.
On portions of a lot not covered by street or alley intersection restrictions,
the height of fences of any length and foliage continuous for five feet or more
shall be limited to 42 inches on any street line and the front 50 feet of any
side lot line. On all other portions of lot lines, fences, hedges and
continuous foliage barriers may not exceed a height of 80 inches.
170.33   MEASUREMENT RULE.
Heights of fences, hedges, and other continuous foliage shall be measured from
the adjacent top of the street curb, surface of an alley, or the official
established grade thereof, whichever is the highest. On inside lot lines the
measurement shall be from the average grade thereof, whichever is the higher.
On inside lot lines the measurement shall be from the average grade of the lot
line of the parcel or property having the lower elevation.
170.34   EXCEPTION; BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
The Board of Adjustment may approve, or may direct as a condition for granting
an appeal, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these regulations
be placed as screening between different uses, or between like uses upon
agreement between the parties affected thereby, provided that no such approval
shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein.
170.35   FENCES; LOCATION OF.
Fences or foliage may be placed within the required setback in any zoning
district at the distance specified from the property line for that district.
This shall not exempt a fence or foliage from the corner visibility requirement
as specified in Section
170.31, nor the height restrictions of Section
170.32. A fence or hedge may be built closer to the property line than the
distance specified in Section
170.36 if a written agreement is signed by the adjacent property owners and
presented to the Zoning Officer. Such agreement must state provisions for the
maintenance and erection of any fence or hedge located within the distance
specified in Section
170.36.
170.36   FENCES; REQUIRED DISTANCE FROM PROPERTY LINE.
1.   Residential Districts:
 
Front Yard:       2 feet
(with sidewalk)
Front Yard:       20 feet
(no sidewalk)
Side Yard:        2 feet
(interior)
Street Side Yard: 2 feet
(with sidewalk)
Street Side Yard: 20 feet
(no sidewalk)
Rear Yard:        2 feet
 
2.   Business Districts:
All Yards:   No Requirement
3.   Industrial Districts:
All Yards:   No Requirement
DISTRICTS
170.40   AG – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district is designed to preserve lands best suited for
agricultural use from encroachment of incompatible uses, and to preserve in
agricultural use land suited to eventual development in other uses pending
proper timing for practical and economical provisions of utilities, major
streets, schools, and other facilities so that reasonably compact development
will occur and the fiscal integrity of the City preserved. A change of zoning
from AG to any other classification shall be in accordance with planning
practices established by the Commission.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the AG District:
   A.   Agriculture including the raising of field crops, horticulture.
   B.   Ranch and farm dwellings pertaining to agricultural operations.
   C.   Parks and recreational areas operated by the City or other political
subdivision.
   D.   Riding academies.
   E.   Country clubs, as defined herein, when located on a lot of at least
five acres.
   F.   Recreational camps operated by public, charitable, or religious
organizations.
   G.   Buildings and installations geographically necessary to operate a
public utility, but not including general offices, material yards, or repair
shops. Such facilities shall observe yard space rules, but shall not be
required to provide the full lot size and lot width requirements.
   H.   Railroad through or spur tracks, but no siding or other terminal type
facilities and no service repair or administrative facilities.
   I.   Greenhouses and nurseries.
   J.   Kennels.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the AG District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Living quarters for persons regularly employed on the premises, but not
including labor camps or dwellings for transient labor.
   B.   Guest houses, not rented or otherwise conducted as a business.
   C.   General home occupations.
   D.   Offices incidental to and necessary for conducting a permitted use.
   E.   Private garages, stables, and barns.
   F.   Roadside stands, not exceeding 400 square feet in floor area, for the
sale of agricultural products grown on the premises.
   G.   Nameplates and non-illuminated signs, not to exceed 20 square feet in
area, identifying the premises but not containing over 20 percent brand
advertising.
   H.   The keeping of not more than two roomers or boarders.
   I.   Other accessory uses and buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the AG District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Quarters for transient labor.
   B.   Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums, or columbariums.
   C.   Commercial mines, quarries and sand and gravel pits.
   D.   Par-3 golf courses.
   E.   Public and quasi-public buildings and structures and uses of an
administrative, educational, religious, cultural, or public service type
including colleges.
   F.   Local utility services.
   G.   Railroad through and spur tracks.
   H.   Animal husbandry, feedlots, and poultry operations.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the AG District:
 
                                       Min. Side
Min. Lot Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Yard,     Min. Rear Max.       Max.
Area     Width    Yard       Yard      Street    Yard      Ground     Height
(acres)  (feet)   (feet)     (feet)    Side of   (feet)    Coverage   (feet)
                                       Cor.
                                                           10 percent
10       150      35         20        25        35        (including 35
                                                           accessory
                                                           buildings)
 
6.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street parking space shall be provided for all uses established in
this zone.
   B.   Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on one zoning
lot except as otherwise provided herein.
170.42   RS-90 – SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (9,000 SQUARE FOOT ZONE).
1.   Intent. This zone is designed to stabilize and protect the residential
characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable family life on
medium size lots. More uses are allowed as a matter of right throughout the
zone than in the larger lot size zones.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RS-90 District:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Public, parochial, and private schools and colleges offering courses of
general instruction when located on sites of at least five acres, and including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same site as the school or college.
   C.   Parks and recreation areas operated by the City or other political
subdivision.
   D.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural uses.
   E.   Country clubs as defined herein.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the RS-90 District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Private garages and private parking areas.
   B.   Limited home occupations.
   C.   Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the
premises and their non-paying guests and subject to any other regulations or
ordinances of the City.
   D.   The parking of one unoccupied trailer or self-propelled camper designed
for recreational use and not to exceed 36 feet in length within a building, or
in the open in a rear yard but subject to any permits required by law or
ordinance.
   E.   The storage of one pleasure boat on a trailer within a building, or in
the open in the rear yard.
   F.   Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RS-90 District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Local utility service.
   B.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of worship and
instruction.
   C.   Utility substations.
   D.   Railroad through and spur tracks, but no sidings or other terminal type
facilities and no service, repair, or administrative facilities and only after
a showing before the Board that such facilities are necessary in the location
proposed.
   E.   The growing of field crops.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the RS-90 District:
 
                                        Min. Side
Min. Lot  Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Yard,     Min. Rear Max.       Max.
Area (sq. Width    Yard       Yard      Street    Yard      Ground     Height
ft.)      (feet)   (feet)     (feet)    Side of   (feet)    Coverage   (feet)
                                        Cor.
                                                            25 percent
9,000     75       30         10        20        30*       (including 35
                                                            accessory
                                                            buildings)
 
*Except those lots with an alley as the rear property line may have a garage or
an accessory building not exceeding 680 sq. ft. for garages or 144 sq. ft. for
accessory buildings located within two feet of the rear property line. Those
lots without an alley as the rear property line may have a garage not exceeding
680 sq. ft. or an accessory building not exceeding 144 sq. ft. located within
10 feet of the rear property line.
6.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses established in the
residential zone.
   B.   Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on one zoning
lot, except as otherwise provided herein.
170.44   RD-60 – DUPLEX RESIDENCE DISTRICT (6,000 SQUARE FOOT ZONE).
1.   Intent. This zone is designed to provide for one and two dwelling areas on
lots of moderate size.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RD-60 District:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Residential buildings containing not more than two dwelling units.
   C.   Public, parochial, and private schools and colleges offering courses of
general instruction when located on sites of at least five acres, and including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other related living structures when
located on the same lot as the school or college.
   D.   Parks and recreation areas operated by the City or other political
subdivision.
   E.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural uses.
   F.   Country clubs.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the RD-60 District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   General home occupations.
   B.   Private garages and parking areas.
   C.   Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the
premises and their non-paying guests and subject to any other regulations or
ordinances of the City.
   D.   The parking of one unoccupied trailer or self-propelled camper designed
for recreational use and not to exceed 36 feet in length within a building, or
in the open in a rear yard but subject to any permits required by law or
ordinance.
   E.   The storage of one pleasure boat on a trailer within a building.
   F.   Other accessory uses and structures customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RD-60 District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Utility substations.
   B.   Railroad through and spur tracks, but no sidings or other terminal type
facilities and no service, repair, or administrative facilities and only after
a showing before the Board that such facilities are necessary in the location
proposed.
   C.   Fraternity and sorority houses when directly associated with a college
or university.
   D.   Buildings of non-profit community organizations and social welfare
establishments other than those providing living accommodations.
   E.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship
and instruction of a quiet nature when located in a substantial structure.
   F.   The growing of field crops.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the RD-60 District:
 
                                         Min. Side
Min. Lot   Min. Lot Min. Front Min. Side Yard,     Min. Rear Max.       Max.
Area       Width    Yard       Yard      Street    Yard      Ground     Height
           (feet)   (feet)     (feet)    Side of   (feet)    Coverage   (feet)
                                         Cor.
6,000 sq.
ft. for
single-
family
dwellings;
4,000 sq.  50       30         5         15        25*       40 percent 35
ft. for
each
dwelling
unit in
excess of
one
 
*Except those lots with an alley as the rear property line may have a garage or
an accessory building not exceeding 680 sq. ft. for garages or 144 sq. ft. for
accessory buildings located within two feet of the rear property line. Those
lots without an alley as the rear property line may have a garage not exceeding
680 sq. ft. or an accessory building not exceeding 144 sq. ft. located within
10 feet of the rear property line.
170.46   RG-20 – GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT (2,000 SQUARE FOOT ZONE).
1.   Intent. This zone is designed to provide for moderately high density
apartment development and other uses which have characteristics similar to
those found in the operation of apartment houses.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the RG-20 District:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Multiple dwellings containing not more than 12 dwelling units.
   C.   Parks and recreation areas operated by the City or other political
subdivisions.
   D.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural uses.
   E.   Country clubs.
   F.   Hospitals and rest homes, nursing homes.
   G.   Rooming houses and boarding houses.
   H.   Apartment hotels.
   I.   Private clubs, fraternity houses, sorority houses, lodges, and similar
establishments, but specifically excluding those establishments which have a
name or legal basis as the aforesaid, but are in fact operated as a business
enterprise, and also excluding concessions associated with the aforesaid which
are operated as a business enterprise.
   J.   The offices of one or more professional persons engaged in the
activities which generate a limited amount of contact with the general public,
but including medical clinics, offices of lawyers, accountants, architects,
planners, engineers, and similar professions.
   K.   Buildings of non-profit community organizations and social welfare
establishments.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the RG-20 District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Private garages and private parking areas.
   B.   Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the
premises and their non-paying guests and subject to any other regulations or
ordinances of the City.
   C.   The parking of one unoccupied trailer or self-propelled camper designed
for recreational use and not to exceed 36 feet in length within a building, or
in the open in a rear yard but subject to any permits required by law or
ordinance.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the RG-20 District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Utility substations.
   B.   Railroad through and spur tracks, but no sidings or other terminal type
facilities and no service, repair, or administrative facilities and only after
a showing before the Board that such facilities are necessary in the location
proposed.
   C.   Office buildings for the conduct of the administrative business of a
single company when such business does not deal with the public directly from
the site of such office building.
   D.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels.
   E.   Public, parochial, and private schools and colleges offering courses of
general instruction when located on sites of at least five acres, and including
convents, monasteries, dormitories, and other living structures when located on
the same site as the school or college.
   F.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship
and instruction of a quiet nature when located in a substantial structure.
   G.   The growing of field crops.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the RG-20 District:
 
Min. Lot Min.                          Min. Side
Area Per Zoning Min. Lot Min.   Min.   Yard,     Min. Rear Max.       Max.
Dwelling Lot    Width    Front  Side   Street    Yard      Ground     Height
Unit     (sq.   (feet)   Yard   Yard   Side of   (feet)    Coverage   (feet)
(sq.     ft.)            (feet) (feet) Cor.
ft.)
                                                           80 percent
2,000*   6,000  50       30     5      10        10**      (including 75
                                                           accessory
                                                           buildings)
 
*Except that residential buildings containing one dwelling unit shall have a
minimum lot area of 6,000 sq. ft. and residential buildings containing 2, 3, or
4 dwelling units shall have a minimum lot area of 2,500 sq. ft. per dwelling
unit.
**Except those lots with an alley as the rear property line may have a garage
or an accessory building not exceeding 680 sq. ft. for garages or 144 sq. ft.
for accessory buildings located within two feet of the rear property line.
Those lots without an alley as the rear property line may have a garage not
exceeding 680 sq. ft. or an accessory building not exceeding 144 sq. ft.
located within 10 feet of the rear property line.
170.48   ER – EXISTING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district is intended to provide for an area of City with
minimum development regulations. This district is to be located in portions of
the City which have been developed prior to the adoption of these zoning
regulations.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the ER District:
   A.   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Multiple dwellings containing not more than 12 dwelling units.
   C.   Parks and recreation areas operated by the City or other political
subdivisions.
   D.   Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural uses.
   E.   Country clubs.
   F.   Hospitals and rest homes, nursing homes.
   G.   Rooming houses and boarding houses.
   H.   Apartment hotels.
   I.   Private clubs, fraternity houses, sorority houses, lodges, and similar
establishments, but specifically excluding those establishments which have a
name or legal basis as the aforesaid, but are in fact operated as a business
enterprise, and also excluding concessions associated with the aforesaid which
are operated as a business enterprise.
   J.   The offices of one or more professional persons engaged in the
activities which generate a limited amount of contact with the general public,
but including medical clinics, offices of lawyers, accountants, architects,
planners, engineers, and similar professions.
   K.   Buildings of non-profit community organizations and social welfare
establishments.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the ER District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Private garages and private parking areas.
   B.   Private swimming pools exclusively for the use of residents of the
premises and their non-paying guests and subject to any other regulations or
ordinances of the City.
   C.   The parking of one unoccupied trailer or self-propelled camper designed
for recreational use and not to exceed 36 feet in length within a building, or
in the open in a rear yard but subject to any permits required by law or
ordinance.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the ER District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Utility substations.
   B.   Railroad through and spur tracks, but no sidings or other terminal type
facilities and no service, repair, or administrative facilities and only after
a showing before the Board that such facilities are necessary in the location
proposed.
   C.   Office buildings for the conduct of the administrative business of a
single company when such business does not deal with the public directly from
the site of such office building.
   D.   Mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels.
   E.   Public, parochial, and private schools and colleges offering courses of
general instruction when located on sites of at least five acres, and including
convents, monasteries, dormitories and other living structures when located on
the same site as the school or college.
   F.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of religious worship
and instruction of a quiet nature when located in a substantial structure.
   G.   The growing of field crops.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the ER District:
 
         Min.                               Min.
Min. Lot Zoning Min. Lot             Min.   Side    Min.   Max.       Max.
Area     Lot    Width    Min. Front  Side   Yard,   Rear   Ground     Height
(sq.     (sq.   (feet)   Yard        Yard   Street  Yard   Coverage   (feet)
ft.)     ft.)                        (feet) Side of (feet)
                                            Cor.
                         15 feet or
                         in line
                         with the
                         two                               40 percent
                         immediately                       (including
6,000    6,000  50       adjacent,   5      12      25*    accessory  35
                         developed                         buildings)
                         lots,
                         whichever
                         is the
                         greater
 
*Except those lots with an alley as the rear property line may have a garage or
an accessory building not exceeding 680 sq. ft. for a garage or 144 sq. ft. for
an accessory building located within two feet of the rear property line. Those
lots without an alley as the rear property line may have a garage no exceeding
680 sq. ft. or an accessory building not exceeding 144 sq. ft. located within
10 feet of the rear property line.
170.50   CGB – CENTRAL GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. To provide a general business district which will take into
account the special characteristics of the Central Business District including
the orientation to pedestrian traffic rather than vehicular traffic.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the CGB District:
   A.   Bakery or pastry shops employing not more than five persons on the
premises, exclusive of drivers; bicycle sales and repair shops, but not
including sales and repair of motor-driven vehicles; billboards and general
advertising signs; bowling alley, trampoline or rebound equipment center,
miniature golf, pool hall, dance hall, kiddy parks, skating rinks; building
other than heavy storage and maintenance shops for municipal or governmental
purposes; business and commercial schools; clinics for people only; dancing
schools including group instruction; feed and seed store; frozen food lockers
for individual or family trade, but no slaughtering, killing, eviscerating,
skinning, plucking, or smoking on the premises; furniture and antique homes and
stores including used furniture stores; garages for the storage of automobiles,
but not including major repair, body and fender work or painting; greenhouses,
commercial; nursery stock sales yards; loan office; extremely light,
professional type manufacturing and repair of such items as eyeglasses, custom
jewelry, prosthetic devices, and other similar services and manufacture;
mortuaries, funeral homes, and funeral chapels; motel, hotel; general office
buildings; commercial parking lots; pawn shops; pet shops; printing job when
mechanical operation is not visible from a street and employing not over four
persons; radio and television stations, except transmission towers over 35 feet
high; stationary and office machine sales and service; tavern, cocktail lounge,
club operated as a tavern or cocktail lounge; theater other than drive-in;
upholstery shops; automatic vending structures when located on that portion of
a lot in which a principal building is permitted.
   B.   Other retail and service establishments which may be determined by the
Board of Adjustment to be similar to the above listed principal permitted uses
and which are in harmony with the purpose of this district. Excluded is any use
not listed as a permitted use in this district but is specifically listed as a
permitted use in another district.
   C.   Residential structures and other structures and uses permitted in the
RG-20 District when not in conformity with the space limits of the RG-20
District.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the CGB District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Accessory uses for residential development shall include those listed
under the RG-20 District and shall be established and conducted in accordance
with the regulations of that district.
   B.   Signs including illuminated signs.
   C.   Other accessories normally appurtenant to uses permitted in this
district.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the CGB District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   The Board of Adjustment may allow residential and mixed business and
residential structures to conform with the space limits of the RG-20 District
or any other district requiring more lot area per dwelling unit, upon a finding
that the proposed density of residential use will be in harmony with nearby
residential zoning, and when said mixed occupancy building is specifically
designed and constructed for such mixed occupancy, but shall not include the
construction of a business building in the yard of a residence or within an
existing residence.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the CGB District:
 
Min. Lot Area   Min. Lot Width  Min. Front Yard Min. Side Yard  Min. Lot Area
for Business    (feet)          (feet)          (feet)          for Residences
                                                5 feet when
                None for        None for        abutting any
None            business        business        district        Structures
                                                requiring a     shall conform
                                                side yard       with the
Min. Side Yard, Min. Rear Yard  *Max. Ground    Max. Height     provisions of
Street Side of  (feet)          Coverage        (feet)          the RG-20
Cor.                                                            District,
                                                                except as may
                                                                be modified by
                                                                the Board of
                                                                Adjustment in
                                                                accordance with
None            10              95 percent      35              the special
                                                                exception
                                                                provisions of
                                                                this district.
 
*Including accessory buildings, loading docks, incinerators, and vending
devices
6.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street loading shall be provided for all new buildings. Off-street
parking may be provided by governmental or group action. It is not desired that
each building supply parking space to meet its full demands on or adjacent to
its site in that such an arrangement would tend to spread the CGB District over
too large an area to make pedestrian communication and interchange
inconvenient.
   B.   Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on one zoning
lot except as otherwise provided herein.
170.52   HSB – HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district is designed to provide for the effective use of land
situated in relationship to major highways and highway interchanges so
efficient grouping of activities can develop to serve the traveling public.
Front yard requirements are designed to provide for the safety of the traveling
public by provision for adequate off-highway maneuvering and parking space.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the HSB District:
   A.   Motels and motor hotels designed for accommodation of the traveling
public, and including swimming pools, children’s play yards, golf putting
greens, and similar uses when they are a part of said motel or motor hotel
developments.
   B.   Restaurants and eating places, provided however, that no such
establishment shall be operated as a restaurant or eating place in which more
beer or other intoxicating beverages are sold than food. Taverns, bars,
cocktail lounges, and similar establishments which require licensing for the
dispensing of beverages shall be prohibited except as a part of and located in
the same building as a restaurant or eating place specified above.
   C.   Gasoline service stations which do not conduct major automotive
repairs, body or fender work, or automobile painting, and at which all used and
waste materials are kept within a solid enclosure so that the contents are not
visible from a street, highway, interstate highway, or other properties;
gasoline pumps and other facilities shall be considered as structures and shall
not be located within a required yard space.
   D.   Self-operated vending devices, provided such devices shall be placed
for operation and stored behind the building line specified herein for
conventional structures.
   E.   Drive-in configurations of any business otherwise permitted in this
district, provided that any such establishment shall provide adequate off-
street space for the maneuvering and storage of patrons’ vehicles, and further
provided that there be a sturdy, close-woven or solid fence suitable for the
retaining of any discarded paper or other material on all sides of the parking
area except the front, and provided no music or loud speaker system shall be
installed or operated that can be heard at neighboring residential motel or
motor hotel properties, and providing all lighting shall be directed and
shielded so as to light only the property of such establishments.
   F.   Light retail establishments such as: apparel, drug, variety, florist,
gift, grocery, jewelry, small appliances, bakery, and dairy; provided, however,
that these uses do not exceed 500 square feet of gross floor area and are
incidental to the primary uses listed under Paragraphs A, B, and C above, of
principal permitted uses.
   G.   Light service establishments such as: tailor, dressmaker, barber,
beauty operator, dance studio (but excluding dance halls), real estate,
insurance, photographer, professional offices (but excluding veterinary
hospitals), self-service laundry, and dry cleaning.
   H.   Other light retail and service establishments which may be determined
by the Board of Adjustment to be similar to the above listed uses and which are
in harmony with the purposes of the district.
   I.   Single family residences, when not in a business building or on the
same zoning lot as a business building or on the same zoning lot as a business
building, and when in conformity with the space limits of the RD-60 District.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the HSB District including, but not limited
to, the following:
   A.   Accessory uses for residential development shall include those listed
under the RD-60 District and shall be established and conducted in accordance
with the regulations of that district.
   B.   Accessory uses for commercial development shall include those normally
appurtenant to such development, except as further specified herein, and shall
be located in accordance with the space limits of this district.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the HSB District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Local utility service.
   B.   Churches, synagogues, chapels, and similar places of worship and
instruction.
   C.   Utility substations.
   D.   Railroad through and spur tracks, but no sidings or other terminal type
facilities and not service, repair or administrative facilities and only after
a showing before the Board of Adjustment that such facilities are necessary in
the location proposed.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the HSB District:
 
Min. Lot Area   Min. Lot Area  Min. Lot Width
for Business or for Residence  (feet)          Min. Front Yard Min. Side Yard
Industry
                Conform to the
10,000 sq. ft.  provisions of  None for
                the RD-60      business        25 feet from a
                District                       street or       None, except
Min. Rear Yard  Max Ground     Max. Height     highway right-  that no building
                Coverage       (feet)          of-way, except  shall be located
                                               that one sign   closer than 25
                                               or decorative   feet from any
                                               pylon may be    street or
                40 percent for                 placed at a     highway right-
None            business or    55              property line   of-way line
                industry                       or within the   except as
                                               required yard   provided herein
                                               space
 
6.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided for all uses
established in this district.
   B.   Only one building for living purposes shall be permitted on one zoning
lot except as otherwise provided herein.
170.54   ML – LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district provides for a wide range of commercial and
industrial uses, all of which shall be able to meet comparatively rigid
specifications as to nuisance-free performance. The district specifically
excludes residences on the theory that the mixture of residential use, and the
public service and facilities for residences with those for industry is
contrary to the purposes of these regulations irrespective of whether the
industry is encroaching on a living area or a living area is encroaching on an
industrial area.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the ML District:
   A.   Any use allowed in the CGB District, except that all dwellings and
other types of living accommodations shall be prohibited save that one quarters
for a guard or caretaker shall be permitted as an accessory use for any
permitted use occupying more than 20,000 square feet of lot area.
   B.   Any business, commercial, or industrial use which can meet the
performance standards set forth for this district but not specifically excluded
or specifically mentioned as belonging in another less restrictive district.
   C.   Agriculture, including the raising of field crops, horticulture, and
animal husbandry. Feed lots, poultry farms, fur farms, and kennels shall be
allowed when such activities shall meet the performance standards set forth for
this district.
3.   Excluded Uses. The following uses are prohibited within the ML District:
   A.   Dwellings, except caretaker and guard quarters as set forth herein.
   B.   Public, parochial, and private schools and colleges, except trade
schools.
   C.   Hospitals, clinics, rest homes, and other institutions for housing or
care of human beings.
   D.   Motels, hotels, and mobile home parks.
   E.   Any use not enumerated as permitted in this district but which is
specifically provided for in another district or districts.
4.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the ML District:
   A.   Any accessory use normally appurtenant to a permitted use shall be
allowed provided such use shall conform with all performance standards set
forth for this district.
5.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the ML District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
   A.   Recreation uses which are temporary in nature and do not involve any
appreciable amount of fixed construction and which will not interfere with the
efficient functioning of the district for its primary purpose of providing for
manufacturing and heavy commercial establishments, may be allowed only upon
appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
6.   Performance Standards. The following performance standards shall apply in
the ML District:
   A.   Physical Appearance. All operations shall be carried on within an
enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition
may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be
stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily
visible from the street. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be
construed to prohibit the display of merchandise or vehicles for sale or the
storage of vehicles, boats, farm machinery, trailers, mobile homes, or similar
equipment when in operable condition.
   B.   Fire Hazard. No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable
gases, acid, liquors, grinding processes, or other inherent fire hazards. This
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels
and welding gases when handled in accordance with other ordinances of the City.
   C.   Noise. No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess
of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily
peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line. When
the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the natural
senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include breakdown
into a reasonable number of frequency ranges. All noises shall be muffled so as
to not be objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness.
   D.   Sewage and Liquid Wastes. No operation shall be carried on which
involves the discharge into a sewer, water course or the ground of liquid
wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid wastes of a chemical nature which
are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to
sewer pipes and installations.
   E.   Air Contaminants.
      (1)   Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated
Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines,
except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for
one four minute period in each one-half hour. Light-colored contaminants of
such an opacity as to obscure an observer’s view to a degree equal to or
greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted.
      (2)   Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by
any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two-tenths
grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit,
except for a period of four minutes in any one-half hour, at which time it may
equal but not exceed six-tenths grains per cubic foot as corrected to a
temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit.
      (3)   Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contaminants cannot
reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied
the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever
such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quality as to
cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of
persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort, repose, health,
or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in
general or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to
business, vegetation, or property.
   F.   Odor. The emissions of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious
to any considerable number of persons shall be deemed that strong odors of
putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as
associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be
considered obnoxious within the meaning of this chapter.
   G.   Gases. The gases sulfur dioxide and hydrogen sulfide shall not exceed
five parts per million; carbon monoxide shall not exceed five parts per
million. All measurements shall be taken at the zoning lot line.
   H.   Vibration. All machines, including punch presses and stamping machines,
shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such
vibration exceed a displacement of three thousandths of an inch measured at the
zoning lot line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted in
this district.
   I.   Glare and Heat. All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces,
shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the zoning lot line.
No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the zoning lot
line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than
five degrees Fahrenheit.
7.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the ML District:
 
Min. Lot Area   Min. Lot Width  Min. Front Yard Min. Side Yard  Maximum Height
(sq. ft.)       (feet)          (feet)          (feet)
10,000          50              20              None            No restriction
Min. Rear Yard  Min. Side Yard, Min. Rear Yard  Max. Ground     except as
(feet)          Street Side of  (feet)          Coverage        limited by
                Cor.                                            gross floor
                                                                area ratio and
                                                                by any
                                                                restrictions
                                                                imposed by
                                                                virtue of
None            10 feet         None            75 percent      aircraft
                                                                approach and
                                                                turning zone
                                                                height
                                                                restrictions
 
8.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided for all uses
established in this district.
170.56   HI – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district is intended to provide areas for activities and uses
of a heavy industrial character and is the least restrictive of any district.
In the best interest of the City, certain uses in the HI District shall be
subject to final City Council approval, conditional approval, or denial to
insure that proper safeguards are taken. No residential uses are permitted.
2.   Permitted Uses. There may be any use, excluding residential uses and
mobile homes. The following uses must be given separate Board of Adjustment
approval before a zoning permit is issued:
   A.   Acid manufacture.
   B.   Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
   C.   Distillation of bones.
   D.   Explosive manufacture or storage.
   E.   Fat rendering.
   F.   Fertilizer manufacture.
   G.   Gas manufacture.
   H.   Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reduction or dumping.
   I.   Glue manufacture.
   J.   Petroleum, or its products, refining of.
   K.   Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
   L.   Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
   M.   Junk yards. Must be surrounded by a solid fence at least six feet high
located within building lines and the junk piled not higher than the fence.
   N.   Commercial livestock confinements not meeting the definition of
“Agricultural.”
3.   Required Conditions.
   A.   The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or
water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke,
gas, noise, or similar nuisance shall be employed and subject to all State and
federal regulations.
   B.   All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures,
including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at least 100 feet
from any “R” District boundary, except where adjoining a railroad right-of-way,
and 50 feet from any commercial boundary.
4.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the HI District.
   A.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use.
   B.   Living quarters for watchmen or custodians of industrial properties.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the HI District:
 
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot     Min. Front  Min. Side   Min. Rear Yard Max Height
(sq. ft.)     Width (feet) Yard (feet) Yard (feet) (feet)
                                                                  The lesser of
9,000         80           30          15          30             3 stories or
                                                                  45 feet
 
6.   Off-street Parking. The following off-street parking requirements shall
apply in the HI District:
   A.   All commercial uses shall provide one parking space on the lot for each
300 square feet of floor area.
   B.   All industrial uses shall provide one parking space on the lot for each
two employees of maximum number employed at any one time.
7.   Off-street Loading. The following off-street loading requirements shall
apply in the HI District:
   A.   All activities or uses allowed in the HI District shall be provided
with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent
service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
8.   Signs. The following sign regulations shall apply to the HI District:
   A.   Off-premises signs are permitted.
   B.   Off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the districts they
are located in. Other bulk regulations do not apply. Off-premises signs are
governed by State and federal regulations along highways, where zoning exists.
   C.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the
driver of any motor vehicle.
   D.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to
render dangerous the use of the highway.
   E.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign,
signal, or device.
   F.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public right-of-way.
   G.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic
control sign, signal, or device.
   H.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected, or
maintained which simulates any official, directional, or warning sign erected
or maintained by the State, County, Municipal, or other governmental
subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or
resembling traffic signals or control signs.
   I.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on rocks, fences, trees,
or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities.
   J.   Signs may be erected on municipal utility structures by written
approval of the City.
170.58   M – MODIFIED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
1.   Intent. This district is designed to provide for the inclusion of mobile
home parks as an additional use in several districts at locations which are
suitable for mobile dwellings.
2.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the M District:
   A.   Any principal permitted use in the primary district to which the M
District classification is appended when established according to the rules and
conditions of the primary district.
   B.   Parks authorized by the City for the parking and occupancy of mobile
dwellings.
3.   Accessory Uses. Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use in the M District including, but not limited to,
the following:
   A.   Any permitted accessory use allowed in the primary district to which
the M District classification is appended when established according to the
rules and conditions of the primary district.
   B.   Those accessory uses other than those permitted by the primary district
regulations, but which are or may in the future, be required for inclusion in
mobile home parks by other ordinances of the City.
4.   Special Exceptions. Certain uses may be permitted in the M District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses:
   A.   Any special exception use permitted in the primary district to which
the M District classification is appended when established according to the
rules and conditions of the primary district.
5.   Bulk Regulations. The following requirements shall provide for light and
air around permitted uses and buildings in the M District:
   A.   All space limit provisions of the primary district to which the M
District classification is appended shall be adhered to, except that mobile
homes may be parked in compliance with minimum standards of other ordinances of
the City.
6.   Procedure. The M District shall be considered as a separate and distinct
zoning classification and shall be appended to a primary district in the same
manner in which zoning map changes are made under the provision of the statutes
of the State of Iowa and of this chapter and shall modify the regulations
applying to the specific sites or zoning lots upon which the M District is
designated.
7.   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   A.   Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses established in this
district.
   B.   The entire mobile home park shall be treated as one zoning lot, except
that when uses other than those normally included or required by ordinance
within a mobile home park are established within the boundaries of a mobile
home park, then a separate zoning lot shall be designated for said other uses.
SIGNS, NONCONFORMITIES, AND ADMINISTRATION
170.60   ADVERTISING SIGNS, POSTERS, AND BILLBOARDS.
1.   Intent. This section is established to protect and promote health, safety,
general welfare, and order within the City through the establishment of
comprehensive and uniform standards, regulations, and procedures governing the
type, number, size, structure, location, height, lighting, erection, use or
display of devices, signs, or symbols serving as a visual communications media
to persons situated within or upon public rights-of-way or private property.
The provisions of this section are intended to encourage the opportunity for
effective, aesthetically compatible, and orderly communications by reducing
confusion and hazards resulting from unnecessary or indiscriminate use of
communications facilities. Hereafter no sign shall be erected, constructed,
altered, or modified except as regulated by the provisions of this section.
2.   Definitions. The following terms, for the purposes of this section shall
have the meaning stated herein:
   A.   “Address sign” means a sign communicating street address only, whether
written or in numerical form.
   B.   “Campaign sign” means a temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a
person running for a governmental office or promoting an issue to be voted upon
at a governmental election.
   C.   “Construction sign” means a sign placed at a construction site
identifying the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor,
financier, or others involved.
   D.   “Directional sign” means a sign erected on public or private property
which bears the address and name of a business, institution, church, or other
use or activity plus directional arrows or information on location.
   E.   “Flashing, sign” means any illuminated sign that has artificial light
or color which is not maintained at a constant intensity or color when such
sign is in use. A sign providing public service information, such as time,
weather, date, temperature or similar information, shall not be considered a
flashing type sign.
   F.   “Governmental sign” means a sign which is erected by a governmental
unit.
   G.   “Information sign” means any sign giving information to employees,
visitors, or delivery vehicles but containing no advertising or identification.
   H.   “Nonconforming sign” means a sign which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of these regulations or amendments thereto but which does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   I.   “Real estate sign” means a business sign placed upon a property
advertising that particular property for sale, for lease, or for rent.
   J.   “Sign” means the use of any words, numerals, pictures, figures,
devices, or trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show
an individual, firm, profession, or business, and are visible to the general
public.
   K.   “Sign area” means that area within the marginal lines of the surface
which bears the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures, or symbols
attached directly to the part of a building, that area which is included in the
smallest connecting geometric figures which can be made to circumscribe the
message, figure, or symbol displayed thereon. Only changeable copy areas of
marquee or canopies shall be considered in determining the total sign area.
   L.   “Sign structure” means the supports, uprights, bracing and framework
for a sign including the sign area.
   M.   “Temporary sign” means any sign which is erected or displayed for a
specific period of time.
   N.   “Wall sign” means a sign which is affixed to the exterior wall or
mansard roof of a building and which is parallel to the building. Wall signs
are also referred to as “flush mounted signs.”
3.   Requirements. Billboards and signs in conjunction with the principal
permitted uses are allowed subject to the following regulations.
   A.   RS-90, RD-60 and RG-20 Districts:
      (1)   Flashing type signs are prohibited.
      (2)   Only one permanent type sign intended to be read from off the
premises will be allowed for each principal use.
      (3)   Non-residential uses will be limited to a sign not to exceed six
square feet.
      (4)   The following sign types are permitted:
 
Real estate signs
Government signs
Address signs
Campaign signs
 
   B.   Highway Service Business District:
      (1)   Flashing type signs are prohibited.
      (2)   Billboard type signs will be limited to 100 square feet and must
not impair sight distance or create a traffic hazard.
      (3)   Highway service businesses may be permitted one independent
structure located no more than 150 feet from the principal building. The
independent sign must not have an area in excess of 100 square feet.
      (4)   The following sign types are permitted:
 
Address signs
Real estate signs
Government signs
Campaign signs
Directional signs
Informational signs
 
   C.   CGB District:
      (1)   Flashing type signs are prohibited.
      (2)   The following signs types are permitted:
 
Address signs
Real estate signs
Government signs
Campaign signs
Informational signs
Directional signs
 
4.   Special Exceptions. In all districts, for uses permitted as special
exceptions, signs will be allowed only through Board of Adjustment approval.
5.   Additional Regulations. In all districts, signs and billboards shall
adhere to pertinent State regulations and other local ordinances.
6.   General Sign Provisions.
   A.   Hazardous Signs. No sign permitted by this chapter shall, by reason of
its location, lighting, size, color, or intensity, create a hazard to the safe,
efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. No private sign shall
contain words which might be construed as traffic controls, such as “stop,”
“caution,” “ warning,” etc., unless such sign is intended to direct traffic
within a premises.
   B.   Sign Maintenance. All signs and sign structures shall be properly
maintained and kept in a safe, orderly condition. In addition, all parts and
supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign structure which is rotted,
unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered shall be repainted,
repaired, or replaced by the property owner or agent of the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located, after written notice by the City.
   C.   Interference. No sign, nor any guys, stay, or attachment thereto, shall
be erected, placed, or maintained by any person on rocks, fences, or trees; nor
in such a manner as to interfere with the effective use of fire fighting
equipment or personnel, or any electric light, power, telephone, telegraph, or
TV cable wires or supports thereof.
   D.   Signs in Right-of-Way. No sign other than government signs shall be
erected or temporarily placed within any public rights-of-way except as may be
specifically provided herein.
   E.   Temporary Signs. The temporary use of portable or moveable signs,
search lights, banners, pendants, and similar devices shall be allowed in
excess of and in addition to the sign limitations of this section for
continuous periods of 10 consecutive days. No business proprietor shall be
allowed more than six such periods in any calendar year.
   F.   Clearance. All signs located over public rights-of-way or private
access route (sidewalk, mall, etc.) shall be located a minimum of 12 feet above
grade level.
   G.   Safe Ingress and Egress. No sign or part thereof shall be erected or
maintained so as to prevent or deter free ingress or egress from any door,
window, or fire escape. No sign or sign structures shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape.
   H.   Signs Required by Law. All signs required by law shall be permitted in
all districts.
   I.   Obsolete Signs. Obsolete signs which advertise an activity, business
product, or service which is no longer produced or conducted on the premises,
shall be removed within 90 days from date of notice provided by the City. The
owner of the property on which the sign is located shall remove any such sign.
If after the expiration of the 90 day period, the sign has not been removed,
the City may cause the sign to be removed and any expenses may be charged back
to the property owner.
   J.   Illumination. All externally illuminated signs shall be constructed to
direct the source of light away from adjacent properties or public streets or
ways.
   K.   Animated Signs. Animated signs may be allowed as a special exception
requiring a hearing before the Board of Adjustment.
   L.   Double Frontage. Lots having frontage on two streets or on a street and
an alley shall be permitted to provide the maximum number and square footage of
signs on each of the opposite ends of said lot, provided however, that not more
than the maximum number of square feet of sign per frontage may be viewed
simultaneously.
   M.   Permit Required. No sign except permitted signs as identified herein
shall be erected, altered, constructed, or modified without first receiving a
valid sign permit from the City. Temporary signs shall be exempt from the
permit requirements.
   N.   Sign Permit Application. The application for a sign permit shall
contain such information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement
of this chapter.
   O.   Permit Fees. To defray administrative costs of processing requests for
sign permits, the applicant for a sign permit shall pay to the City Clerk a fee
in the amount established by the City Council.
7.   Permitted Signs. The following signs are allowed without a permit but
shall comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter:
   A.   Government Signs. Signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include
safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating
scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, when
signs are erected by or on order of a public officer or employee in the
performance of official duty.
   B.   Directory Signs. A wall sign which identifies the business, owners,
managers, or resident occupant and sets forth the occupation or other address
information but contains no advertising. There may be one directory sign per
zoning lot not to exceed two square feet of area per business or resident
occupant.
   C.   Directional and Parking Signs (on site). On-site directional and
parking signs intended to facilitate the movement of vehicles and pedestrians
upon which the sign is located. Signs shall not exceed six square feet of area.
   D.   Integral Signs. Name on buildings, date of construction, commemorative
tablets and the like which are of the building or structure.
   E.   Campaign Signs. Not exceeding four square feet in the residential and
agricultural districts nor 18 square feet in the commercial, highway
commercial, or industrial districts. These signs shall remain no longer than 45
days prior to and five days after the election for which they were intended and
shall be removed by the owner of the property on which they are located. All
signs shall be confined to private property and shall not be attached to trees,
utility poles, or rocks.
   F.   Construction Signs. A non-illuminated sign announcing the names of
architects, engineers, contractors, future use, and other individuals or firms
involved with the construction, alteration, or repair of such building (but not
including any advertisement of any product). Such signs shall be confined to
the site of the construction, alteration or repair and shall be removed within
two years of the date of issuance of the first building permit or when the
project is completed, whichever is sooner. One sign shall be permitted for each
major street the project abuts. No sign may exceed 32 square feet in the
agricultural or residential districts, or 50 square feet in all other
districts.
   G.   Real Estate Signs. Any on-site sign announcing the owner, manager,
realtor, or other person directly involved in the sale or rental of the
property. In the case of sale, signs shall be removed within 10 days of the
sale. Signs shall not measure more than six square feet in the residential
district, nor more than 24 square feet in the other districts. Only one real
estate sign may be allowed per zoning lot.
170.62   NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES.
1.   Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments
that may later be adopted there exist:
   A.   Lots.
   B.   Structures.
   C.   Uses of land and structures.
   D.   Characteristics of use which were lawful before these regulations were
adopted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted
under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but
not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this chapter that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, not be uses
as grounds for adding other structures, or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district.
2.   Nonconforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or nonconforming use of a structure and land in
combination shall not be extended or enlarged after adoption of these
regulations by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs
intended to be seen from off the premises or by the addition of other uses of a
nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
3.   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal
of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
4.   Nonconforming Uses of Land (or Land with Minor Structures Only). Where at
the time of adoption of these regulations lawful use of land exists which would
not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where such use
involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00,
the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of these regulations.
   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations.
   C.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to
the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land
is located.
   D.   No additional structures not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
5.   Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of these regulations that could not be built
under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions or area, lot
coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements
concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its nonconformity.
   B.   Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Should such structure be moved for any reasons for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
6.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures or of Structures and Premises in
Combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement
cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structures and premises in combination, exists
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of these regulations that would
not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use
may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building.
   C.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as special exception be changed to
another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of
Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district and the nonconforming use may not thereafter
be resumed.
   E.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months (except
when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or
structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   F.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purposes of this
subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent (or other
figure) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction.
7.   Repairs and Maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a
structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-
bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10
percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the
structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it
became nonconforming shall not be increased.
8.   If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
9.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
10.   Uses Under Special Exception Not Nonconforming Uses. Any use which is
permitted as a special exception in a district under the terms of this chapter
(other than a change through Board of Adjustment action from a nonconforming
use to another use not generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed
a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.
170.64   AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
1.   Intent. After the effective date of this chapter, in all districts, except
the Central General Business Zone, there shall be provided at the time any
building or structure is erected, off-street parking spaces in accordance with
the requirements set forth herein.
2.   General Provisions:
   A.   All buildings and structures erected and all uses of land in all
districts established after the effective date of this chapter shall provide
accessory parking facilities as required under this section unless a building
permit has been issued and construction is begun prior to the effective date of
this chapter.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas in the Central
General Business Zone.
   C.   All off-street parking spaces required by this chapter shall be located
on the lot of the use it serves or within 300 feet of the principal use.
   D.   Owners of two or more uses or parcels of land may agree to jointly
utilize the same parking spaces, provided that satisfactory legal evidence is
presented in the form of deeds, leases, or contract documents to establish such
joint areas for use.
   E.   All yard area except the required front and side yard for residential
uses may be used for off-street parking.
   F.   A plan drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and
loading requirements are to be fulfilled, shall accompany an application for a
building certificate. The plan shall show all elements necessary to indicate
that the requirements are being fulfilled.
   G.   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the
effective date of this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of
employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise to create a
need for an increase of two percent or more in the number of existing parking
spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or
change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this
chapter is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the
area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the
parking requirements set forth herein.
3.   Off-Street Parking Requirements. At the time of construction, alteration,
moving into, enlargement of a structure or building, or change in the use of
the land, off-street parking spaces and loading areas shall be provided,
constructed, and maintained for all uses as follows:
   A.   Single-family residences: two spaces.
   B.   Multi-family residences: one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.
   C.   Mobile home residences: one space.
   D.   Hotel/motel: one space per room.
   E.   Hospital/nursing home: one space for each four beds plus one space for
each employee on the major shift.
   F.   Places of public assembly: one space for each six seats.
   G.   Bowling alleys: five spaces per alley.
   H.   Skating rinks/dance halls: one space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
   I.   Retail sales and services: one space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area.
   J.   Restaurants: one space per four seats plus one for every two employees.
   K.   Taverns, bars, lounges: one space for every two seats.
   L.   Elementary/junior highs: one space per classroom or one for every six
seats in the largest facility for public assembly, whichever is greater.
   M.   High schools/colleges: one space for every 10 students or one space for
every six seats in the largest facility for public assembly, or whichever is
greater.
   N.   Manufacturing and similar uses: one space for every two employees on
the largest working shift.
4.   Computation of Spaces.
   A.   In the case of any building, structure, or premises, the use of which
is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so
mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply, as determined by the
Board of Adjustment.
   B.   Where fractional spaces occur, the parking space required shall be
construed to the nearest whole number.
   C.   In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall
equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses if computed separately.
170.66   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1.   Establishment of the Board of Adjustment. A Board of Adjustment is hereby
established and shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Board.” The Board
shall consist of five members serving without compensation, appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, for a term of five years.
2.   Vacancy. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the
approval of the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term. Should any
member be absent from the City or become incapacitated or disqualified, the
Mayor with the approval of the Council shall appoint a substitute to serve as a
member of the Board with the same powers and authority as the regular members
of the Board until the regular member has returned or is able to serve on the
Board.
3.   Zoning Officer. The building inspector appointed by the City shall be the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall be responsible for carrying out,
administering, and enforcing the provisions set forth in this chapter and the
rules, regulations, and decision adopted by the Board of Adjustment.
4.   Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Business of the
Board shall be conducted in accordance with these regulations set forth herein
and with the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, and amendments
thereto. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure in harmony with said
provisions. The chairperson, or in their absence the acting chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be
open to the public.
5.   Records. The Board shall keep minutes of all meetings, containing the
substance of testimony and detailed findings and showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indication of such
fact, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and
shall be a public record. The concurring vote of two-thirds of all of the
members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Officer or to decide in
favor of the applicant or any matter upon which the Board is required to pass
under this chapter or to allow any variation to the strict interpretation of
this chapter. No order or finding of the Board shall become effective until the
eighth day following the posting of a copy of such ruling or finding, duly
attested by the Zoning Officer, upon a public bulletin board in the City Hall
and transmittal of duplicate copies to the City Clerk and to the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Commission. The City Clerk shall serve as a
secretary to the Board and keep its records.
6.   Appeal. Appeal to the Board may be taken within 30 days after an order
becomes effective, by any person or persons aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning
Officer.
7.   Jurisdiction. The Board shall have powers to make rulings in the following
situations:
   A.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirements, decisions, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of these zoning regulations.
   B.   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms
of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to
a special condition a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the chapter
shall be observed and substantial justice done.
   C.   Hear applications for special exception permits and make requisite
findings precedent to authorization as required by this chapter and by Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa and amendments thereto.
   D.   To make rulings from the advice of the Zoning Officer in cases where
uses are found to exist which are not specifically mentioned in this chapter,
and to specify the zones in which such new uses may properly fall, until such
time as such uses shall be specifically treated by amendment to this chapter.
It is the intention of the Council in adopting these regulations that all uses
of land, performance standards and requirements as to the placement and sizes
of buildings specifically treated in this chapter are so designated to conform
with a Comprehensive Plan within the meaning of Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, and amendments thereto. Any changes in the application of this chapter
which would have the effect of changing the zoning classification of any parcel
of property other than through application of specific provisions of this
chapter are deemed to be a legislative determination and to fall within the
province of the Council.
8.   Finding, Variances. Before making any rulings on a variance, the Board
shall make all of the following determinations and shall record such
determinations in its proceedings:
   A.   That the appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Board.
   B.   That all parties directly in interest have been notified of the
proceedings.
   C.   That the granting of the appeal would not have the effect of changing
the intended zoning of the property.
   D.   That the property cannot reasonably be used in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   E.   That the difficulty complained of is not the result of a willful act of
the petitioner or other person maintaining an interest in property or their
immediate predecessors in interest.
   F.   That the difficulty complained of is unique to the property in question
and is not common to all property similarly situated.
   G.   That balancing the interest of the City in preserving the Comprehensive
Plan or the interest of nearby properties against the interest of the
petitioner in using their property as proposed to be used, the granting of the
variance is required by considerations of justice and equity.
9.   Finding, Special Exceptions. Before authorizing a special exception use,
the Board shall make the following determinations:
   A.   That the appeal falls within the jurisdiction of the Board.
   B.   That all parties directly in interest have been notified of the
proceedings.
   C.   That all specific conditions of this chapter relative to any specific
limitations or conditions necessary to protect the public interest and assure
the continued beneficial use and enjoyment of nearby properties, or that no
special limitations are necessary to protect the public.
   D.   That the special exception with specific limitations and design
features as may have been required will further the aims of the Comprehensive
Plan and will not be unduly detrimental to nearby properties.
   E.   That in the event that opposing interests cannot be resolved, the Board
shall find that balancing the interests of the City in preserving the
Comprehensive Plan or the interests of nearby properties against the interest
of the petitioner in using their property as proposed to be used, the granting
of the special exception permit is required by consideration of justice and
equity.
10.   Notice. The Board shall give sufficient notice to parties affected by any
proceeding and shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations to facilitate such
notice. A copy of each notice shall be transmitted to the City Clerk and to the
office of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
11.   Fees. The Board may adopt a schedule of fees to defray all or part of the
cost of processing an appeal. Said schedule of fees shall be approved by the
Council. All fees shall be payable to the City Clerk and may be deposited with
the City Clerk in a fund determined by the Council.
12.   Termination of Variance. Where property is in use under the terms of a
variance and such use ceases or in the case of a structure such structure
ceases to exist, then the variance shall terminate unless the terms of the
variance specify otherwise.
170.68   APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
1.   After adoption of this chapter, no building permit for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement, extension,
raising, or moving of any building or a part thereof shall be issued before
application has been made for a certificate of occupancy, and no permit shall
be issued unless the plans, specifications, and intended use conform in all
respects to the provisions of this chapter. Blank forms shall be provided by
the Zoning Officer.
2.   Each application shall be accompanied by a plan in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, and a licensed
surveyor’s plat of the property if required in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer, the size and location of the buildings to be erected, and such other
information as deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of these zoning
regulations, including type of construction and estimated cost. One copy of
such plans shall be returned to the owner after approval or disapproval of the
project. A careful record of all such applications and plans shall be kept in
the office of the Zoning Officer. The fee for a building permit and certificate
of occupancy shall be as follows:
$10.00 for an estimated cost under $10,000.00
$25.00 for an estimated cost in excess of $10,000.00
If the estimated cost of material only is available, then 50 percent shall be
added for construction costs in connection with computation of the fee.
3.   Any building permit, under which no construction work has been commenced
within six months after the date of issue of said permit, shall expire by
limitation, and no work or operation shall take place under such permit after
such expiration.
170.70   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
1.   No vacant land shall be used or occupied, and no change made in the use of
land until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Officer to
the effect that the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. Such certificate of occupancy shall be issued or reasons for refusal
given within 10 days after the application has been made, except in special
cases where recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and action of
the Council is required.
2.   No building or part thereof hereafter erected or altered in use shall be
occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Zoning Officer to the effect that the building or part thereof and the proposed
use are in conformity with the provision of this chapter. Such certificate
shall be applied for coincident with the application for the building permit or
prior to any changes or extensions, and shall be issued by the Zoning Officer
within 10 days after completion of the work, provided that it conforms to the
provisions of this chapter.
3.   Pending the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed one year,
which may be renewed for buildings other than dwellings. Such temporary
certificates are intended to cover the period of construction or partial
occupation of a building and shall not alter any of the respective rights,
duties, or obligations of the owner or the City. It shall not be issued except
under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure the safety of
the occupants of the building.
4.   Upon application by any tenant or owner, the Zoning Officer shall, after
inspection, issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or land existing
at the time of passage of these regulations.
5.   A certificate of occupancy shall state whether a building or the use of a
building complies with the building and health laws, other ordinances, or with
the provisions of this chapter. A record of all certificates shall be furnished
on request of any person having a proprietary or tenant interest in the
building or land affected. No fee shall be charged for an original or temporary
certificate of occupancy applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit or for an original certificate covering any proposed use or
change in the use of land, but for all other certificates there shall be a
charge of $10.00 each.
170.72   AMENDMENTS.
1.   The Council may from time to time make amendments to the text and maps of
this chapter in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, and amendments thereto. Action may be initiated by the Council, by the
Commission or by a private citizen. The Commission may make reasonable rules
and regulations and fee schedules for the processing of amendments with the
concurrence of the Council.
2.   Any notice specified by said rules and regulations shall be in addition to
that specified by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto, and
proper notice as specified by law shall be deemed to be the sole legal notice
for such changes in the text or map of this chapter as may be hereafter
proposed. It shall be the policy of the City to give as full and adequate
notice as practical to all interested parties and to the general public, but
failure to issue such notice except as specified by the Code of Iowa shall not
invalidate the proceedings.
170.74   INTERPRETATIONS, PURPOSE, AND CONFLICT.
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to law by a Building Inspector, Zoning Officer,
Health Department, or the Council relating to the use of buildings or premises.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall govern.
170.76   VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
1.   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day that
the violation is permitted to exist after notification in writing by the Zoning
Officer and the expiration of the time designated in said notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
2.   Any structure erected, raised, converted, or land or premises used in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the requirements thereof
is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and may be abated in such manner as
nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under existing law.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
of the City and have not been codified herein, but are specifically saved
from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED          ORDINANCE ADOPTED
159       July 28, 2003
162       October 27, 2003
174       August 13, 2007
220       March 26, 2020
 
